                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    RULES AND DISCRETION   IN TRADE POLICY




                             Robert W. Staiger

                               Guido Tabellini




                           Working Paper No. 2658




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  July 1988




We are grateful to Peter Neary and to two anonymous referees for very helpful
comments on a previous version.  This research is part of NBER's research
                                                          are those of the
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper #2658
                                        July 1988


                     RULES AND DISCRETION IN TRADE POLICY


                                   ABSTRACT



    We argue in this paper that the second—best nature of trade-policy

intervention makes it likely that the issue of time consistency viii be

an important consideration in determining both the extent and the

efficacy of such intervention in most environments. The point is seen

most directly by noting that a tariff is both a tax on consumers and a

                                                     Since first—best
subsidy to producers of the import—competing good.

intervention typically calls for targeting each distortion with a

separate tax/subsidy, the tariff will be a more effective policy tool if

its consumption tax aspect can be separated from its production subsidy

dimension.   Consequently, if production decisions are made prior to
                                         sufficient policy flexibility
consumption decisions, a government with

will be tempted to surprise producers with policies other than those

announced in an effort to make this separation.   This leads optimal

trade policy intervention to be time—inconsistent in a wide range of

environments.   We explore this idea in general terms and illustrate the

results with specific examples.




Robert W. Staiger                        Guido Tabellini
Department of Economics                  Department of Economics
Stanford University                      U.C.L.A.
Stanford, CA 94305                       Los Angeles, CA 90024
                                 1.   Introduction


     Since the publication of the seminal paper of Kydland and Prescott (977) on

the time inconsistency of optimal policy, the debate over rules versus discretion

has had a major influence on the evolution of ideas concerning macroeconomic

policy.   In contrast, this debate has had comparatively little effect on the

international trade literature, where discussion concerning the efficacy of

activist trade policy in general and the relative merits of alternative trade

                                                                             that
policies in particular has proceeded largely under the (implicit) assumption

governments can precommit to the optimal polloy.

     Yet the question of the costs of discretion in trade policy deserves serious
                                                                    the presence
attention, especially in light of the recent literature on trade in

of imperfect markets.   While much of this literature is concerned with various

                                                                             the
conditions under which activist trade policies are warranted, taken together

results of the literature suggest a second, more subtle, implication:    the new

activist trade policy, if It is to be pursued at all,    must be pursued with

discretion and flexibility, judging each situation on a case by case basis.-!!' As

                                                                    trade policy
such, the current debate over the appropriate degree of activism in

is unavoidably a debate over the appropriate degree   of policy discretion as well.
                                                                             is
     The relevance for trade policy of the debate on rules versus discretion

also suggested by the following consideration:     a necessary condition for any

economic policy to be time inconsistent is that the government implementing that

policy find itself in a second best (or worse) situation.    This condition is

                                                            if the government is
virtually always satisfied in the case of trade policy:

forced to rely on tariffs to achieve its objectives, it is because it lacks
                                      —2—


other, less distortionary, instruments2'      In this envircnment, unexpected policy

sotions can enlarge the set of instruments available to the government.       Hence,

if a government using trsde policy hed the option of surprising the
                                                                    privste

sector with unexpeoted potioies, it would choose to do so since s policy surprise

could move the economy towards the first best.     In other words, with e sufficient

degree of discrsticn snd flexibility, the cptimsl trsde policy is bound to be

time inconsistent.

        The centrsl results of this psper srs bssed on the ides that governments

often enjoy sufficient discretion to generste trade policy surprises with respect

to production decisions, but not with respect to consumption decisions.       While

decisions concerning the allocation of consumption across different commodities

are generally fairly flexible, decisions concerning investment or resource

allocation are often much less so.    Hence, in the presence of sufficient

government flexibility, the latter decisions might have to be made before

observing trade policy actions.    When this is the case, production decisions must

be based on the expectations of forthcoming trade policies, and the government

has the option of generating policy surpriaea.    Cf course, in equilibrium policy

surprises are ruled out by an incentive compatibility condition.    This condition

implies that the government loses control of producers' expectations.    Thus, in

an equilibrium with discretion, the government is prevented from taking into

account the production distortions induced by the expectation of future trade

policy.

        The next section develops the normative end positive implications of this

idea.    Sections III and IV illustrate these general results with specific
                                       —3-.


examples.    Possible extensions and generalizations are discussed In Section V.

Finally, Section VI conoludes the paper.


                       II   Time   inconsistency   and Trade Policy


       Consider the basic trade model of a static economy in which all goods are

traded and individuals act as producers and/or consumers.        The arguments of this

and of the next two sections hinge on the following crucial timing assumption:

First, producers select the allocation of productive resources, I.e. they select

a point on the (possibly distorted) production possibility frontier.-/ Next (or

simultaneously with the producers), the government chooses its tariff policy.

Finally, consumers make their consumption decisions.        This is equivalent to

assuming that the government has at least as much flexibility in choosing the

level of its tariff as does the private sector in choosing the sectoral

allocation of resources, but that consumer decisions are the most flexible of

all.    Clearly this is not always the case in practice; but the assumption seems

to capture the relative timing of moves for the three kinds of agents in a broad

class of environments, provided that the government is endowed with sufficiently

flexible trade policy instruments.      For instance, such flexibility might

characterize escape clause actions under section 201 of the Trade Act of 1974.

The implications of relaxing this timing assumption are discussed in Section V

below.

       The Importance of the timing assumption Is immediate once it is recalled

that a tariff can always be decomposed Into a domestic production subsidy and a

domestic consumption tax on the domestic import good.        The timing assumption

implies that, in equilibrium, the government is forced to take producers'
decisions as bygones when choosing its trade policy.   Hence, the government

ignores any production distortions introduced by theprcduction tax/subsidy

aspect of its tariff policy:   the tariff is set as if the distortions it brcught

about were only those associated with the ccnsumpticn tax/subsidy dimension.    But

of course, the expectaticn of the forthcoming tariff policy exerts an influence

on the producticn aide of the economy, even   if in equilibrium the government is


prevented from taking this into account.

     We now explore this idea in general terms, turning to specific illustrative

examples in the following aecticna.   To begin we consider an environment in which

lump sum instruments are available to redistribute inccme, so that the domestic
                                                                          We
government is concerned only with the conditions of Paretc efficiency.

explore the time—inconsistency issues that arise when the government attempts to

use trade policy (a tariff) to offset existing distcrtions.F'

     (i)   Consider first the existence of a domestic production distorticn.   A
                                                                     Pareto
production tax/subsidy can move the economy toward (possibly to) the

frontier, but a consumption tax/subsidy will only move it further swey.    Thus,

regardless of the (ex—ente) tariff policy announced to producers, once production

decisions sre made, the government faces a new (ax—post) optimization problem:

set the tariff level so that the consumption tax implicit in it maximizes welfare

(achieves Pareto efficiency) in s smell exchange economy with no distortions.

The resulting equilibrium policy is clearly free trade, even though the (second—

best or worse) optimal tariff policy is typically not free trade."     Hence, in the

presence of policy discretion, trade policy will be under utilized as 5 (second—

best or worse) tool to sddress production distortions:    tn such an environment,


the unique time—consistent equilibrium is one of free trade.    Section III below
                                    —5—


provides an Illustration of this case.

     (ii)    Consider next the existence of a domestic consumption distortion.
                                                                            but 5
Here a consumption tax/subsidy can move the country to the Pareto frontier,

production   tax/subsidy must move it further away.   Again, independent of the (ex—

                                                                      are nade,
ante) tariff policy announced to producers, once production decisions

the government faces a new (ex—post) optimization problem:     set the tariff level

                                                                        Pareto
so that the consumption tax implied therein maximizes welfare (achieves

                                        with a domestic consumption distortion.
efficiency) in a small exchange economy
                                                                  level which
Here the time—consistent policy is clearly to set the tariff at a

                                                                 the (second—
exactly offsets the domestic consumption distortion, even though

best) optimal tariff will stop short of this because of the production

distortions introduced by the tarlff..Y    Thus, the use of trade policy as a

                                                               when the
(second—best) tool to address domestic consumption distortions

government has policy discretion will be excessive.
                                                                       The relevant
     (iii)    Finally, consider the existence of a trade distortion.
                                                                and oonsumption
point here is that a tariff now also affects foreign production

decisions.    In choosing a tariff, the domestic government must weigh the benefits

of tariff revenue against the costs of the distorted producer and consumer

decisions in the domestic economy.    At the (ex—ante) optimum tariff, a smell

increase in the tariff would lead to an increase In tariff revenue whose benefits

are just offset by the costs of Increasing distortions at home.     However, once

domestic and foreign production decisions are made, domestic and foreign

                                                          and a small increase in
production responses to further tariff changes disappear,

the tariff starting from the (ex-ante) optimum will Increase tariff revenue by

more than the cost of the increased distortion at home.     Hence, the time—
                                      —6—



consistent     tariff in this case involves excessive protecion. This point has

been made by Lapan (forthcoming).L"

        (iv)   Thus far we have maintained the assumption that lump sum

redistributive instruments are available and have explored the nature of time—

consistent trade policy when one of the conditions for Pareto efficiency is

violated.      Consider now the case in which all the conditions for Pareto

efficiency hold but the government wishes to redistribute income and does not

have access to lump sum tax instruments.        In this case the government would like

to leave all economic decisions undistorted but at the same time desires to alter

the distribution of income.     The (ex—ante)   optimal use of a tariff would at the

margin weigh the redistributive benefits against the costs of domestic producer

and consumer distortions.     However, once producer decisions are made, the (ex-

post) redistributive effects of an additional increase in the tariff will in

general differ from the effects ax—ante, and the associated benefits may rise or

fall.    Moreover, these benefits will be weighed only against the additional

consumer distortions induced.     Hence, when the government has policy discretion.

trade policy may be over— or under—utilized as a redistributive tool.       Section

III below illustrates a case in which policy is over—utilized with an example

taken from Staiger—Tabellini (1987).

    We summarize these results     in the following:


    Proposition: When the degree of flexibility in government trade policy
    decision making is greater (less) than it is In the resource allocation
    (consumption) decisions of the private sector, tariffs will be under
    utilized relative to their optimal use In the presence of domestic
    production distortions, over utilized relative to their optimal use in the
    presence of domestic consumption distortions and trade distortions, and
    either under— or over—utilized relative to their optimal use as
    redistributive tools.
                                    —7—

       Three implications emerge from this general analysis.   First, because trade

policy distorts the decisions of both producers and consumers and because the

decisions of the former typically preceed those of the latter, sufficient

government flexibility is likely to undermine the optimal use of trade policy 55

a   remedy for the existence of distortions.   That is, optimal trade policy in this

broad class of problems will in general be time—inconsistent.    Whenever this is

the case, rules may be better than discretion in the conduct of trade policy.

Second, given that optimal trade policy is generally time—inconsistent in this

environment, policy rankings that acknowledge this time—inconsistency will

generally differ from the analogous rankings based on the optimal (time-

inconsistent) tariff.    Finally, with the existence of domestic consumption

distortions considered to be empirically unimportant as a trade policy rationale

(see Bhagwati, 968), our results suggest that a government with policy

discretion will use tariffs primarily in two oases:    either as redistributive

tools, or where it has world market power.     In the next two sections we

illustrate the general conclusions drawn here with specific examples.


                             III.   Over—Active Policies


       We consider first a two-sector model in which tariffs are used by the

government to redistribute income from individuals with a low marginal utility of

income to those with a high marginal utility of income, subsequent to the

realization of an adverse terms of trade shock.     In order to focus on the issue

of precommitment, we suppose that the government is benevolent and maximizes a

social welfare function defined over the utility of the workers in both

sectors.    In the absence of complete insurance markets, the government may wish
                                                —8—



to      use trade polioy to reduoe interseotoral wage differentials that arise as a

result of the shook

          In partioular, we start with a small open eoonomy produoing two traded

goods,         x    and    y,   using one input, labor.           Suppose that labor oan move aoross

seotors, but only at a oost.               Speoifioally, assume that whenever a worker onanges
                                                                                   — A,                                     Consider
seotors, its marginal produot fells by the fraotion                           1              1   >    A > C.

now what happens if the world prioe of the imported good,                                say         y,        drops

unexpeotedly.             If it drops by sore than       (1   —   A),    some fraotion                        (1
                                                                                                                   —   i)    >   0   of

seotor         ys        work foroe will find it worthwhile to relooate aoross seotors.                                          The

                                                                              of
post—shook equilibrium allooation of labor is illustrated by the interseotion

the solid lines in figure             1,   under the assumptions that the produotion funotion

is oonoave and that the government does not (and is not expeoted to) intervene

with trade proteotion.              The horizontal axis measures                  1,     the fraotion of


aeotor         y's       pre-shook labor foroe that remains in the injured seotor.                                       The

vertioal axis measures the wage in seotor                     y    and    A        times the wage rate in

seotor         x.    te     denotes the expeoted degree of tariff proteotion.                                  Given the

oonoavity of the produotion funotion, the wage in seotor
                                                                                         '                    is deoreasing
                                                                                             (wy)
in the fraotion of workers who remain in that seotor                              ('1)       and is represented by

a downward sloping aohedule in Figure               1.    Conversely,                        is Inoreasing with
                                                                                   wx

1,       and              is given by the upward sloping aohedule in FIgure                           1   .        The
                   AWx

equilibrium allooation of labor when proteotion is neither expeoted nor

forthooming is              1(1e    G),    and oorresponds to the point where the wage

differential between the two seotors ia exaotly equel to the oost of relooating:
w
w
    x
                                                               —9—



         Now consider          the      actions        of the government.                   As noted at the outset, the

government may wish to use trade policy to reduce the wage differential between

the two sectors.               However, the actual redistribution associated with any given

tariff depends on the fraction of workers remaining In the injured sector                                                               (i),


which depends Ln turn on the expected tariff.                                            As such, unexpected protection can

                                                                      the work
have effects quite apart f'om protection that is fully anticipated by

force.       This is why the issue of time inconsistency arises:                                            the government may

have an incentive to surprise the private sector by providing more protection

than expected.

         In order to see that this is the case, consider what happens to the diagram

of Figure       1    if workers anticipate the protective policy.                                       An increase in the

                                                                                                    curve to the right—-say, to
degree of protection forthcoming would shift the                                            w
the dolted line of Figure                        1,    where     t —     t    >    0.      With the tariff fully

anticipated            ie    =    t),       the fraction of labor staying in the                                y    sector in

equilibrium is now                    .re*(te          t) >    IC(e           0),        and the equilibrium wage

differential remains                    —x
                                        w'   —    A.      Intuitively,              if    workers     realize       that     the
                                        w
protective          policy       is    forthcoming,            they    will        reduce    their     reallocation            away from

the   injured        sector.           Under our hypothesis,                      a perfectly        anticipated           protective

policy     would       have no impact                 on the wage differential, but would Simply bring

about an inefficient allocation of labor.                                         If however, the protective policy were

unexpected, then it would take the economy to point A in Figure 1:                                                          the labor

                                                                           be on
allocation would remain unaffected, and all the impact of the policy would

the wage differential.                       Hence the government's incentive to surprise.                                         Since the

                                                                     the (time
government is not able systematically to deceive the private sector,

consistent) equilibrium is found where the government's Incentive to surprise is
                                     —   10 —




just equal    to the marginal ooat of the oonsumption distortions associated with a

higher tariff.

     In Staiger and Tabellini (1987), we show that in such an equilibrium the

tariff is always positive, even though the optimal trade oolioy may be one of

free trade.    Hence, the requirement of time consistenoy implies in this osse that

governments with some degree of disoretion in trade polioy may be forced to

choose inferior over—protective policies.       This comes about not as a result of

lobbying pressures or other political concerns.      Rather, it is a consequence of

the government's inability to preccmmit to trade policies which it would not,

once the labor force has reallocated, care to pursue.       Moreover, the requirement

of time consistency can lead to a reversal of the traditional normative orderings

of tariffs and subsidies as instruments of trade policy.       Since a production

subsidy is not assocIated with any consumption distortions, there is a greater

incentive to utilize it as a surprise policy tool.      Consequently, its time
consistent level would always be higher than that of a time consistent tariff.

As a result, in a time consistent equilibrium a policy of production subsidies

may be welfare—dominated by a tariff.


                              IV,   Pareto Inferior Trade


     In this section, we explore the use of trade policy to address a distortion

that arises in the allocation of productive resources between a safe and a risky

sector.   Specifically, consider a two—country two—sector model with one safe and

one risky sector.    In the presence of production risk that    is not perfectly


positively correlated across countries, trade policy decisions will affect the

extent to which prices adjust in response to variations in output.      As such,
trade policy will affect the degree of risk borne by producers, and the

allocation of productive resources between risky and non—risky sectors.

Consumers will be affected by trade policy in two ways:      direotly via the effect

of policy on the risk (price variability) they face, and Indirectly via the

sectoral relocation of productive resources.
                                                                               in
     Newbery and StIglltz   (98U      explore these issues with a simple model

which the opportunity to trade goods internationally completely stabilizes goods

prices.    In their model, trade leaves producers earning the same expected return

but facing greater risk than in autarky. while consumers enjoy reduced risk but

suffer a divergenc, of the resource allocation away from their preferred

pattern.    Risk averse producers are unambiguously worse off with trade in this
                                                                            face
model while the risk aversion of consumers makes the reduction in risk they

a benefit from trade that must be weighed against the consumer loss associated

with relocation of productive resources.       For some parameter values, Newbery and

Stlglitz show that the opportunity to trade can lead to a Pareto inferior

outcome.    We explore a similar setup and show that, when the government has more

flexibility than the production sector and finds policy commitments infeasible.
                                                                   Pareto
it will be unable to use trade policy to keep the economy from the

 inferior free trade equilibrium.

      Following Newbery and Stiglitz, we consider two countries——home (no star)

and foreign (star)——both of which use "capital'      to produce a risky good and a

 safe good.    Each country has   n   identical producers, each owning one unit of

capital, and    m   identical consumers, each with a constant amount of income       I,


which can be thought of as their endowment of a third (numeraire) good.       The

                                                                    countries:
 Output of the risky good is perfectly negatively correlated across
                                                            —    12 -




that     is,       if output per unit            of capital of the risky good is                               2,    a random
                                                                       2                            *
variable with mean unity and variance                                 o ,     then     0   ÷   0        = 2.        The Output of the

safe good per unit of capital is normalized to unity.

         As in Newbery and Stiglitz, we consider only symmetric equilibria in which

the domestic and foreign choices coincide.                                   We will focus on the decisions of

domestic producers and consumers.                            Competitive risk averse producers choose a

fraction            x    of their capital to allocate to the risky project, the remainder

(i—x)      going to produce the safe good.                            Assuming that producers do not consume

what they produce and that they maximize expected utility of profits, the choice

of   x     will be given by the solution to


         tU'(It)(pO—q)              0                                                                                           (1)



where      p (q)          is the price of the risky (safe) good,                               II       xpe     +   q(1—x)      are

producer           profits,     and         EU(rl)    is the expected utility of profits with

U' > 0         and       U" < 0.        Finally, as in Newbery and Stiglitz, the indirect utility

function of the representative consumer is assumed to take the following form:


                                   —a —b 1—p

         V(I,p,q) =
                              (Ip
                                    1   q                                   for p*1
                                                                                                                               (2)
                              log I —        alog    p —   blog   q         for   pi

where          p        is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.                                     This leads to

aggregate (domestic) demand functions for the risky                                                       and safe           (Q5)

commodities of                Qr                and    Q5    -
                                            p                     q
         The domestic government controls the volume of international trade through

the use of trade quota licenses, which it issues (free of charge) to foreign

producers allowing them to export to the home market, and to domestic producers
                                                         13 —
                                                    —




allowing then,              to export abroad.     To model this,        we define      I       as the fraction of

one country's excess of risky commodity production over the other country's that

can be exported under the chosen quota levels.                          Then the domestic government

chooses       T,       which ranges from zero to one half, with                  I - 0         corresponding to

autarky and            I =         ccrresponding to free trade.

        For any choice of              x,    the volume of trade allowed under the quota System

will directly affect the behavior of equilibrium goods prices, as can be seen by

equating commodity demand in the domestic market to commodity Supply available

there, or

        aml
                   nx0 + T.[nxq —nx0,
                                      *
                                                  —
                                                  brnI
                                                          (1—x)n                                          (3)


                                                                                           *
Rearranging            (3)   and using the relationship between              0   and   0         yields


         =             ay                                                                                 fJ4)
              xq2T(-0)I                       q   1-x


where    y    -    -.         At   the same time, the choice of          I   will effect commodity

prices        p    and       q     indirectly as well, through its effect on the producer choice

of x      that solves (1).                Finally, to keep the problem simple,                 we assume that all

capital In the domestic production sector is owned by foreigners, so that the

domestic government cares only about the welfare of domestic consumers when

choosing          T.     As we will see, this assumption turns the problem into one in which

the government chooses trade policy in an attempt to address a domestic

production distortion that arises under free trade.

        Consider now the domestic government's optimal choice of trade policy                                    T.

If it were to choose a policy of autarky                        (1—0)    and producers believed this

announcement, then all risk would be borne by consumers, and the allocation of
                                                 —   1k   —




resources    between the risky and safe commodity would be determined by (1)                            as

                        But   for any choice of trade policy                             the choice of
           -cg .
x(T=O)                                                                   Tc[O,V2J,

x   that maximizes consumer utility, i.e., which solves                        = 0,       is also


sc that only expecting autarky would producers choose the allocation of resources

that is best for consumers.            As    T       is increased from    0   toward         ,    the   risk

is shifted from consumers to producers, and producers find it optimal to reduce

x   from            and move resources cut of the increasingly risky sector.                        This

resource allocation effect is, tc domestic consumers, a cost of freer trade which

                                                                        risk
must be weighed against the benefit that results as ccnsumers face less

(price variability).          It is the effect of trade on prcducers' choice of                     x    that

                                                                       trade is
enables Newbery and Stiglitz to find parameter values under which free

Pareto infericr to sutarky.            More generally, free trade             (T =   )     will   not be

                                                                  will be chosen
cptimal as a result of this effect, and scme degree of protection

as the cptimsl policy.

      Ccnsider, however, the choice of                    T made by the dcmestic government when it

is unable tc influence producer decisions abcut                    x   by preccmmiting to a

particular trade policy          T,    and is forced intc a time ccnsistent equilibrium.

The time consistent level cf trade will occur at a value of                          T   fcr which the

dcmestic gcvernment has no incentive to surprise producers with a different trade

level.     But caring only about dcmestic ccnsumers, any announced level of

protection     (T   <   5)    will   leave the gcvernment with an inrentive tc surprise

producers with free trade             (T =   3)      since, with   x   held fixed, the movement to

free trade can only benefit domestic consumers by eliminating the risk they

face.      Free trade Is the unique time consistent equilibrium.
                                        —   15 —



     As such,   a government   that   maintains    flexibility    of'   its trade policy

relative to the decisions of domestic producers Would in this case find itself

trapped in the time consistent free trade equilibrium.              Trade policy discretion

will, in this case, lead the government to allow too much trade and could, under

the kinds of parameterizations described by Newbery and Stiglitz, result in trade

freely occurring between countries even though all participants Would be better

off in its absence.


                          V.    Generalizations and Extensions


     The results of the previous sections were based on a one shot game.

Moreover, the extensive form of such a game assumed that trade policy was set In

between production and consumption decisions.

     The normative results concerning the suboptimality of discretion and the

ambiguity of the rankings of alternative instruments are robust to several

extensions of the underlying framework, as long as some economic decision is made

before observing the trade policy action.           If the game were repeated over time,

however, the government might face reputational incentives.                As Is well known

from the macroeconomics literature, such reputation mechanisms could reduce the

severity of the time inconsistency problem.            The plausibility of reputational

equilibria however is still an open issue (see,              for Instance, the survey by

Rogoff (1987)).

     The positive results presented in the previous sections, on the other hand,

are more sensitive to the details of the timing assumptions.                 In an explicitly

dynamic model, for instance, the decisions concerning savings and the purchase of

consumer durables would be based on the expectations of future trade policy.
                                      —   16 —




Hence, the government would have the opportunity of surprising consumers as well

as producers.   Alternatively, the government might take its trade policy actions

after some production decisions but before others, so that the opportunity to

                                                                     decisions.
surprise would exist Only with respect to a subset of the production

An example   is the labor—leisure choioe mentioned in footnote 3.   In these oases,

the nature of the incentive oompatability condition, and hence the positive

properties of the time—consistent equilibrium, would reflect the details of the

timing assumptions.   As a consequence, the clear and simple positive results in

the general analysis of Section II could be overturned.    Acknowledging these

                                                                        results
complications, however, does not diminish the relevance of our positive

for the class of problems that are broadly consistent with the simple timing

assumptions maintained above.    Nor does it weaken our main point:   the second—

best nature of trade policy intervention suggests that the issue of time

                                                                         as well
consistency will be an important consideration in determining the extent
as the efficacy of such policy intervention in most environments.


                                VI.   Concluding Remarks


     The general analysis and examples of the previous sections point cut that

increasing the discretion and flexibility of the government decision process may

be counterproductive.    Many of the same market imperfections that motivate trade

policy intervention can also generate time inconsistencies in the implementation

of the optimal activist policies. Whenever this happens, a government pursuing a

discretionary trade policy finds itself trapped in a suboptimal equilibrium.

Thus, a commitment to a simple set of trading rules may be superior to an

activist but discretionary trade policy.
                                         —
                                             17   —




     It   is   riot   surprising that these conclusions resemble those of the debate on

rules versus discretion in macroeconomic policy:            a careful analysis of the

government incentives is bound to find that the scope of economic policy (whether

trade, monetary, or public finance policy) is limited by the government's ability

to influence private sector expectations.             This Is why the government can benefit

by being endowed with the possibility of entering into binding commitments.             In

the case of trade policy, however, and in contrast to other aspects of economic

policy, institutions capable of enforcing these commitments nay be more readily

available.      Existing international organizations, like the GATT, were originally

conceived to facilitate international cooperation among individual countries.

The results of this paper suggest that these institutions can—-and presumably to

some extent already do--perform an equally crucial role in enforcing the

cooperative outcome in a setting in which the strategic Interaction is between

each government and the private sector at home or abroad.
                                        —   18 —




                                            Footnotes
1-"   For inatanoe, Dixit    (1987)   oonoludes, "The ourrent median view of the

      profession in this matter osn be fsirly oharaoterized as (i) a reoognition

      that the existenoe of imperfeot oompetition does modify or overturn some

      oonventional beliefs about trade polioy, and          (U)   an awareness that the

      design of polioy to fit eaoh situation requires olose attention to its

      speoifio details.     This suggests that researoh should be direoted toward

      improving our understanding of the realities of some industries that are

      likely oandidates for strategio trade polioies."

      It is well known that for a distorted small open eoonomy trade polioy is

      generally not the first best tool.           Unless a two—part tariff polioy oan be

      used, a tariff is also not first best for a large open eoonomy, sinoe it

      leaves some monopoly rents unexploited.           Henoe, in this oase too, the

      government laoks a polioy instrument.

1"    For simplioity, we abstraot from the labor/leisure ohoioe in what follows.

      The natural way to introduoe this deoislon would be to treat it as a

      oonsumption deoiaion, I.e., made after having observed the government

      polioy.    This would oomplioate the analysis by providing the government with

      the opportunity to surprise only with respeot to a subset of produotion

      deoisions.    See Seotion V for a disousaion of how this would effeot our

      results.

1"    The literature on trade polioy Intervention foousea on the use of tariffs to

      oorreot distortions that fall within the traded seotor, a foous that we

      adopt here as well.     Introduoing a nontraded seotor leaves the entire

      analysis qualitatively unaffeoted as long as the distortion remains within

      the traded goods seotor and that produotion deoisions in the nontraded
                                  —   19 —



sector      are made prior to the government policy move.     On the incorporation

of nontraded goods into the traditional analysis of tariffs, see Woodland

(1   982)

See, for example, Bhagwati (1971).

See, for example, Bhsgwati (1971).

While (i), (ii) and (iii) consider the time consistency of tariff

intervention in the presence cf distortions that keep the economy from the

Pareto optimum, the use of tariffs to pursue so—called "non—economic"

objectives with regard to consumption, production, or trade would run into

exactly analagous problems.

A more detailed analysis can be found in Stalger and Tabellini         (1987).

Eaton and Grossman (1985) show that such a policy can be optimal ex-ante, in

the sense that it can achieve some beneficial risk sharing between risk

averse individuals when insurance markets are Incomplete. See Dixit (1987),

however, for a recent challenge to       h1s   view.   An alternative motivation for

the use of tariffs as redistributive devices could come from a political

economy perspective.
                                  —
                                      20 —



                                      References

Bhagwatl, J. 'The Generalized Theory of Distortion and Welfare," in "Trade,
     Balance of Payment and Growth," edited by Bhagwati, J. • B. James, B.
     Mundell, J. Vanek: North Holland, 1971.

Dixit, Avinash, "Trade and Insurance with Moral Hazard,' Journal of International
     Economics, November 1987.

                                                                 in Economic
Dixit, Avinash, "Strategic Aspects of Trade Policy,' in Advances
     Theory: Fifth World Congress, Truman F. Bewley, editor, Cambridge University
     Press, New York, 1987, pp. 329—362.
                                                                             when
Eaton, J. and 0. Grossman, "Tariffs as Insurance: Optimal Commercial Policy
     Domestic Markets are Incomplete," Canadian Journal of Economics, May 1985.
                                                                              of
Kydiand, F. and E. Prescott, "Rules rather than discretion: the inconsistency
     optimal plans," Journal of Political Economy, 1987.

Lapan, Harvey E., "The Optimal Tariff, Production Lags and Time Consistency,"
     forthcoming, American Economic Review.
                                                                    of Economic
Newbery, D.M.G., and J.E. Stiglitz, "Pareto Inferior Trade," Review
     Studies, 19814.

Rogoff, N. "Constitutional Constraints on Monetary Policy," Carnegie-Rochester
     Conference Series on Public Policy, Spring 1987.

Staiger, B. and G. Tabellini, "Discretionary Trade Policy and Excessive
     Protection," American Economic Review, December 1987.

Woodland, A., International Trade and Resource Allocation (North-Holland:
     Amsterdam), 1982
    Figure   1




0                :1.
