                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       EXTERNAL DEBT, PLANNING HORIZON AND DISTORTED CREDIT MARKETS




                              Joshua Aizenman




                           Working Paper No. 2662




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 July 1988




                                                                         Paul
I would like to thank Enrica Detragiache, Mike Dooley, Elhanan Helpman,
                                                            in the conference
Masson, Maurice Obstfeld, Assaf Razin and the participants
on "The International Credit Market: Perspectives and Policy Problems",
                                                       and the Research
Organized by Cuillermo A. Calvo and Maurice Obstfeld,
                                                     The research reported
Department seminar at the IMF for useful comments.
here is part of the NBER's research program in International Studies. Any
                                           not those of the National Bureau
opinions expressed are those of the author
of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2662
                                               July 1988


                                                               CREDIT MARKETS
               EXTERNAL DEBT, PLANNING HORIZON AND DISTORTED


                                         ANsTCT



      The purpose of this paper is to study the role of policies in the presence of country
risk with overdiscountirig by the policy maker. Overdiscounting may reflect political
uncertainty, which makes the effectiveplanning horizon of the centralized government
shorter than that of the private sector. The consequence of overdiscounting is to shift
the supply curve facing the economy leftwards.The role of optimal borrowing policies in
the presence of country risk is to discourage borrowing for consumption purposes,
encourage investment in openness, and discourage investment in activities that reduce
openness. The effect of overdiscountingby the policy maker is to increase the values of
the optimal policy instruments (i.e. to increase the magnitude of the borrowing taxes
and subsidies). Increasing the relative importance of open activities can be viewed as a
way to reduce the harmful consequences of overdiscounting. Overdiscounting may
rationalize various conditionality clauses that will induce the economy to follow the
desired credit market policies.




                                                Joshua Aizenman
                                                The Hebrew University
                                                Jerusalem, Israel
                                                011-972-2-8 83249
1. INTRODUCTIONAND SUMMARY

      Most developing countries are presently credit rationed in   the international credit
markets. This is reflected in the segmentation of the international and domestic credit
markets. The domestic market is characterized by high real interest rates where
domestic agents find it impossible to raise new external credit. As is well documented in
the literature, this situation is related to substantial borrowing in the seventies followed
by the reversal of the easy borrowing policy in the early eighties. This reversal
corresponds to the growing awareness to the role         of   country risk in determining
international credit flows1.

      The experience of  the debtor countries in recent years suggests that there are
                                                                                     debt
tight linkages between the political infrastructure in the various countries and the
                                                                           and a growing
problem. Obviously, these linkages are not unique to the debt issue,
literature has studied the interaction between political structure  and the economy. The
                                                                                     that
purposeof this paper is to focus on one dimension of these linkages- the possibility
the planning horizon of the policy maker differs from that of the economic agent. This
issue may be of special relevance for the default decisions in the context of country risk.
                                                                             a centralized
Typically, the default decision against external creditors is undertaken by
                                                              his country. The purpose of
policy maker whose decision affects the private debtors in
this study is to investigate the consequences of discrepancies between the policy
makers and the private agents planning horizons. The importance of differences



       1           For   an analysis of country risk see, for example, Harberger (1976),
Kharas (1981), Eaton and Gersovitz (1981), Sachs (1984), Kletzer (1984), Krugman
(1985) Smith and Cuddington (1985), Edwards (1985), Folkerts-Landau (1985), Dooley
(1986), Aizenman (1986), Bulow and Rogoff (1986), Calvo (1987), Helpman (1987),
Alesina and Tabelline (1987) and Aizenman and Borensztein(1988).
                                              2

between    the plannir. horizons    the private and the public sectors has been recently
                                    of
                                                                       2
highlighd in the context of fiscal policy. A growing literature has attributed
deviations from Ricardian Equivalence to the possibility that the private sector operates
with a shorter planning horizon relative to the public sector because of life-time
uncertainty. An important characteristic of country risk is that the opposite
presumption may apply - because of political uncertainty, the effective planning
horizon of the centralized government may be shorter than that of the private sector.
The purpose of this paper is to explore the economic consequencesof this presumption.

      Thisresearch has both positive and normative aspects. At the normative level, it
is well understood that country risk may imply that competitive equilibrium is
inefficient, This result    may explain the role  credit market policies, yet it cannot
                                                   of

explain why, frequently, such policies are not voluntarily implemented by the indebted
countries themselves. We have frequently observed that rescheduling agreements entail
various conditionality clauses attached to the provision of fresh credit. One purpose of
our analysis is to demonstrate that various conditionality clauses may be rationalized
in a framework where the planning horizon of the centralized decision maker is shorter
than that    of   the representative agent.

      We     start our analysis by considering the      positive aspects of planning horizon
discrepancy: we investigate how it affects the behavior of the debtor nation and of the
international credit market. We specially investigate the consequences of planning
horizon discrepancies on the investment undertaken by the private sector. First we
present the case where the only source of uncertainty stems from uncertainties
regarding the centralized decision makers discount factor. The Appendix demonstrates
that symmetrical results can be obtained for the case where the centralized decision
makers discount factor is known, and the uncertainty stems from a stochastic default


      2       See, for example, Blanchard (1985), and Frenkel and Razin (1986).
                                            3

penalty. Then we explore the normative consequences of exogenous changes in the
various variables, such as the volume of investment and consumption borrowing. Such
a change may be implemented by conditionality arrangements that set guidelines for
domestic credit market policies We derive the desirable conditions characterizing the
proper conditionality in t}i presence of a limited planning horizon of the centralized
decision maker. These conditions are defined by the policies that maximize the expected
utility of the representative agent in the economy. We close the paper with concluding
remarks regarding extensions and qualifications.

      Our key results arethat the consequence of overdiscountingby the policy maker
is to mft the supply of credit facing the economy leftwards. The role of optimal
borrowing policies in the presence of country risk is to discourage borrowing for
consumption purposes, encourage investment in openness, and discourage investment in
                               3
activities that reduce openness The rationale for these policies is that investment in
openness generates positive externality: it increases the penalty associated with default,
thereby bonding the policy maker and the country to honor their financial obligations,
shifting rightward the supply of credit facing the country. The economic agent does not
have the incentive to internalize this effect, and the role of policies is to induce him to
do it by taxing activities that reduce openness, and subsidizing (relative to the
competitive equilibrium) activities that increase openness.

      The effect of overdiscountingbythe policy maker is to increase the values of the
optimal policy instruments. Overdiscounting increases the optimal investment in
openness, and reduces the optimal investment in activities that are not biased towards




      3     Throughout the paper we refer to openness as synonymous with trade
dependency. A country is more open if its welfare depends more heavily on
international trade, or alternatively if it faces higher costs of trade embargo.
                                              4

openness. Overdiscounting    can   be viewed as a new distortion: the policy maker
understates the future penalty triggered by default. Consequently, the decision maker
defaults too frequently relative to the default rate that maximizes the welfare of the
representative consumer. This distortion operates on the top of the distortion introduced
by country risk, Increasing the openness of the economy increases the costs of default
and reduces the incidence of non-optimal defaults, mitigating thereby the harmful
consequences of the distortion generated by the policy makers short horizon.

      In the presence of overdiscounting these policies will not be implemented
voluntarily by the decision maker, because he is not maximizing the welfare of the
representative consumer. An obvious source of a distortion in the presence of short
planning horizon is the default rule in the indebted country. Assuming a given
institutional structure we cannot affect the default rule. Instead, a proper
conditionality may reduce the consequences of that distortion. Consequently,
implementing the policies that maximize the welfare of the representative consumer
will require various conditionality clauses   that will induce the economy to follow the
desired credit market policies.
                                                  S


2. THE     MODEL



      We construct   a simple model to evaluate the dependency of investment decisions
and policies on the planning horizon in the presence of country risk. There are three
periods. In the first period agents in the economy make the borrowing decisions. The
borrowed funds are used to finance investment or consumption. To simplify we assume
that, due to relative scarcities of funds, the first period investment is financed by
external borrowing. Repayment is due in the second period. Default in the second period
triggers a penalty that reduces available resources in the second and third periods. The
default decision is made by a centralized policy maker, such as the central bank, who
compares the costs and the benefits of a default -fault will occur if the costs fall short
of the benefits associated with the default. We udy an economy where the central
                                                                                             4
decision makers planning horizon differs from         the representative agent We
                                                       that   of

present the case where the discount factor applied by the centralized decision maker
may differ from the one applied by the private agent. In period one there is
uncertainty regarding the identity of the decision maker in period two, and thus
regarding his future discount factor. The decision makers discount factor is e
where      0     s   1.   is a random variable. The available information in period one is
summarized by a distribution function of the future values of t, denoted by f(e).
    To simplify analysis we consider risk neutral agent whose utility is given by




      4              the only decision made by the centralized decision maker concerns
               Because
the default decision in period two we need at least three periods in order to evaluate
the role of planning horizon.
      5      All the key results     of   the present paper apply also to the case   of   a general

utility.
                                                                    6


                                            1                 12
      (1)                 U        C1
                                        +       C2
                                                     +
                                                         (;)         C3


where    stands for the subjective rate of time preference and C1 is the consumption of
         8

traded goods at time t (t = 1, 23).
     The role of the centralized decision maker is limited to the default decision and to
the implementation of credit market policies. These policies are in the form of borrowing
taxes for consumption and investment purposes. We assume that if the country is
facing credit rationing the policy maker will impose the appropriate tax on consumption
borrowing, denoted by p. The purpose of this tax is to capture the wedge between the
external supply price of credit and the domestic price of credit needed to clear the
                                        6
domesticmarket for credit The domestic interest rates are given by


     (2) 1    +   r       =   (1   +   r*) (1 + p)       ;          1   +
                                                                            r1 = (1 +   r*)   (1 +   j)
where r is the external interest rate facing the country, and p is the domestic tax on
borrowing for investment in activity i, 0 i q.                  '
The budget constraints for a representative consumer are given by


     (3)                  C= Yi÷B

                                                          q
     (4)     C2,      =
                          2,n   —
                                       (B (1 r) +               l(1÷r1)} + R      ;         C2,d     =
                                                                                                         2,d
                                                         i= 1


      (5)                 C3, = 2,n                                     C3,d          2,d

     6       For      further discussion regarding the role of such a tax see Aizenman (1987).
                                                           7


where   Ct,d (Yt.d)       and   Ct (Y)          stand for consumption (G.N.P.) at time      t   in case   of

default (d) and no default (n), respectively. Consumption borrowing and investment
borrowing in activity i are denoted by B0 and I, respectively. Lump-sum transfers are
given by      R.
The role of  the lump-stir transfer s to rebate the public of the net tax collection
generated by credit market policies. To simplify, we focus on the case where investment
decisions are carried only in the first period, and we assume equality of output in the
second and third period.
     Suppose that  the value added in sector i depends on two factors. First, it may be
affected by the decision regarding default. For example, if default raises the costs of
imported inputs it will tend to depress output. Second, the value added in sector i
depends positively on the capital stock, which in turn is determined by past
investment. We can summarize the value addec in sector i at time t by:



                                't;i (n, K.1)     if   no default occurs
        (6)           =


                                                  if   default occurs
                                ''t;i (d, Kt)

The GNP in         our economy is the sum         of the   value added in all activities, given by

                          q
                      =
                                                         8
where s        =   ri or d (no default or default, respectively) and there are q sectors.7 Equation
(7) should be viewedas a reduced form equation, and Appendix A.1 provides a detailed
example ofthe factors determining the value added.
     We define the default penalty (denoted by (2) as the drop in the GNP resultant
from the default:             -
                                         ''
                                ''t (see Appendix A.1 for the analysis regarding the
factors determining          (2).


      The default decision is made by the centralized decision maker who compares the
cost of default (given by the drop of output by (2 in period two and three) to the gain in
                                                                                                     q
period two, given by (1          +      r*)B, where B is aggregate borrowing, given by   B =   B+          I.
                                                                                                    i' 1
Thus, default will occur if

         (8)         (1+r*)         >    (2(1



The right-hand side stands for net present value of the default penalty, discounted to
the second period applying the decision makers discount factor,                          .   In the first

period                      the information on its possible value is summarized by a
               is unknown, and
                             8
density function f(€) . Let ij be the marginal value of associated with default, and
defined by:




      7           that the GNP is a function also of the vector of capital (Kj, Kt,2
                   Note

Kt,q). For notational simplicity this vector is suppressed.
       8     To simplify the discussion we treat the political ml: astructure generating
overdiscounting as exogenously given. One example of an economy generating our
results is the case where the governments effective tax collection is a fixed proportion
                                                       9


       (8)    (1+r)          =



      Assuming symmetric informatlon between lenders and borrowers, if                           the lenders
are risk neutral they will require an interest rate r* such as

       (9)     j+r1=(1+r)fl
where   r is the risk free interest rate and
       (9')   fl =         f(e) de


Note   that   Vt   is   the probabilitydefault, and equation (9) requires equality of
                                          of no

expected yield and risk-free yield. The representative agent in the economy is fully
informed about the decision rule guiding the centralized decision maker. His expected
utility is given by




of  the private sectors consumption, and these taxes are used to finance the fiscal
consumption.Let e be the probability of government's survival from the second to the
third period. The government preferences are given by a separate utility function [like


sectors utility is          j
(1)] where we replace the private sector by government consumption (i.e., the public

                                 G2 +   (}j2   G3 ,   and G   =   t C)   .   It can be shown that if, in

economy, the government maximizes its expected utility we may generate a default
                                                                                                           that


rule of the type summarized by (8). This is only one possible example of an economy
where the results of our policy discussion may be relevant.
                                                               10

       (10)



   +
                            iY2—      c1){1       +        )   f(e)   d   +




  1                                               q
       j   0
               1''2,n + R
                            —
                                (B (1 + r)    +
                                                  i1   I(1'-r1)}      +
                                                                          T 2,n
                                                                              1
                                                                                  f(c)   dc


where the second and third terms stand for the expected net present value conditional
on default and no default decision, respectively.
                                                     11




3. BORROWING FOR CONSUMPTION AND INVESTMENT: THE AGENT PROBLEM


      A  representative agent will choose consumption and investment as to maximize
the expected utility, given by (10). Assuming that each agent is price taker, he views
his borrowing as negligible relative to the aggregate borrowing of the country. Thus, he
treats the probability of default (and consequently c0) as being exogenously given to
him. The condition for optimal consumption borrowing (assuming             an internal
equilibrium) is obtained by maximizing (10):


      (11)          1 =         (1+r)   U


Applying (2) and (9) we get a unique borrowing tax consistent with internal equilibrium
with positive borrowing. This tax is given by


      (12)           = (8   -   rf)/(1 + r)

Since we assumed that consumers are risk   neutral and that the rate of time preference
rate is constant, then for a tax rate below consumers will borrow until the credit
constraint is reached, and for a tax rate above p no borrowing for consumption will
occur We will assume an internal equilibrium where the tax p is imposed. At that



      9      Once   the credit constraint
                                        reached the policy maker will impose the tax
                                                is

  to capture the wedge between the external supply price of credit and the domestic
price of credit that is needed to clear the domestic market for credit. For further
discussion regarding the role of such         a tax see Aizenman (1987).
                                                        12

tax  consumers are indifferent to the volume of consumption borrowing. As we will
demonstrate later the optimal level of consumption borrowing will be obtained by also
taking into consideration the social consequences of country risk on the default
penalty.
      The investment in activity           i is   determined by the following condition [derived by
                     10
maximizing(10)1

      (13)    NVMP1 = (1 + rf)(1 +         p)


where NVMP1

This condition
                 =
                     (        - {1 - 1fl           1+        )

               equates the net present value of the marginal productivity of investment
to the expected marginal costs of investment. ['ote that the left hand side of (13) is the
expected net present value of the marginal product of investment, taking into
consideration the consequencesof the investment on the expected default penalty. The
right hand side is the expected cost of borrowing.    We close this section by evaluating
the consequencesthe overdiscountingon the supply of credit facing the country and on
the level of investment. Appendix A.3 demonstrates that higher overdiscounting will
shift the supply credit facing the economy leftward. Thus, given borrowing will be
associated with a raise in the interest rate facing the country and a drop in the
probability of repayment         (TI). Inspection of     the investment rule     (13) shows   that this




      10     We use the fact that (9) implies            that
      (1 + rf)/(1 + r*)   =            d€
                              Jf()
                                                  Y2 - ttf Q                 1
      11.    Alternatively,     NVMP       =
                                                                 y)(   1 +
                                             13

adjustment implies a drop in the expected marginal product                   of   capital, thereby
reducing the investment.

4. OPTIMAL BORROWING: OVERDISCOUNTINGAND THE                           ROLE OF POLICIES AND

CONDITIONALITY
       We would like to evaluate the role of policies in   the presence of limited planning
horizon. These policies   may     either in the form of conditionality imposed by
                                 be

international institutions or in the form of taxes and subsidies implemented
domestically. The presumption is that in the presence of overdiscounting these policies
will not be implemented voluntarily by the decision maker, because he is not
                                                            12
maximizing the welfare of the representative consumer Consequently, implementing
                                                                 .



the policies that maximize the welfare of the representative consumer may require
various conditionality clauses. We start our analysis by evaluating how marginal
change in borrowing will affect the expected utility. We can accomplish this by
differentiating the expected utility subject to the constraint on the supply of credit lie.,
where c0 and r* are determined by (8) and (9)]
                                        13
      The expected   utility is given by




      12    Maximizing the welfare of the representative consumer will require a
default rule like (8) with no overdiscounting (i.e., with t = 1). As is elaborated in
footnote 8, the decision rule in our paper may reflect uncertainty regarding the
survival of the policy maker and is consistent with the case where the policy maker
maximizes his own expected welfare.
      13.   Equation (14) is obtained by applying the assumption that the lump-sum
transfers are rebating the consumer of the net collection   of       borrowing taxes.
                                                                        14

            (14)         V=


                             '2 - } f()d + j—j0 (V2
                                                          1                                   q
            +
                   1                                                       —
                                                                                (1+r*)(Bc +       l)}f() dc
                i+&J0                                                                         i=1



÷
    ()2rc
       )
        1
                   0
                         (Y2— Q)f()       de   ÷
                                                    1 211
                                                   (;g)       J
                                                                  0
                                                                      Y2 f(€)   d

As is shown in Appendix A.2 , marginal changes in B0 and                                       I (i =   1, ...q) will   change the

expected           utility by:
            (15)        AV=

            1r1               B
                                                              +
{t- ---- (1+—n{1+Ufl}80
    q
            1{NvMP1 —(1+rf)[1+Tri(1+U}1}lj
 ii.
                         (21(1+6)
where U            =     —       *   (1   Eo); rj0         d log (1 + r*)/ d log B0
                         B(1+r
and                    d log (1 + r*)/ d   log     I.
                                                                                                                               the
  measures the relative importance of overdiscounting the future default costs by
U
                                                                      14
policy maker, and it is zero if no overdiscounting
                                                  occurs (i.e. if =
                                                                    1)     and ri are                               n

             14.  that /(1+6) is the decision makers marginal discount factor
                         Note
                                                              costs of default are (2
 associated with default. For this decision maker the future
                                           For the economic agent the future costs of
 c0/(1+8) (in terms of the second period).
                                           15

the elasticities of the interest rate with respect to borrowing for consumption and
investment.
      Equation (15) has been derived for the case where the source uncertainty
                                                                     of               is

stochastic rate of time preference (or equivalently stochastic overdiscounting). Our
welfare discussion in thi section will be based on that equation. Appendix A.4
demonstrates that the same equation can be derived for the case where the source of
                                                                                    the
uncertainty is stochastic future productivity and where the overdiscounting by
decision maker is exogenously given. Consequently, it can be shown that all the welfare
discussion in this section applies to both cases: stochastic productivity and stochastic
overdiscounting.
      Marginal borrowing will change welfare by the sum of the initial distortion times
the change in the distorted activity. The distortions in the various activities are given
by the terms in large brackets in (15), which measure the wedge between the marginal
benefit and the marginal social cost associated with extending the distorted activities.
For example, a raise in consumption at period one will increase welfare by 1, but will
generate a marginal cost of
 1+r1
       t+ B    r   1 + U)]. The value of    is the elasticity of the interest rate with

respect to consumption borrowing. In the absence of country risk  r= 0 and the cost of



borrowing is simply given by the the risk-free interest rate discounted by
                                                                           the rate of
time preference. With country risk and full discounting (U=0) the social cost of




                                                                      01(1+5)
default are 0 /(1+S) (in terms the second period). Consequently, —
                                 of                                       (1- o) is the
                                                                  B(1+r

penalty    overdiscountedby the decision maker relative to the debt due in the second
period.
                                                         16
                                                                                                                   15
consumption borrowing is given by expected discounted increase in future repayment
Country risk introduces a distortion that raises the social cost of funds. The distortion
arises from the fact that individual borrowers treat the rate of interest as given even
though, from the perspective of the country as a whole, the rate of interest increases
with the volume of consumption borrowing due to the rise in the probability of default.
Each small consumer overlooks the marginal rise in the probability of default induced
by his marginal borrowing. The increase in the probability of default entails a negative
externality because of the consequent rise in the expected default penalty inflicted on
all domestic consumers.
      As can be seen from (15), country risk increases the expected social cost of

consumption borrowing at a rate of —                 r   ( 1 +    U). If   the policy maker's discount factor
equals    that   of   the economic agent      (i.e., if 1     =
                                                                  e   and thus    U = 0),   the social cost will
increase at a rate given by the weighted interest rate elasticity                     (B
                                                                                            Tb). The    implication
of overdiscounting by the policy maker is that the policy maker defaults too
frequently', relative to the desired default by a representative consumer, because he




 where
         15. Note

            iT is
                      that the social cost   of   consumption borrowing for             =


                      the probability of no default. Applying definitions one can show that
                                                                                            1 is   i
                                                                                                   1t   d[(i.+r)B]
                                                                                                           dB

iT d[(1+r*)B]
                      =
1+8       dB
 1+rf
          1+
               B
               — rid. This will be the case with full discounting by the policy maker                      (   =   1),

where the uncertainty is due to a stochastic default penalty generated by a
productivity shock [see Aizenman (1987) for such an example, and Appendix A.4 for an
example with a fixed overdiscountingin the presence of productivity shocki.
                                                     17

overlooks some of    the future costs of default.         This   result in increasing the distortion
                                    B
introduced by country risk by
                                    L)c
                                          n U.
      Similar interpretation applies to the welfare change introduced by marginal
investment borrowing: th. benefit of investment in period two is NVMP1 (in terms of
the second period). The marginal social cost of the funds is            (1 + rf)E 1 +
                                                                                        B
                                                                                            i   f   1 + U)),


nd country risk and short planning horizon increase the costs of funds at a rate of
B


      We can apply (15) to infer the conditions characterizing the optimal allocation, by
equating the terms in the large brackets to zero. This allocation can be obtained by a
proper conditionality. An obvious source of distortion is the default rule in the indebted
country. This rule reflects the overdiscounting due to the limited planning horizon of
the decision maker. Assuming a given institutional structure we cannot affect the
default rule. Instead, a proper conditionality may attempt to reduce the distortions
(holding the institutional structure as given). From (15) we infer that the proper
'quotas for consumption and investment borrowing are given by the conditions:



                     8—r1       B
      (16)                  =
                                —n[1+U)

      (17)      NVMP1 =   (1+rf)[   1+{          1 +U}]




Recalling    that with the borrowing tax consumers are indifferent to the volume of
                                                 p
consumption borrowing, equation (16) determines the condition for the socially desirable
level of consumption borrowing. Equation (17) determines the optimal investment rule.
Comparing (17) to (13) shows         that the optimal investment can be implemented by
                                            18/
imposing inve5tment borrowing taxes at a rate of p. With this tax the interest rate for
investment in activity i is given by (1+r*)(1+pj), where

                       B
      (18)       p1=   Tflj{l+U)

      Inspection of (16) and (18) revealsthat two key factors determine the optimal
borrowing for consumption and investment in activity i. The first is the elasticity of the
interest rate with respect to use of funds (y and rfl), and the second is the relative
importance of the overdiscounting,as measured by U. As is shown in Appendix A.3, the
elasticity of the interest rate with respect to borrowing reflects the marginal
contribution of the borrowing to the country risk characteristics of the economy, and is
determined by the use of funds (see equations (A15) and (A19)).
      In the case of consumption borrowing, the interest elasticity       i   reflects the
inverse of the elasticity of supply of credit, and it approaches infinity as we approach
the credit ceiling. As is shown in Appendix A.3, in the presence of country risk       r
measures the increase in the probability of default resultant from the increase in
indebtedness. Figure one summarizes the factors determining the optimal level of
                            16
consumption borrowing In the absence of overdiscountingthe consumption borrowing
                                 .


is given by  Bi , and with overdiscountingit is given by B2. A rise in country risk (i.e.

            r)
a higher or higher overdiscounting will shift CC (and CC) leftwards, thus reducing
the desired level of consumption borrowing.




      16.    Curves    CC   and     upwards, correspondingto the assumption that due
                                     CC siop
to the presence of country risk we operate on the upper sloping portion of the supply of
credit, where higher indebtedness reduces the elasticity of the supply of credit (thereby
increasing   k)
                         U
                       F.
U-   U-. - . - - -
                     --+
                                        0U   w
                                    1
                             1L L
                             I+
                             'Ca
                                                  19

      Unlike consumption borrowing, marginal investment borrowing affects the
interest rate in two opposite directions (see Appendix A.3 for the derivation of this
result). Fir5t, marginal borrowing raises total indebtedness, thus increasing the
probability of default. This effect is similar to that observed for consumption borrowing.
Second, the investment also changes the productive capacity of the economy, thereby
                                                                 17
affecting the default penalty and the probability of default . We refer to these two
effects as the indebtedness and openness effects. The indebtedness effect reflects an
upward move on the given supply of credit facing the economy, whereas the openness
effect reflects the consequences of the investment on the location of the supply of
         18
credit     .   As is   shown in Appendix   A.3,        r
                                         the elasticity is the sum of both effects (see
(A19)). The optimal borrowing tax balances these two effects. The stronger the openness
effect, the lower the optimal investment borrowing tax (18), and if the openness effect
dominates, the elasticity ij and the corresponding borrowing tax will be negative.
      Figure 2 describes opti'mal investment. Curve NVMP depicts the dependencyof the
expected marginal productivity of capital on the investment. We consider investment in


               .
two types of activities, according to their relative openness, as measured by the
                                 i
elasticity The elasticity is negative (positive) for a sector biased in favor (against)
international trade. This point is developed and justified in Appendix A.3, where we
provide the economic interpretation for the bias in favor (or against) trade in terms of
the relative importance of the sector in determining the default penalty. In Figure 2 we
describe the investment in two activities that differ in terms of their openness as
reflected in the value of i. We denote the elasticities of the 'relatively open and closed




         17.                              a sector that depends heavily on international
                 For example, investment in
trade raises the default penalty and reduces thereby the probability of default.
      18. Note that the location of the supply of credit facing the economy is conditional
on the vector of capital (Kt,j., Kt-2  Ktq). Thus, investment will affect its location.
               r
               +
               +
+   U              CIII
                   0
F iI—
    U
                          NJ
I                  0
                          LI
                   CJ
                   U
        '-I-
        +
                                                  20

activity by lo and       r.
                      The level of optimal investment in the open sector is given by 10,1
and 'o2 for the case where there is no overdiscounting (U = 0) and the case where
there is overdiscounting (U > 0) , respectively. Similarly, the level of optimal
investment in the relative closed sector is given by 'ci and 1c2 for the case where
                                              19
overdiscountingU = 0 and U 0, respectively Note that in the absence of investment
                                                       .


                                                                              the role of
policies there is a uniform interest rate applied for all activities. Thus,
optimal investment policies is to encourage investment in openness, and to discourage
investment in activities that reduce openness. As is shown in Appendix A.3, a rise in the
                                                                               horizontal
openness of an activity reduces the corresponding Th shifting down the
                     20
schedule in Figure 2 , thus increasing the optimal investment. The rationale for this
effect is that investment in openness generates positive externality: it increases the
penalty associated with default, thereby bonding the country to honor its financial
obligations, thus shifting rightward the supply schedule facing the country.
                                                                                      The

economic agent does not have the incentive to internalize this effect, and the role of
                                                                                   and by
policies is to induce him to do so by taxing activities that reduce openness,
subsidizing (relative to the competitive equilibrium) activities that increase openness.

      Figure 2 also shows the optimal investment consequence of higher overdiscounting
    the policy maker (i.e. an increase in U). It tends to encourage investment in
                                                                         towards
openness, and to discourage investment in activities that are not biased
openness. In terms of Figure 2, a higher U will shift upwards (downwards)
                                                                             the
horizontal line for activities with positive (negative) r, reducing (increasing) the optimal
investment. Thus, overdiscounting by the policy maker should increase the optimal




       19.   In Figure        2   we assume that both sectors have the same expected marginal
 productivity schedule.                                         —
                                                                B
       20.   This   is   the schedule given by (1 + r)(    1+
                                            21

 investment in sectors biased in favor of trade and reduce the optimal investment in
 activities not biased in favor of trade. Increasing the relative Importance of
                                                                                open
 activities can be viewed as a way to reduce the harmful consequences of
 overdiscounting.

       Overdiscountingcan be viewed as a new distortion: the policy maker understates
the future penalty triggered by default. Consequently, the decision maker defaults too
frequently relative to the default rate that maximizes the welfare of the representative
consumer. This distortion operates in addition to of the distortion introduced by
                                                                                   country
risk. The role of optimal policies is to mitigate the effect of
                                                                overdiscounting: increasing
the openness of the economy increases the costs of default and reduces the incidence of
non-optimal defaults, mitigating thereby the harmful consequences of the distortion
generated by the policy makers short horizon. Optimal policies also call for a further
reduction in consumption borrowing; the short-horizon of the policy maker causes too
frequent defaults (relative to what is optimal for the representative consumer), and
tightening consumption borrowing can be viewed as another way of reducing the
frequency of the non-optimal defaults. Note that as long as the policy maker's
consumption (or the public sector's consumption) is positively correlated with private
consumption, optimal policies in the presence of overdiscounting will call for fiscal
            21
contraction     It is noteworthy that the optimal policies have been derived by
maximizing the representative consumers welfare. In the presence of overdiscounting
by the policy maker these optimal policies will deviate from those policies viewed &s




       21.   This result follows from the observationthat part of the borrowing for
coniumption may   be  used to increase the public sectors consumption. Consequently,
cutting borrowing for consumption also has the consequence of reducing the fiscal
deficit.
                                         22

optimal by the policy maker in the developing country. Overcoming this conflict will
                                                                             an active
require conditionality attached to the provision of credit, and may justify
role for international institutions in intermediating between the policy maker and the
                               22
international banking system



5. CONCLUDING REMARKS
      Throughout the paper we have assumed the presence of a centralized decision
maker, who undertakes the decision regarding the default and who implements policies.
We studied the potential consequencesof overdiscountingby the policy maker. Our key
results are that the consequence of overdiscountingis to shift the supply curve facing
the economy leftwards. In the context of desirable credit market policies,
overdiscounting by the policy maker increases the tax on borrowing for consumption
purposes and for investment in sectors that are not biased towards international trade;
it also increases the subsidy for borrowing for investment in sectors heavily biased
towards international trade. We concludewith an outline for a possible extension of our
analysis and some qualifying remarks.
      Our discussion provided a rather narrow interpretation of the optimal policies. We
 terpreted the optimal polices in the form of borrowing taxes and subsidies that
generate the proper wedge between the external interest rate facing the economy and
the internal interest rate facing the representative agent. A dual representation of the




      22.   It can be shown that if the policy maker is confronted with an all-or-
                                                                               to the
 nothing option (i.e., borrowing with the attached conditionality or no access
 international credit market) he is better off with the conditionality.
                                            23
 various policies is in the form of corresponding taxes arid subsidies applied to sectorial
                                                         23
 investment and for the saving and borrowing decisions
       We concluded that in the presence of overdiscounting the optimal
                                                                                 degree of
 openness (or trade dependency) exceeds the one           ed by the policy maker. It is
noteworthy that our discussion overlooked several - : ortant factors that are relevant
for a more complete determination of the optimal degree of openness. First, openness
has the consequence of reducing the exposure to domestic shocks, and increasing the
exposure to external shocks. Second, one should recognize that the ability of developing
nations to increase openness is conditional on the willingness of the developed nations to
tolerate it. Both factors may dampen the optimal degree of openness. Our analysis can
be extended to account for these factors by allowing for the presence of domestic and
foreign shocks and by considering   a more symmetric world where developing nations
have a certain market power.
     Our analysis should be viewed only as an example intended to highlight a more
general point: country risk and overdiscounting by the policy maker generate an
environment where the optimal openness form the point of view of private agents may
exceed the optimal openne - :orm the point of view of the policy maker, justifying
conditionality attached to new credit. This result should apply also to alternative
models. We considered the case where the costs of default are the result of trade
embargo. If one believes that the default costs are in the form of embargo on future




      23.   According to this interpretation agents are free to borrow in             the
international capital market but are taxed (or subsidized) according to the domestic
activities that they choose to engage in. The duality between the two interpretations of
the policies discussed in the paper is similar to the duality between commercial policy
and the equivalent set of taxes cum subsidies on domestic activities (like consumption
and production).
                                           24

borrowing and trade credits,    then the optimal policies should encourage the activities
                                                                       where the embargo
that are most vulnerable to a credit embargo. We modeled the case
                                                                               reduces the
is in the form of a hike in the effective price of imports. If the embargo
effective price of exportables, then the policies should also encourage exportabies.
       One  important  limitation of our discussion is that we treat the overdiscouriting
                                                                        A useful extension
and the politicalinfrastructure in the economy as exogenously given.
                                                                  in a political economy
of the paper may integrate the logic of the present discussion
                                                                Another limitation of our
framework, where overdiscountingis endogenously generated.
                                                                    the case where there
analysis is with regard to informational assumptions.We treated
                                                                                   and the
is full information on the use of external credit obtained via the central bank,
                                                                                       that
structure of optimal policies is conditional on this information. Suppose, instead,
                                                                               and all that
there is no information on the marginal use of credit due to full fungibility,
                                                                     is room only for one
is known is the average use of funds. In such an economy there
                                                                                      taxes
 uniform borrowing tax, whose value is determined as a weighted average of the
                                                                                  funds.  In
 derived in the present paper, where the weights reflect the average use
                                                                               of

                                                              set in between these two
 general, however, the policy maker has an information
                                                                                  but may
 extreme assumptions: fungibility of funds is feasible for small-scale projects,
                                                                         cost. In such an
 be harder in major projects that can be monitored at a lower
                                                                                         for
   ivironment the key results of our paper will hold, after the proper adjustment
 monitoring costs is made.
                                             - 25 -
                                          APPENDIX
       The purposeof this Appendix   is   to provide a detailed discussion on   the derivations
 ofthe key equation in the text. Appendix A.1 derives the default penalty endogenously.
Appendix A.2 studies the welfare consequences of exogenous changes in borrowing.
Appendix A.3 determines the linkages between openness and the interest elasticity of
consumption and investment borrowing and evaluate the consequence of a raise in
overdiscountingon the supply schedule facing the economy. Appendix A.4 extends the
discussion to the case of stochastic productivity.


Al    The Default Penalty
      In the paper we considered the case where the default penalty 0 is exogenously
given. We start the Appendix by deriving the default penalty endogenously. For
simplicity we give an example of a two-sectorial economy. Our analysis applies also to
an economy with any number of sectors. Output is produced by domestic and imported
inputs. The two sectors differ in terms of their reliance on international trade. A default
results in a rise in the price of imported inputs. The various sectors differ in their
dependency on importable goods. For example, consider an economy where output in
sector 1 (denoted by X1) is producedby the following process:


      (Al)           X1
                          =
                              (K (M)'                 ;   c       <1;

where K1 and   M1
                    are the capital and the imported inputs used in sector i, and      '   is   a

productivity measure. The only difference between the two sectors is that they differ in
their dependence on international trade. One of them, sector 1 for example, is more
dependent on international trade (i.e.    <
                                                ).
                                               Thus, we can refer to      as a measure
ofthe openness, or the reliance on international trade of activity i. In the short run,
the stock of capital is exogenously given. We denote the price of the imported input by
                                                                      -   26    -
          we assume that
        and                     is deterrnrned by the policies of the country. In the
absence of default the country faces the international price of     assumed to be unity.
                                                                  to a trade embargo. A
A default will have the consequence of triggering a penalty due
                                                                           will raise the
simple way to capture the penalty is to assume that the trade embargo
price of imported inputs at a rate of        such that in states of default the effective

costs of importables facing the country is exp Pm1' where p> 0.
       Producers in each sector maximize profits in two ways. in the first period,
                                                                               stock in
producers will choose the optimal investment which will determine the capital
the second and the third period. Within each period the stock of capital is given, and
                                                                            Short-run
producers will choose the imported input M in order to maximize profits.
                                                                                  value
profit maximization with respect to the use of importable M yields the following
for output


                                                           1/(1   —
                                                                                    c/(1 -
                                 =
        (A2)                X1       c1




 where          =   (       )
                                 1(1-     )    .   Thus,    a rise        of         from 1 to exp        is associated with a
          c1

 change of output at a rate of:

                                                                               -1     -
         (A3)                        exp C-        (p 1(1—                                   1(1-   iPm

 Note   that a portion                    of   output is spent on the imported input. Thus, the value added



                        -
                                                     - 27 -

 and (A3) implies         that the drop in value added in sector i resulting from the default is

      -
 (1                  /(1- i11Pm          X     Pm


 Aggregating the drop in the value added across sectors gives us:


           (A4)                     [         +
                                                    2 X2] m          where

                      -
                           C1   i 1/(1—.)1   (1<1         1




                (c1 are
for i     = 1,2           constants ).
           default penalty can be approximated by the sum of output in the various
          The
sectors in states of no default, weighted by a measure of  the reliance on trade (the s)
times the increase in imported inputs prices,
                                                    m• Equivalently, the default penalty
equals the increase in the cost of imported inputs resultant from the default. The
reliance on international trade (as measured by the importance of the imported input,
)   plays a key role in determining the relative importance of sector i in the aggregate
default penalty. A sector that is shielded from international trade would not play a role
in    the determination  the aggregate default penalty. These observations will play a
                              of

key role in determining the elasticity of the interestrate with respect to investment
(n1) and in determining optimal tax on borrowing for investment in sector i. An
investment in an activity with a larger 'openness index will cause a greater increase
in the the default penalty, causing a larger increase in the probability of no default.
Throughout the paper we treat productivity as a constant. Appendix A.4 extends the
discussion to the case where the source of randomness is stochastic productivity.
                                                           - 28 -
A.2   The Welfare Consequences Of Exogenous Changes in Borrowing
      The purpose of this part is to derive equation (15), determinrng
                                                                       the consequences
                                                      on the expected welfare position of
of marginal consumption and investment borrowing
the representative agent. Direct derivation of (14) shows that

         (A5)                 V   /6             =



1+               (1r -                          -                           f(s)    d

 - -         2
                 Q f(s)


Note that
                    a[(1+r*)J = (j+rw)
                              C             C
                                                   r and J     11
                                                               S0
                                                                    f(c)   d   =   IT. Thus,


     1   I1a[(1+r] f(s)           ds            1+rf   r
                                                       B
                                                                 Applying this result to (AS) we get, after


collecting terms, that:



             (A6)   av /aB         =



                                                      Eo        l+rf
                 [(1+r*)B - 0(1 +      1fl f(s) — -
         1                —             1
 1

 Applying the default rule (8) we get                  (1+r)B - 0(1 +

 0           (s - 1). Consequently,

             (A?)             V /aB              =



         1          1                  as0 - 1+rf          B

 1-jQ—(1-so)f(s)--—                                  ---
                                                              - 29 -

Applying (9) we get


         (A8)         f(s)
                                C
                                             i-i
                                              C
                                                   n         )     a0
                                                                    1
                                                                        =
                                                                             ii
                                                                              1




Applying (A8) to (A7), collecting terms and using the definition of                      U   [below (15)] we get

                                                 l+r
                                              1- ----
         (A9)         aV/aB0                          [l+—rl0{1+Ufl

We turn now to       the derivation of               V   /    1.
         Direct derivation of (14) shows               that



         (Alo)                           =



    1
         (1+r)B -
                 —
                      QI f(c)
                                O    -
                                         (jg)
                                               2         Q 1(c)



-
        lJa[(1+r] 1(c) de + jVMP1
Applying the steps described in                    the derivations      of   (A6)-(A9) we get, after collecting
terms


         (All)    V/l1              {NVMPI -(1+rf)[1+{1+U}])
                                                        - 30 -
Note   that

       (Al2)           V =     {ciV   / aB0) B      + (aV        / ai )

Applying (A9) and (All) to (A12) we obtain equation (15).


A.3    Openness and the Interest Elasticity of Consumption and Investment
Borrowing
      We now turn to the derivation of the value of the interest rate elasticities with
respect to consumption and investment borrowing,                      r
                                                     and 1h Equation (8) implies that
for tB0 , assuming    = 0 for all activities




        (A13)



Applying equations (9) and (9) we get


        (A14)      0     =
                             f(e0)(1+r)
                                           (l +   rM)



Solving (A13) and (A14) simultaneously we infer                     that

                                     B0 I(0)(1+r)
        (A15)           n0 =                 —
                                       - f(E0)B(1+r)
                               (1+6)


The interest rate elasticity with respect to consumption borrowing is zero for small
borrowing, and initially it grows with the volume of borrowing. We reach the credit
                               cnr
 ceiling   for B   =
                       f(s0)(1+r=)(1+8)
                                                    - 31    -

          now turn to the derivation of the interest rate elasticity with respect to
            We
 investment borrowing. Applying (8) we infer that for   assuming B0 = C and        =

 0 for



            (A16)     B(1+r)+(1+r=)l1=               j c2




 Applying (A4) we infer           that

            (A17)         Q=      MPK m

where MPK0 is the marginal product of capital in sector i (in the absence of default).
Applying (A2)          w infer:

            (A18)     MPK.1       r—     K1



Note        that equation      (A14)     continues to hold. Solving (A16)-(A18) simultaneously,
applying (A14), we get that


            (A19)     n   =
                              n[1 -   sj-]
where       s is the is sector share in the aggregate penalty
              -
                    i)<n;i+ 2X2

We can define          the openness of a given activity by its contribution to the default penalty
(s1)   It    is   determined by the reliance on imported inputs,      .   A sector that does not
                                                -   32

                                                       the penalty is zero (s =0). As
import goods has = 0, and consequently its share in
                                                                       to investment
(A19) reveals, for such a sector the interest elasticity with respect
                                                       A higher openness is associated
borrowing in that activity is positive and equals
                                                                    .




with a higher and s. Inspection of (A19) shows that a higher openness of an activity i
will reduce the interest rate elasticity with respect to investment in that activity.
                                                                                      For

high enough openness this elasticity may be even negative (for


Note that we can rewrite (A19) as

                                                    Ii
                              Ii   - Si
       (A19)    fl =                          flc



The elasticity rj is the sum of two terms. The first reflect the move on the given supply
curve. We refer to this move as the indebtedness effect (it is obtained from (A16) for
    = 0). The second term reflect the shift of the supply schedule associated with the

investment. We refer to this shift as the indebtedness effect (it is obtained from (A16)
for   .(1 + r*) =   0).

        Note that our analysis considered the case where the default penalty stems from
      increase in the prices of imported inputs. A similar analysis can be made for the
case where  the default reduces the price of exports.
      We now turn to evaluate the consequence of a raise in overdiscounting on the
supply schedule facing the economy. The overdiscounting is summarized by the
distribution f(e). We will refer to distribution f as representing a higher overdiscounting
relative to f if for all s (0 < e <1) the cumulative density of f is above the cumulative
density of f, or formally if
                                                     11                 11
        (A20)       for all    0   <   e <1         jC    f(s) ds   K
                                                                        j f(s) de.
                                                                         C
                                                 —   33   -

We define a distribution fh for 0 < h < 1 by fh = f + hif - f). We will refer to a rise in
the overdiscounting as a rise in h, shifting 1h closer to f. We will derive the
consequences of higher overdiscountingon the supply of credit, or &*/h for a given
B. The   supply schedule corresponding to fh is defined by equations (8), (9) and (9)
(replacing f with fh)• Applying these equations we can infer that a higher h changes the
interest rate (for a given borrowing) by


      (A21)    —                                     Q        1 [f(c) -
                                          flc
                    given borrowing             B0(1+8)fh J   0
                                                          (1
Note that   rom the definition   (A20)   it follows that j [f(c) I (€))dt
                                                                    —
                                                                            >0,   thus   the sign of
                                                           to
(A21) is   determined by   fl' implying that a rise in overdiscountingwill shift the supply
curve facing the economy leftward.
                                                   - 34 -
A.4  Stochastic Productivity
                                                                                 is the
     Throughout the paper we assumed that the only source of randomness
                                                                 This assumption was
uncertaintyregarding the time preference of the decision maker.
made to simplify the discussion. We close our discussion by extending our analysis to
the case where the source of uncertainty is a stochastic future productivity. We
assume that the rate of time preference of the future policy maker equals e/(1+6), and,
for simplicity, we consider now the case where e is known with certainty.
      Equations (1)-(5) continue to hold. We now modify the output equation by
                                                          is
allowing for stochastic productivity. Consequently, output given by:


                           't;i (,     n, Kt;i)    if   no default occurs
      (6)      =


                           ''t;i   '   d, J<t;i)   if default occurs


where is a stochastic productivity term whose density function is given by g, and we
assume that              > 0 and        tQ/i
                                        > 0. An example of such an economy is provided

in part Al. of this Appendix. While equation (7) continues to apply, we modify the
default rule (8) to reflect the new source of uncertainty. Default will occur if


      (A22)        (t +   r            (2(1 +



The source of uncertainty is the future default penalty, which will be determined in
our case by the realization of          .
                                Let us define the marginal value of the productivity
shock associatedwith default by o:


      (A23)        (1 +   rM)      =   Q(o) (1     +    E
                                                            th
                                                                 - 35 -
The   interest rate is determined by the equality                         of   the expected yield to the risk-free
yield:


         (A24)     1+   rf =   (1   +   r*)            g()    d

The expected utility of the representative agent is:


         (A25)          Yi+B            +
                                               J0(Y2fl-Q)(1+                   }g()d+
                                                       q
  1

           0
                [Y2, R - (B (1 + r)                +
                                                       i=1
                                                             l1(1+r)} +         Y2,] g()    d
The source of uncertainty is now stochastic productivity and not uncertainty regarding
the future discount rate. Nevertheless, it can be verified that all the results regarding
policies continue to hold. Specifically, Equations (11)-(13) and (15)-(18) continue to hold
                                                             c
subject to the following replacements: is replaced by c; Q is replaced by Q evaluated
at o   (Q(o)); and NVMP1 is replaced by the expected value of NVMP1 (denoted by
E{NVMP1D. It can be shown that


                                              1#r                 B
         (15)        V= {i-                              [1+r0(1+U)]}B                  +




           q1
           i=1
                 j    {E(NVMP)
                                            - (1   +
                                                       r1)[ 1 +   jI n { 1 +

                 Q/(1+6)
where U     =             (1   —

                 B(1i-r*)
                                         - 36 -


Applying (15) we can show      that all the key results regarding the consequences of
overdiscounting and the role of policies (Sections 3-4) continue to hold if the source of
uncertainty is future productivity instead of the future discount factor24. Note that the
interpretation of productivity shocks is broad, and that one can implement our analysis
to the case where the productivity uncertainty stems from uncertainty regarding
future terms of trade or regarding future input prices.




      24.   For example,   a drop in underdiscounting shifts the supply schedule to the
                                                                 dlogB                It
right. Formally, it can be shown that for a given interest rate d logE =          >


can be also shown that the characteristics of optimal conditionality (equations (16) -
(18)) continue to hold for the case where uncertaintyis due to stochastic productivity.
                                        -   37   -
                                       REFERENCES


Aizenman, Joshua. 'Country Risk, Incomplete Information and Taxes on International
          Borrowing,' manuscrIpt, 1986.
________— and Eduardo R. Borensztein. 'Debt and Conditionality under Endogenous
          Terms of Trade Adjustment,' manuscript, The International Monetary
             Fund, 1988.
Alesina Alberto and Guido Tabellini. External Debt, Capital Flight and Political Risk'
             manuscript, 1987.
Blanchard, Olivier J. "Debt, Deficits, and Finite Horizon", Journal of Political
             Economy 93, 1985.
Bulow I. Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff. "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign
            Debt," manuscript 1966.
Calvo, Gulliermo. "Debt Repudiation: The Role of Expectations, "manuscript 1987.
Dooley, Michael P. "Country-Specific Risk Premiums, Capital Flight and Net Investment
             Income Payments In Selected Developing Countries", manuscript, the
            International Monetary Fund, 1986,
Dornbusch, Rudiger. "External Debt, Budget Deficits and Disequilibrium Exchange rates,"
            NBER Working Paper No. 1336, 1984.
Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz, "Debt with Potential Repudiation Theoretical and
            Empirical Analysis," Review of Economic Studies 48, 1981.
Edwards, Sebastian, "Country Risk, Foreign Borrowing and the Social Discount Rate in
            an Open Developing Economy," NBER Working Paper Series No. 1651, 1985,
Folkerst-Landau David. " The Changing Role of International Bank Lending in
            Development Finance" The I. M. F. Staff Papers 32, 1985,
Frenkel, Jacob A. and Assaf Razin, "Fiscal Deficits in the World Economy, Journal of
            Political Economy 94, 1986,
Harberger,  Arnold   C. 'On Country Risk and the Social Cost of Foreign Borrowing   y
            Developing Countries," manuscript, 1976.
Heipman, Elhanan. 'The Simple Analytics of Debt-EquitySwaps", manuscript, 1987.
Kharas, Homi, J. "Constrained Optimal Foreign Borrowing by L.D.C. 's" Domestic Finance
            Study No, 75, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., 1981.
Kletzer, Kenneth M. "Asymmetries of Information and LDC borrowing with Sovereign
            Risk," Economic Journal 94, 1984.
Krugman,   Paul.  "International Debt Strategies in an Uncertain World," in Smith, W.G.
            and Cuddingtcn, J. T., eds., "International Debt and the Developing
            Countries", A World Bank Symposium, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.,
            1985.
                                       - 38   -

Sachs,Jeffery D. Theoretical Issues in International Borrowrng, Princeton Studies in
           International Finance 54, 1984
Smith, Gordon, W. and John T. Cuddington. International Debt and the Developing
           Countries, A World Bank Symposium, The World Bank, Washington,DC.,
           1985.
