NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FARM PROFITS, PRICES AND HOUSEHOLD BEHAVIOR
Daniel R. LaFave
Evan D. Peet
Duncan Thomas
Working Paper 26636
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26636

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
January 2020

Peter Arcidiacono, Jean-Marie Baland, Dwayne Benjamin, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Amar
Hamoudi, Joseph Hotz, Daniel Keniston, Sylvie Lambert, David Margolis, Jean-Phillipe Platteau,
Edy Purwanto, Marcos Rangel, Mark Rosenzweig, T. Paul Schultz, Cecep Sumantri, John
Strauss, Alessandro Tarozzi, Zaki Wahhaj and Liam Wren Lewis have provided very helpful
comments. Funding from NIA R01 AG020909 is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Daniel R. LaFave, Evan D. Peet, and Duncan Thomas. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Farm Profits, Prices and Household Behavior
Daniel R. LaFave, Evan D. Peet, and Duncan Thomas
NBER Working Paper No. 26636
January 2020
JEL No. D52,O1,Q12
ABSTRACT
The farm household model, in which decisions about production and consumption are made
simultaneously, lies at the heart of many models of development. Empirically modelling these
simultaneous choices is not straightforward. The vast majority of empirical studies assume that
farm households behave as if markets are complete in which case decision-making simplifies to a
recursive system where consumption choices can be treated as if they are made after all
production decisions. Previous empirical tests of this assumption have relied on restrictions on
production decisions. We develop a new approach to testing based on household consumption
choices and implement the procedure using data from rural Indonesia. Relative to production-side
tests, the consumption-based test is well-suited to identifying those farm households in any
setting whose behavior is consistent with complete markets and those for whom the assumption is
rejected. We find the recursion assumption is not rejected for larger farmers but is rejected for
small farmers. The tests are straightforward to implement and the results of the tests provide new
opportunities to identify the behaviors that households adopt in the face of incomplete markets.

Daniel R. LaFave
Colby College
5243 Mayflower Hill
Waterville, ME 04901
drlafave@colby.edu
Evan D. Peet
RAND Corporation
4570 Fifth Avenue, Ste 600
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
epeet@rand.org

Duncan Thomas
Department of Economics
Duke University
Box 90097
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
d.thomas@duke.edu

1. Introduction
The agricultural household model has played a central role in many empirical and theoretical
studies of economic development. The model, which dates back at least to Chayanov (1966),
integrates production of goods that are consumed by a farm-household into a standard utility
maximization framework and has been used to provide important insights into a broad array of
economic questions. These include, for example, links between nutrition and labor markets (Strauss,
1982, 1984; Thomas et al., 2016), wage determination, labor supply and agricultural productivity
shocks (Rosenzweig, 1980; Kochar, 1999; Jayachandran, 2006; Kaur, 2019, Breza et al., 2019), risk
and human capital invesments (Jacoby and Skoufias, 1997), the allocation of resources among family
members (Udry, 1996; Duflo and Udry, 2004; Edmonds and Theoharides, 2019; Rangel and
Thomas, 2019), property rights (Field, 2007), technology adoption (Barnum and Squire, 1979; de
Janvry, Fafchamps and Sadoulet, 1991; Conley and Udry, 2010; Suri, 2011, Jones et al., 2019) and
microcredit and financial markets (Kaboski and Townsend, 2011; Beaman, Karlan, Thuysbaert and
Udry, 2015).
A central assumption in the model is that farm households make decisions as if markets are
complete which underpins the extremely powerful result that the simultaneous production and
utility maximization problem can be modeled recursively with farm profit maximization occuring in
a first stage without reference to decisions about consumption of goods and leisure. In the second
stage, farm households maximize utility treating profits from the production side as given (Singh,
Squire and Strauss, 1986). This separation of consumption and production decisions has important
implications for studies of farm households: on the one hand, production decisions can be analyzed
independently of preferences; on the other hand, consumption choices can be examined without
taking into account how resources are allocated in the farm business. To wit, the recursion or
separation assumption is invoked, in many cases implicitly, in much of the theoretical and empirical
literature in development.
It would be fatuous to assert that low income, rural settings are in fact characterized by a
complete system of markets. There is, however, a good deal of evidence that farm households
organize their economic and social lives in ways that provide the resources necessary to make the
best choices for them and their families, adapting their behaviors to take into account missing
markets (Barnum and Squire, 1979). For example, families and communities share risk by providing
insurance and resources in times of need (Rosenzweig, 1988; Rosenzweig and Stark, 1989;
Townsend, 1994), are able to successfully smooth seasonal variation in income (Paxson, 1992, 1993),
1

make choices that mitigate liquidity constraints (Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1993, Zimmerman and
Carter, 2003), and that families are extremely resilient even in the face of large-scale unanticipated
natural disasters and financial shocks (Frankenberg, Smith and Thomas 2003; Stillman and Thomas,
2008; Frankenberg et al., 2018). However, it would be premature to interpret this evidence as
indicating that all farm households in the studied rural economies behave as if production and
consumption are recursive. Recent evidence highlights heterogeneity in the behavioral choices of
households within rural economies and that the lack of markets deleteriously affects the well-being
of poorer and less connected households (Chandrasekhar, Kinnan and Larreguy, 2018; Thomas et
al., 2004; Banerjee et al., 2019).
To this end, we develop and implement a novel approach to testing for recursion that is
designed to yield more powerful evidence than in the existing literature and identify those subgroups of households within a community whose behavior indicates they face the greatest
constraints. Tests for recursion in the literature have been based on implications for farm household
production decisions. There are two classes of these tests. First, seminal work by Benjamin (1992)
and Pitt and Rosenzweig (1986) pointed out that input choices or profits can be treated as
independent of farmer and household characteristics. (See, for example, Udry, 1999; Bowlus and
Sicular, 2003; LaFave and Thomas, 2016; Dillon and Barrett, 2017; Dillon et al., 2019, for
applications.) Second, a more structural approach has estimated the marginal productivity of each
input into the farm production function and compared estimates of these implicit prices with
market-level prices (Jacoby, 1993; Lambert and Magnac, 1998; Barrett et al., 2008).
Whereas the earliest tests failed to reject recursion, some recent evidence indicates that the
assumption is rejected. However, empirical implementation of production-side tests has proved to
be far from straightforward. These tests typically impose strong assumptions that are difficult to test,
have had to confront substantial measurement challenges and have difficulty purging estimates of
contamination due to unobserved heterogeneity and behavioral responses of farm households.
This paper makes three contributions. First, we develop a consumption-side test that
exploits the fact that, under recursive two-stage budgetting, factors that affect only farm business
profits in the first stage are restricted, in the second stage, to only have an income effect on
consumption choices. Such factors include, for example, prices of inputs into farm production that
have no direct influence on consumption choices. The tests are implemented using longitudinal
survey data from the Work and Iron Status Evaluation (WISE) conducted in Central Java, Indonesia
which collected detailed information about consumption at the household level in conjunction with
transaction prices elicited from local markets, shops, and stalls in the WISE communities.
2

Second, we establish that the consumption-side tests are, in principle, straightforward to
implement and not subject to an array of specification concerns that arise with production-side tests.
Third, in part because of this advantage of the consumption-side tests, we provide evidence that
rejection of recursion is not universal, but farm households that have greater landholdings behave as
if they face a complete set of markets. This is an important methodological result: it demonstrates
the consumption-side test has the power to detect heterogeneity among farmers within the same
community, facing the same set of prices, yet behaving differently. Production-side tests using the
same data failed to draw these distinctions (LaFave and Thomas, 2016). The result is also
substantively important as illustrated by evidence on differential smoothing behavior in the face of
income and price innovations of households for whom production and consumption decisions are
recursive relative to those for whom they are not.
The next section presents a dynamic version of the neoclassical agricultural household model
appropriate for our longitudinal data and focuses on the implications of recursion for consumption
allocations. The empirical demand system is outlined in Section 3, and the survey and price data are
discussed in Section 4. Section 5 presents the results for the full sample of households as well as
heterogeneity across households in the same community. Section 6 concludes with a discussion of
the implications of our findings.

2. Tests for recursion: theory
The following describes a dynamic version of the agricultural household model along with
the restrictions on production that are implied if consumption and production decisions are
recursive in each period. We then lay out the implications for consumer demand by the farm
household and develop empirically-tractable non-linear Wald tests.

2.1 Dynamic model of the agricultural household
Assume that a farm household chooses consumption and leisure in each season or time
period, t, to maximize the present discounted value of expected current and future utility subject to a
production process, endowment of time, and intertemporal budget constraint. If preferences are
intertemporally additively separable, households choose consumption goods, farm inputs, and
leisure to:

⎡T t
max E ⎢ ∑βt u xmt , xct ,ℓ t ; µt , ε t
⎢⎣ t=1

(

3

⎤

)⎥
⎥⎦

[1]

subject to:

(

Qct = Qct ( Lct , Vct , Act ; n ct )

[2]

EitL = LFit + LOit + ℓ it

[3]

)

Wt+1 = 1+ rt+1 [Wt +

{∑

c

{∑ w (E
i

it

L
it

}

− ℓ it ) +

} {

}

pct Qct − wt Lct − pvtVct − pAt Act − pmt xmt + pct xct ]

[4]

where bt is the discount rate, xmt is a vector of market consumption goods, xc t is consumption of
agricultural goods (i.e. food, some of which may be grown by the household), and ℓ t is a vector of
household members’ leisure. Preferences are captured by µt and εt, which include observed and
unobserved characteristics that parameterize the utility function such as household size and
composition. There is an agricultural production function, [2], for each crop c in each time period,
Qct, which relates labor, Lct, variable inputs such as seed and fertilizer, Vct, and capital stocks,
including farm land, Act, to output of that crop in each period. Crop and time-specific productivity
shocks are represented by n ct . Some of the crop output may be consumed by the household, as part
of xct in [1], and some may be sold on the market at price pct. The total endowment of time available
to each household member i, EitL , is allocated between working in the family business, LFit , outside
the family business, LOit and leisure, ℓ it . Total household time is the sum of these endowments over
all members, i=1...N, EtL =

åE
i

L
it

. Households face uncertainty over the realization of future prices

and productivity shocks.
The household intertemporal budget constraint, [4], describes the evolution of wealth over
time. In the presence of credit markets or some other mechanism for inter-temporal smoothing,
farmers can borrow resources in period t to be repaid with interest at the market rate rt+1 in the
following period and a parallel market exists for savings which earn the same market interest rate.
Wealth in period t+1 is equal to the interest earned on wealth in t plus net savings that period. Net
savings by the household in period t are the sum of total income from all work (in the first pair of
braces) and farm profits (in the second pair of braces), less expenditure (in the third pair of braces).
Wealth is negative if a household is in debt. Each household member who works earns wage income
from off-farm labor at the market wage for that member, wit, which, under the assumption of the
model, is also the shadow wage for work by that member on the farm. Thus, the imputed value of
4

labor supplied by household member i to their own business and to the market is wit (EitL − ℓ it ) . Net
profit is given by the sum over all crops of total output Qct evaluated at the market price, pct , less the
imputed value of labor demand (at the market price), wtLct , and the costs of variable and fixed
inputs, pvtVct and patAct, respectively. The value of consumption, in the final pair of braces, is total
spending on goods and services purchased in the market, pmtxmt, and the value of consumption of
own production evaluated at the market price, pctxct.
Solving [1] through [4], demand for market, xmt, and home–produced goods, xct, depends on
all prices of market goods, output prices of home produced goods, all input prices in the production
function, pmt, pct, pvt and pAt, respectively, the shadow value of time of each household member, wit and
non-labor income (or income from wealth, rtWt ), yt, given observed household characteristics, µt,
such as demographic composition and unobserved characteristics, et, such as preferences:
xgt = xgt ( pmt , pct , pvt , p At , wit , yt ; µt , ε t )

[5]

where market and home produced goods are collected together and denoted xgt,. Under the
assumption of additive inter-temporal separability, prices of all but the current period only affect
current demand through the impact on the marginal utility of income which is absorbed in µt.
As discussed in Singh et al., (1986) and formally established in Strauss (1986) for the static
framework and Udry (1999) for the dynamic model, if all current and future prices can be treated as
given (that is, if all current and future markets for state-contingent goods exist and are competitive),
then the optimization program [1]-[4] can be recast as a two-stage choice problem in which, in each
period, the farm household chooses allocations that maximize profits in the farm business without
taking into account consumption choices in [1].1 Conditional on these allocations, the household
maximizes welfare. The insight that production choices do not depend on preferences and,
therefore, household characteristics only enter [1] has been the foundation for all tests of recursion
in the literature. The next sub-section develops a test for recursion that complements these
production-side tests with consumption-side tests for recursion.

Under these assumptions, separation holds if production choices in period t are made prior to output and price
realizations in that period (Udry, 1999). This is likely to be the case in most agricultural settings and is the case in the
setting for this study.

1

5

2.2 Consumption-side tests for recursion
In each period of the recursive model, farm households maximize profits, pt, in their
businesses without taking into account preferences. The farm household chooses labor, variable
inputs, and capital given the production technology and all input and output prices set by the market
including the price of own labor:
max L ,V , A p t = å c pct Qct ( Lct , Vct , Act ; n ct ) - wt Lct - pcvtVct - p At Act

[6]

which yields input demand functions that depend only on current market prices. In principle, it is
straightforward to allow expected future prices to enter production choices in which case input
demands will also depend on those prices. This would arise, for example, if there are current price
shocks because of, say, weather, trade or manufacturing shocks that cause some inputs to be
relatively expensive relative to their long run price trajectory; it would also arise if future relative
prices or future technologies are expected to change such as the introduction of new seed varieties.
In these cases, input demand functions depend on current and expected future market prices for all
inputs. Substituting the input demand functions yields the profit function for all crops taken
together:

p t* = p t* ( pct , wt , pvt , p At )

[7]

where t denotes current period, t, and all future periods and, for future periods, prices represent
their expected future values at time t.
The farm household maximizes the present discounted value of expected utility [1] subject
to the budget constraint modified to take into account the fact that the household treats profits
from the first stage, p t* , as given:

(

)

Wt+1 = 1+ rt+1 [Wt +

{∑ w (E
i

it

L
it

} {

} {

}

− ℓ it ) + π t* ( pcτ ,wτ , pvτ , p Aτ ) − pmt xmt + pct xct ]

[8]

and thus demand for each good, g, depends on profits, rather than all of its determinants, which are
treated in the optimization program the same as any other sources of non-labor income:

xgt = xgt ( pmt , pct , wit , π t* ( pcτ , wτ , pvτ , p Aτ ), yt ; µt , ε t )

[9]

The key insight is that, under the recursivity condition that farm households behave as if production
decisions can be made prior to consumption choices, farm business choices affect utility
maximization and consumption allocations only through the shift in the budget constraint given by
6

the value of farm profits. Thus, second stage utility maximization yields conditional demand
functions that depend on prices of consumption goods, including the value of time, income and the
marginal utility of wealth that parallel demand functions in standard models of consumer behavior
without production.
This insight, and inspection of demand [9], provides the intuition for a consumption-side
test of recursion: prices that enter the profit function and have no direct impact on demand will only
affect demand through an income effect. This applies to the vectors of current and future prices of
variable and fixed inputs in farm production, pvt and pAt , respectively in the model. Both leisure,
which is valued at the market wage, and farm output, priced at its opportunity cost, the market gate
price, directly affect demand and so estimated effects on demand reflect the combination of the
change in the price and the impact on profits. If some of the farm products are never consumed by
the household, the prices of those cash crops are also weakly separable from other output prices
and, like inputs, only affect demand through an income effect yielding additional testable restrictions
on the demand functions.
Exploiting this result, differentiating [9], the marginal effect of a change in any one of these
prices, pv1 , on demand for g can be decomposed into two parts: the effect of a change in the price
on profits, and the impact of a change in profits on consumption:

¶xg
¶pv1

=

¶xg ¶p *
¶p * ¶pv1

[10]

where, without loss of generality we focus on the price of one variable input into farm production
and the time subscripts are suppressed for expositional simplicity. Clearly [10] does not yield a
testable restriction for recursion. However, with the prices of two farm inputs, without loss of
generality, pv1 and pv2, that affect demand only through the profit function, the ratio of their effects
on demand is

¶xg
¶pv1
¶xg
¶pv2
Since, the income effect,

¶xg
¶p *

¶xg ¶p *
¶p *
¶p * ¶pv1
¶pv1
=
=
*
¶xg ¶p
¶p *
¶pv2
¶p * ¶pv2

[11]

, is the same for all prices that are weakly separable in the demand for

7

g, the ratio of the price effects is independent of the good g as shown in the final term in [11]. Thus,
if the model is recursive, the ratio of the effects of any two prices that only affect profits is the same
for all goods in the demand system [9]. This is the core of the consumption-side test for recursion.
Specifically, it follows from [11] that for all pairs of goods, gj and gk in the demand system:

¶xg j
¶pv1
=
¶xg j
¶pv2

¶p *
¶pv1

¶p
¶pv2

*

¶xgk
¶pv1
¶xgk

=

" j, k Î G

[12]

¶pv2

The equality of the ratio of effects of input prices across goods in the demand system in [12]
amounts to a series of non-linear Wald tests.
This approach to testing whether farm household decisions are recursive has at least three
advantages over production-side tests. First, empirical estimation of production functions is
notoriously difficult since inputs are chosen and properly treated as endogenous. This is especially
complicated in low income settings where some important inputs, such as organic fertilizer or water,
are often not sold on the market and so shadow prices need to be estimated. Studies seldom attempt
to measure the effect of these inputs on profits. An advantage of consumption-side tests is that they
do not rely on measurement of these prices.
Second, in many settings, farm households produce multiple products and often inter-crop;
specifying and estimating separate production functions for each crop is difficult as is the allocation
of inputs to each crop. Most studies restrict attention to one or a small number of primary crops.
This has no impact on consumption-side tests which rely only on measurement of prices of at least
two inputs used in production of any crops.
Third, measurement of inputs poses substantial challenges as does measurement of profits.
For example, measurement of land fertility and quality as well as labor quantity and quality is
extremely difficult. Most studies that test recursion have treated all labor as homogenous although
there is abundant evidence that assumption is rejected. These concerns do not affect the
consumption-side tests.

3. Tests for recursion: Empirics
The consumption-side tests of recursion are based on empirical estimates of the farmhousehold demand system. We test for the presence of separation of consumption and production
in each period using longitudinal data to account for unobserved heterogeneity that may otherwise
8

contaminate inferences. Following the literature, we estimate an extension of the Almost Ideal
Demand System (Deaton and Muelbauer, 1980) in which the share of the budget spent on each
good, g=1,…G, in the system by household h in local market m at time t, wghmt, depends on the
logarithm of per capita farm expenditure (PCEht) in a flexible way (represented by the function, f,
Banks et al., 1997) along with the logarithm of a vector of all consumption prices, pgmt (g=1,…G),
and wages, wmt, (which is also vector-valued and measured at the local market m level for different
types of labor). The model is extended to also include the logarithm of prices of goods that only
affect demand through profits which, in our case, are inputs into the production of crops, pvmt. In our
setting, no crops are pure cash crops; without good information on farmers’ expectations about the
evolution of future prices, we do not include those prices in the main specification of the empirical
model.2 Household characteristics that affect demand are captured in the vector, zht, which includes,
for example, household demographic composition and human capital of household members. Thus,
the empirical model of the share of the budget spent on each good, g=1, …G is:
ω ghmt = f g (ln PCEht ) + ln pγ mt β gγ + ln wmt β gw + ln pvmt β gv + z ht β gh + λ hm + ε t + ε ghmt

[13]

In the dynamic model, demand in any period depends on the marginal utility of income which is
assumed to be fixed for each household over the five-year study period. The empirical models thus
include a farm-household fixed effect, lhm, which can be interpreted as a proxy for permanent
income so that the effects of lnPCE on budget shares reflect the impact of transitory innovations in
resources (Browning, Deaton and Irish, 1985).
The specification with farm household fixed effects has the additional advantage of
sweeping out of the model any household-specific heterogeneity that is fixed over time and affects
consumer demand. This includes, for example, deviations between local market prices and the prices
paid by the household (because of quality differences or quantity discounts, for example) and all
time-invariant tastes that affect household budget allocations including, for example, tastes for
investments in the future. To the extent that farmsteads are stable over time, the effects also serve to
capture fixed characteristics of the local market m including distance and thus transport costs from
the primary markets in the study site. The models also include time effects to take into account
seasonal price variation. Time-varying, good specific tastes are captured in eghmt.

Expectations of future rice prices are solicited from each farmer in every survey wave. When included in the models,
expected future prices do not significantly predict budget shares and none of the conclusion about completeness of
markets are affected.

2

9

The non-linear Wald statistics to test recursion from [12] are written in terms of the
coefficient estimates as:

βg

j vy

βg

j vz

=

βg
βg

k vy

[14]

" j, k Î G, y, z Î V

k vz

for each pair of goods, j and k, in G and for each pair of input prices, y and z, in V.3 In this ratio
form, these tests are not well-behaved when the denominator is close to zero and so we follow
Gregory and Veall (1985) and specify the test in product form:

bg v * bg v = bg v * bg v
j y

k z

k y

" j, k Î G, y, z Î V

j z

[15]

It is important to note that [15] should hold for each pair of goods and pair of farm inputs. Failure
of [15] for any pairs implies rejection of recursion. In contrast, the joint test for all consumption
goods and input prices is likely to lack power, especially as the number of goods and farm inputs
increases in much the same way that the power of Durbin-Wu-Hausman type tests decline as the
number of covariates included in the test statistic increases.

4. Data

An advantage of the consumption-side tests developed above is that data on consumption

are routinely collected in budget surveys across the globe and market-level prices of goods and farm
inputs are inexpensive to collect. To illustrate the tests, we use data from the Work and Iron Status
Evaluation (WISE), a longitudinal survey of households living in rural Purworejo, a kabupten
located along the coast of Central Java, Indonesia (Thomas et al., 2016). About 90 percent of the
population of approximately one million in Purworejo is rural and the vast majority of rural
households farm rice, the staple in Indonesia. Many of the farms are also engaged in cultivation of
market garden produce, such as kangkung, a green leafy vegetable like spinach, as well as fruit,
particularly oranges, small and large livestock. Food produced in Purworejo is sold locally and in
markets in neighboring Daerah Istimewa Yogyakarta (the special region of Yogyakarta), a major
Indonesian city that has a population of over 4 million.
Conducted in conjunction with a randomized iron supplement intervention, WISE is a largescale population-representative longitudinal survey of farm households, communities and local

3

As is apparent from the theory, on their own, the estimated effects farm input prices, pvmt , in [13] are not informative
about whether decision-making is recursive. If decisions are not recursive, there are no restrictions placed on the price
effects in [13].
10

markets that was conducted between 2002 and 2007. In addition to collecting information on
household spending, income and socio-demographic characteristics, we paid particular attention to
the collection of high quality, local, monthly price data from 2003 onward including detailed
transaction-level price data on both consumer goods and farm inputs from local stalls and shops in
each of the study areas as well as from all the markets in Purworejo kabupaten.
There are three harvesting seasons each year for rice, the primary crop, and, between 2003
and the first trimester of 2005, farm surveys were conducted every four months. A follow-up survey
was conducted in 2007. We use all eight waves of the survey, along with market price survey data
collected concurrently.4
The longitudinal dimension of the study is critical for assuring that tests are not
contaminated by time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity arising, for example, from variation in the
distance to the market or land quality. Recall, also, that the inclusion of farm household fixed effects
in the models sweeps out the effects of variation in permanent income across farm households and
take into account unobserved factors that are fixed over time and affect consumer demand in a
linear way, including time-invariant factors that affect farm input and technology choices (such as
farmer and farm quality) as well as market prices. It is imperative that benefits of the longitudinal
design are not offset by attrition during the 8 waves of the study. WISE is designed to follow all
split-off households and, for this research, we include 3,600 baseline farm households plus 229 splitoffs that started a farm business in the study area after baseline. We interviewed 95% of the farm
households in every survey wave and 98% were interviewed in all but one survey wave. (See Thomas
et al., 2016 for more detail on follow-up protocols and attrition.)

Consumer demand
Detailed information on consumption by the farm household is collected in a face-to-face
interview with the household respondent who is most knowledgeable about this aspect of the
household economy, typically the primary female who is usually the wife of the household head. The
consumption module, which has been well-validated and is widely used in surveys in Indonesia,
takes approximately 40 minutes to complete. For each of 14 food groups,5 the survey collects
information about spending over the previous week as well as the value of consumption of food

None of the conclusions about recursion are affected by exclusion of the 2007 wave.
The food groups are rice; other staples such as corn; dried goods, such as noodles; meat and fish; vegetables such as
kangkung; fruits; tofu and tempe; milk, eggs and other dairy; sugar; oil; spices; beverages; tobacco products; and food
prepared out of the home.

4

5

11

produced on the farm or provided in kind. Parallel information is collected about 12 non-food
groups, four of which are asked for the prior month (such as utilities) and the rest for the twelve
months preceding the survey (such as education and health) because spending on these goods tends
to be lumpy.6 The recall period for each consumption item is based on extensive experience
collecting consumption data in Indonesia and balances error from longer recall periods against
frequency of purchase. All expenditures are converted to monthly equivalents.
Household spending is aggregated into four sub-aggregates for this research for two main
reasons. First, estimation of demand systems with zero expenditures is a substantial challenge and
aggregation side-steps the complications of separately modelling decisions by households that never
consume a good from those that did not consume the good during the recall period (Deaton, 1986).
Second, as the size of the demand system increases, the number of pairwise comparisons to be
conducted in the non-linear Wald tests rises rapidly and it is helpful to keep that number manageable
to illustrate the method. In principle, the tests can be applied with larger demand systems.
The four sub-aggregates are staple grains (mostly rice), other foods, goods for the home
including household and personal care items, utilities, transport and rent and, finally, goods related
to human capital investments including education, health and clothing. The definition of each subaggregate and budget shares for the sub-aggregates and each of the 26 groups of goods collected in
the survey is presented in Appendix Table A1. None of our conclusions depends on the choice of
four sub-aggregates in the demand system and results of estimating demand systems with seven, ten,
and fourteen sub-aggregates are discussed below.

Prices
Given the centrality of prices in understanding farm household behavior, WISE collected
detailed data on market-level prices of standardized goods throughout the study period in order to
build a consistent series of monthly prices that are plausibly exogenous to farm household decisions.
Specifically, within each study community, at the same time that household surveys were being
completed by the household survey team, a separate team of enumerators completed comprehensive
surveys of the local community. This included the collection of detailed information on prices of
goods and services. The enumerators visited warungs (local stalls), tokos (shops), and pasars (markets)

Monthly spending is asked about utilities and transportation; household items; recreation and entertainment and either
monthly rental or, in the case of owner-occupied homes, the estimated rent if the home were to be rented out. Spending
over the prior twelve months is asked about clothing; household supplies, furniture and repairs; education; medical costs;
ceremonies and gifts; taxes; recreation; and all other expenses.

6

12

that were used by respondents in the community. Warungs are small stalls in the desa (village) that are
often run from a home by one person who sells non-perishable items that are bought frequently
such as oil, sugar and rice. Tokos are more formal and have both perishable and non-perishable items
as well as non-food items. Pasars usually meet once a week and sell local produce, meat and fish as
well as a small number of non-food items. There is a good deal of overlap in the goods that are
purchased from warungs and tokos and so one price instrument was designed for those outlets; goods
purchased at pasars are different and we designed a separate instrument for those outlets. Taken
together, the instruments cover 45 food items and 9 nonfood items which are listed in Appendix
Table A2 along with the source of each price in the analysis.
Enumerators completed a separate price survey for up to six warungs and up to four tokos.
The warungs and tokos were selected after obtaining information from household respondents in the
community about where they made purchases including outlets outside the desa. In most cases, the
price survey covered all outlets mentioned; in those cases in which more than six warungs or more
than four tokos were mentioned by respondents in a community, outlets were randomly selected
from the list of all mentioned outlets of that type to meet the target number of outlets. There is
effectively one pasar that operates in each kecamatan (a sub-district) and the pasar usually meets once a
week. As a result, for the vast majority of communities, only one pasar is mentioned. A census of all
pasars was conducted as part of WISE; we match prices collected from the pasar most frequently
mentioned by respondents in a community which was, in every case, the pasar closest to the desa. In
the small number of cases in which more than one pasar is mentioned, a weighted average of prices
(using the proportion of households in a community that mentions a pasar as the weight) yields the
same results.
There are three important points regarding the price data. First, the price surveys collect
information from the locations where respondents in the community purchase goods during the
study period. Second, prices are collected for goods that are standardized in terms of quantity and
quality to construct a consistent price series that reflects variation in the marketplace. This assures
that the price series is not contaminated by quantity discounts or quality variation which is likely to
be reflected in transaction prices (or unit values) that would be reported by each farmer. Third, the
market-level price surveys are designed to characterize the market prices that farmers in the
community face at the time they make purchases. This is important if demand or supply of a good is
seasonal as is the case for farm inputs such as seed and fertilizer. Those goods are available at
planting and time of fertilizing and we conduct our price surveys at those times, prior to, for
example, weather realizations. In sum, since farmer demand is small relative to the size of the
13

market, and all farm inputs are produced outside the study area, it is plausible to treat the prices of
farm inputs as exogenous in the models of consumer demand. This assumption would be
considerably more difficult to justify if we were to use farmer transaction prices or unit values
(Deaton, 1988; McKelvey, 2011). We therefore rely on the market-level price data collected for this
research.
The price survey instruments were designed for this research and extensively pre-tested. At
each outlet, the enumerator collected transaction prices for specific, standardized consumption
items. For each item, the size or quantity and, where applicable, the brand was pre-specified on the
survey instrument. For some goods, particularly in markets, prices are the outcome of a negotiation;
in those cases, the enumerator purchased the item in order to measure the price a respondent would
pay for the good, to the extent possible. For goods that were not sold in specific quantities, such as
loose vegetables, the amount purchased was weighed with scales carried by the enumerator. In some
instances, a brand, size or quantity was not available; in those cases, the enumerator recorded the
price, brand, size and additional identifying information of the closest substitute drawing on an
ordered list of substitutes on the survey instrument.
A census of all farm stores in Purworejo kabupaten was conducted at the beginning of the
study. At the time of planting and fertilizing in each season, the stores that served a particular
community were visited to collect prices of agricultural inputs including seeds, fertilizers and
insecticides. The price, quantity, quality and brand were recorded for each item.
Up to four expert informants in each community were asked to provide estimates of prices
of goods and services in the community; the experts included the kepala desa (village leader) and the
ibu PKK (pembinaan kesejahteraan keluarga, leader of the local women’s group). Key for this study, each
local expert provided estimates of daily wages for four different types of labor: higher and lower
skilled adult males and adult females. For each community and survey month, the median wage of all
adult males and the median wage of adult females are used as measures of local area wage rates.
For each community, survey month and good, including farm inputs, the median of
recorded transaction prices serves as our best estimate of the local market price. All prices and wages
are converted to real values using the regional price index available from Statistics Indonesia, Badan
Pusat Statistik (BPS). Prices of consumption goods are combined to form four price aggregates that
correspond with the four goods in the demand system. The weight assigned to each price in the
computation of the aggregate is based on the share of the budget spent on the item by households in
Purworejo who were surveyed in the 2002 wave of SUSENAS, a large scale socio-economic survey
that is population-representative at the kabupaten level. In contrast with WISE, which asks about
14

spending on groups of goods, every three years, SUSENAS contains a detailed consumption module
with spending and own consumption on over 100 items. Appendix Table A.2 lists the weight
assigned to each of the prices and the source of price data used to construct the aggregate price
indices.
The first column of Table 1 reports average budget shares, per capita farm household
expenditure and socio-demographic characteristics of households. The average farm household
spends about Rp 200,000 per household member per month (which was approximately US$20 at the
time). Of that, about one-sixth is spent on rice and other grains, 45% on other foods, and 20% each
on goods for the home and on human capital related goods.
The second column of Table 1 reports the average log real price indices for the four
consumption goods, pct, and average log prices of farm inputs, pvt, along with standard errors. Four
farm input prices are used in the empirical analyses: the price of IR64 rice seed, a high-yield rice
variety that, at the time, was the most commonly cultivated in the region; kangkung seed, a leafy
green vegetable similar to spinach that is produced by most farmers; fertilizer and insecticide. These
farm inputs are widely purchased, 81 percent of farms report expenditure on seeds and 95 percent
purchase fertilizer and insecticides. Additionally, since seeds, fertilizer and insecticide are not
consumed, their prices should impact consumption only through a profit effect among farm
households that behave as if production and consumption decisions are recursive.
The validity of the test that farm input prices only have income effects will be compromised
if it is not possible to identify farm input price effects from the effects of consumption good prices.
This would occur if there were no variation in the prices of farm inputs that is independent of
variation in the consumption price indices. Because of seasonal effects and local area shocks that
affect both prices of consumption goods and farm inputs, consumption and input prices are likely to
move together over time, even after taking into account inflation; this covariation is taken into
account in the empirical model [13] by the inclusion of time fixed effects. Similarly, prices are likely
to systematically vary across communities because of, for example, the distance to markets; the
empirical model thus takes community-specific heterogeneity into account so that identification of
price effects depends on within-community variation in prices over time.
Conditional on these fixed effects, it is possible to empirically test whether variation in farm
input prices can be explained by variation in consumption prices and we find no evidence that farm
input prices are significantly correlated with consumption prices. For example, in a model relating
the ln(price) of rice seed to the ln(price) of the four consumption goods, none of the effects of
consumption prices is substantively large or statistically significant and, taken together, the F test
15

statistic for the four prices is 1.90, (p-value=0.216). The prices that are most likely to be susceptible
to this concern are the prices of rice and rice seed; in the model, the coefficient on the ln(price) of
rice is 0.011 with a standard error of 0.095. The four consumption goods prices are unable to
explain variation in any of the other three farm input prices.
To illustrate the variation in farm input prices that is exploited in the empirical models,
Figure 1 displays prices across markets and time for fertilizer. To highlight change over the entire
study period, panel A displays the percentage deviation in the price in each market relative to the
overall average price, all computed at the start of the study (on the left) and computed at the end of
the study (on the right). Each line represents a market and the rank order of each market (from
highest to lowest price at baseline) is indicated next to the endpoint of each line. The heterogeneity
across markets at baseline is absorbed by the farm fixed effects, and so it is the change in relative
prices that identifies the price effects in the models. Variation in relative prices between the start and
end of the study are large: the market with the highest price at baseline has the lowest price at the
end of the study; the market with the second lowest price at baseline has the highest price at the end
of the study. There is also substantial variation in prices both within and across markets during the
study period as illustrated in panel B of the figure which displays fertilizer prices for three of the
markets. (With more markets, the figure is difficult to read.) There is considerable month to month
variation in prices which reflects variation in supply and demand in each market over time. Whereas
the prices of fertilizer and insecticide did not keep up with inflation, the prices of rice and kangkung
seed rose faster than the inflation rate during this time. The key point is that there is heterogeneity in
prices across time and space that is plausibly exogenous from the perspective of an individual farmer
in the study area.
We turn next to estimates of [13], present tests for recursion and then investigate whether
there are identifiable sub-groups of farm households that behave as if markets are complete.

5. Results
5.1 Demand System Estimates
Results of estimating the demand system [13] are reported in Table 2 for the four
consumption good sub-aggregates. Panel A reports estimated effects of the logarithm of prices of
the consumption goods, pct, on the share of expenditure on a given good and panel B reports
estimates of the effects of ln(PCE), specified as a linear spline with knots at each quartile of its
distribution. The effects of the logarithm of prices of farm inputs, pvmt, are reported in panel C of the
16

table, and the logarithm of community wages, wmt, in panel D. All models include farm household
fixed effects and date of survey fixed effects (measured in months). Standard errors reported below
the estimates are robust to heteroscedasticity and take into clustering at the farm household level.
(Standard errors that are clustered at the community level are essentially identical.)
The own-price estimates for human-capital related goods and goods for the home are
negative and statistically significant for human-capital related goods. In contrast, the own-price
effects for grains and other foods are positive and statistically significant in the case of grains. In the
context of the farm household model, as shown in [9], the prices of goods that are both produced
and consumed on the farm not only have a direct effect on demand for that good but also affect
demand through profits. The estimates suggest that negative own-price effects of grains and of other
foods are more than outweighed by the positive profit effects when prices of these goods increase.
The estimated income effects in panel B can be interpreted as the effects of transitory
income since the farm household fixed effects absorb the impact of permanent income. The effects
are precisely determined and indicate that the share of the budget spent on grains is non-monotonic,
rising when lnPCE is below the bottom quartile and declining thereafter. Budget shares tend to rise
with PCE for other foods but at a declining rate of increase, fall with PCE for shares spent on goods
for the home and increase with PCE, especially above the median, for the share of spending on
human capital related goods.
The effects of the logarithm of the four farm input prices are displayed in panel C of the
table. Tests for the joint significance of the estimated input price coefficients for each budget share
are reported in panel E. Half of the estimated effects of farm input prices are statistically significant
and, taken together, the four farm input prices significantly affect each of the budget shares. This is
consistent with input prices having a direct effect on demand and an indirect effect through profits.

5.2 Tests for recursion
If farm household decisions are recursive, then the price effects are restricted to operate
through the profit effect in which case the ratios of all estimated farm input price effects should be
the same following [12] and [14]. To illustrate this test, ratios for the first pair of input prices,
fertilizer and rice seed, along with their standard errors calculated using the delta method are
reported in panel A of Table 3 for each of the four goods. For example, the ratio of the effect of
fertilizer prices (2.27 in panel C of Table 2) to the effect of rice seed prices (0.74) on grain demand is
reported in the first column (3.06) along with its standard error (3.49). The corresponding ratios for
17

demand for other food, goods for the home, and human capital are -0.21 (s.e. 0.23), 0.13 (s.e. 0.23),
and -2.70 (2.39).
If farm household production and consumption decisions are recursive, these ratios should
be the same. Or, by rewriting [14], the ratio of the ratios should be equal to one for all pairwise
comparisons. With four goods in the demand system, there are six pairwise ratio comparisons. Panel
B of Table 3 reports these relative ratios for each pair of goods and the associated p-value in
brackets for a test of whether the statistic is equal to one. For example, the other foods to grain
ratio, -0.21 to 3.06, is equal to -0.07 and we reject the null of one with a p-value of 0.013, thus
rejecting the predictions of recursion. Across all pairs, the test statistics clearly deviate from the null
of one and range from -20.77 to 12.86. Four of the six tests are rejected at the 5 percent level. Panel
C of Table 3 reports the overall test of equality across all six pairwise ratios which is rejected as well
(p-value = 0.027).
The results of these tests for the full demand system are summarized in the lower panel of
Table 4 which reports the p-values for the non-linear Wald tests for the equality of each of the pairs
of ratios. There are 36 pair-wise tests of the equality of ratios when all goods and prices are
considered. The first column [1.1] restates the pairwise results for the prices of fertilizer and rice
seed from Table 3 in rows 1 through 6 and the combined test in row 7. Columns [1.2] to [1.3] show
corresponding results for the remaining pairs of prices.
While rejection of any one of the pairs is evidence against the recursion hypothesis, with a
5% size of test, we expect 2 of the 36 ratios to be significantly different and, with a 10% size of test,
4 of the ratios will be different. In fact, 11 of the 36 ratios (or 30%) are statistically significantly
different at a 5% size of test and 15 (or 42%) at a 10% size of test. These cannot be ascribed to
chance alone, even after adjusting for multiple testing. The consumption-side tests provide
compelling evidence against the recursion hypothesis: overall, farm households in Purworejo do not
behave as if markets are complete.7, 8

The p–value for the non-linear Wald test for the equality of all 36 ratios in Table 3 is reported in row 8 of the table.
This test is likely to lack power because several of the underlying price effects (in panel C of Table 2) are not precisely
estimated. The fact that two of the six tests for all ratios for any pair of prices are rejected (at a 10% size of test) in row 7
of the table reinforces this conclusion.
8 Results from larger demand systems including finer disaggregation of goods are consistent with the four-good
illustration reported here. A 7 share system with 126 pairwise tests results in 27 rejections at 10%, 10 shares (270
pairwise tests) results in 35 rejections, and 14 shares (546 tests) 99 rejections.
7

18

5.3 Who behaves as if markets are complete?
The finding that, overall, farm households in Purworejo do not behave as if markets are
complete does not speak to the question of whether some households have organized their social
and economic lives so that the choices they make are not distinct from those that would be made if
markets are complete. Such households are likely to have greater wealth, better access to credit
markets and/or more family ties or social connections that can be a source of insurance. Land is the
primary asset in Purworejo and those households who own more land are not only wealthier but
also tend to have larger extended families, more social connections, and greater access to financial
markets. To test whether these households behave as if markets are complete and those that have
less land do not, Table 5 reports the same set of non-linear Wald tests as in Table 4 for two groups
of farm households. Results are summarized in the top panel of the table.
Panel B of the table includes those households that have less than the average land holdings
for farms in their desa (village). These less wealthy farm households account for about two-thirds of
all farm households in the sample since the distribution of land holdings is skewed to the right.
Panel C includes those households that have more than the average land holdings. These wealthier
farm households account for the remaining third of the sample. The stratification is based on land
holdings measured at baseline. The corresponding demand system estimates are reported in
Appendix Table A3.
For the poorest two-thirds of farm households in panel B, 7 of the 36 pairs of ratios (or
20%) are significantly different from each other at a 5% size of test and 14 of the pairs of ratios
(40%) are significantly different at a 10% size of test. The results parallel those for all households
and, again, the recursive model is rejected.
However, for the wealthier households, in panel C, none of the pairs of ratios is significantly
different from each other at a 5% size of test and equality of the ratios is rejected at a 10% size of
test in only one case. Since that is less than would be expected by chance, the evidence for these
farm households indicates that they do in fact behave as if they are facing complete markets.
This is an important result for two reasons. First, we have identified a group of households
within the study area for whom the recursion assumption is not rejected. Treating consumption
choices as if production choices have been made and modelling farm production without regard to
preferences is likely to characterize the behaviors of these farm households well. However, for the
less wealthy households, the recursive model is not likely to be appropriate.
Second, from a methodological point of view, the consumption-side test provides
19

information about variation within the sample in behavior of farm-households that is not easily
uncovered using production-side tests. Previous research with the same data has shown that the
model with recursion is rejected using a production-side test. If farm households treat wages as
parametric, demand for farm labor should not depend on the composition of the farm household.
Using the same data, LaFave and Thomas (2016) show that, in fact, farm labor demand
systematically varies with composition. However, that research was unable to uncover robust
evidence that sub-groups of the study farm households decisions are recursive.
Over and above identifying households that behave as if markets are complete, these results
have the potential to provide insights into the strategies adopted by those households by comparing
their behavior with the behavior of all other households. This has been a major challenge in the
literature because it is difficult to draw conclusions about constraints on the basis of behavioral
choices alone. For example, it is tempting to infer that households who borrow on the market are
not liquidity constrained. That conclusion would be premature. On one hand, borrowers would be
liquidity constrained if they would like to borrow more. On the other hand, those who do not
borrow are assumed to be liquidity constrained (excluded from the market) but they may not need to
borrow in which case they are not liquidity constrained. Moreover, even information about interest
rates is ambiguous: those who borrow at high interest rates may be the households who have the
highest expected return on investment projects.
We focus on one dimension of observed behavior: borrowing against human capital of
household members, specifically adult weight and child height. We choose this focus because during
the 1998 financial crisis in Indonesia, when GDP declined by 15% in one year, female adults literally
tightened their belts as their own weight significantly declined in an effort to protect young children
in their families whose nutritional status was unaffected during the financial crisis (Thomas and
Frankenberg, 2006; Frankenberg and Thomas, 2018).
Variation during the study period in BMI of female adults in households in the recursive
group is compared with variation among female adults in all other households in a regression
framework. The model includes an individual fixed effect for each female, to sweep out all timeinvariant factors that affect her BMI, as well as a time effect for each wave of WISE to take into
account all shared temporal variation due to, for example, seasons and economic fluctuations. The
model also includes an indicator that identifies the recursive group of households which is interacted
with the time effects so that the differences between the groups of households may vary with each
wave. These estimates measure the extent to which there is excess variation in BMI over time among
females in households in the recursive group relative to females in all other households. Taken
20

together, these estimated excess variation effects are statistically significant (p-value=0.002)
indicating that females in the recursive group are borrowing against their own bodies, specifically
their weight, more than is the case among females in the non-recursive group. There is no evidence
of similar excess variation in the BMI of males (p-value-0.34) or excess variation in the height of
young children (p-value=0.30) in the households that behave as if production and consumption are
recursive.
The evidence indicates that households in the recursive group use human capital of females
to fill in for missing markets and so there is excess cycling of weight of these females, but the
households do not borrow against the weight of males (which is likely to result in productivity
losses) or the nutritional status of children (which would likely result in reduced adult stature). There
is suggestive evidence that excess variation in female BMI is achieved, at least in part, through food
consumption which is marginally more volatile in the recursive group of households relative to other
households (p-value=0.07). We conclude that households exploit all opportunities to improve the
well-being of household members and, by revealed preference, households in the recursive group
absorb the welfare costs of greater cycling in female weight in order to benefit from the welfare
gains associated with behaving as if markets are complete. Measuring those welfare gains and
identifying other, related behaviors remains a challenge for future research.

6. Conclusion
A new consumption-side test of the assumption that farm households behave as if
production and consumption decisions are recursive has been developed and implemented using
standard consumer budget data augmented with local market prices of farm inputs. Intuitively,
under the assumptions of the recursive model, farm households treat all prices as parametric and so
production choices on the farm will not depend on farm household characteristics or preferences of
household members. Farm household decisions can be treated as if consumption choices are made
after all production choices have been resolved even though the decisions are made simultaneously
and updated over time. In that case, prices of inputs into the production process that are not
consumed themselves will only have an income effect on consumer demand through a profit effect.
This yields a weak separability result that places restrictions on the impact of those farm input prices
on consumer demand: the ratios of the effects for any pair of farm inputs should be the same for all
goods. In effect, failure to reject the recursion restriction implies that the assumption that
households behave as if they face a complete set of markets is not rejected by the data.
21

The restriction is tested using longitudinal survey data collected from farm households in
rural Central Java, Indonesia. For all households in the study area, the restriction is rejected
indicating that production and consumption decisions cannot be treated as recursive. However, for
the third of farm households with relatively more land, the restriction is not rejected indicating those
households have developed mechanisms whereby their production and consumption choices can be
treated as if markets are complete. We establish that one mechanism these household adopt to
complete markets in the face of price and income innovations involves borrowing against their own
human capital.

22

References
Banerjee, A. V., Chandrasekhar, A. G., Duflo, E., & Jackson, M. O. (2019). “Changes in social network
structure in response to exposure to formal credit markets.” Available at SSRN 3245656.
Banks, J., Blundell, R., & Lewbel, A. (1997). “Quadratic Engel curves and consumer demand.” Review of
Economics and statistics, 79(4), 527-539.
Barnum Howard and Lynn Squire. (1979). “An econometric application of the theory of the farm
household.” Journal of Development Economics, 6:79-102.
Barrett, Christopher B., Shane Sherlund, Akinwumi A. Adesina. (2008). “Shadow wages, allocative
inefficiency, and labor supply in smallholder agriculture,” Agricultural Economics, 38: 21-34.
Beaman, Lori, Dean Karlan, Bram Thuysbaert and Christopher Udry. (2015). “Self-selection into credit
markets: Evidence from agriculture in Mali.” NBER Working Paper 20387.
Benjamin, Dwayne. (1992). “Household Composition, Labor Markets, and Labor Demand: Testing for
Separation in Agricultural Household Models,” Econometrica, 60 (2), 287–322.
Bowlus, Audra J. and Terry Sicular. (2003). “Moving Toward Markets? Labor Allocation in Rural China,”
Journal of Development Economics, 71, 561–583.
Breza, Emily, Supreet Kaur and Yogita Shamdasani. (2019). “Labor Rationing: A Revealed Preferences
Approach from Hiring Shocks.”
Browning, Martin, Angus Deaton and Margaret Irish. (1985). “A Profitable Approach to Labor Supply and
Commodity Demands Over the Life Cycle.” Econometrica 53 (3): 503-543.
Chandrasekhar, Arun, Cynthia Kinnan and Horacio Larraguy. (2018). “Social networks as contract
enforcement: Evidence from a lab experiment in the field.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
10 (4), 43-78.
Chayanov, A. K. (1966). The theory of the peasant economy. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Conley, Timothy and Christopher Udry. (2010). “Learning about a New Technology: Pineapple in Ghana,”
American Economic Review, 100(1), 35-69.
De Janvry, Alain, Marcel Fafchamps and Elizabeth Sadoulet. (1991). Peasant household behavior with
missing markets: Some paradoxes explained. Economic Journal, 101:1400-17.
Deaton, Angus. (1986). “Demand Analysis” in Zvi Griliches and Michael Intrilligator (eds.), Handbook of
Econometrics, Volume 3, 1767-1839, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Deaton, Angus. (1988). “Quality, Quantity, and Spatial Variation of Price,” American Economic Review, 78.
Deaton, Angus and John Muelbauer. (1980). “An Almost Ideal Demand System,” American Economic Review,
70, 312–326.
Dillon, Brian and Christopher B. Barrett. (2017). “Agricultural Factor Markets in Sub-Saharan Africa: An
Updated View with Formal Tests for Market Failure,” Food Policy, 67.
Dillon, Brian, Peter Brummund, and Germano Mwabu. (2019). “Asymmetric non-separation and rural labor
markets,” Journal of Development Economics, 139: 78-96.
23

Duflo, Esther and Christopher Udry. (2004). “Intrahousehold resource allocation in Cote d’Ivoire: Social
norms, separate accounts and consumption choices.” NBER Working Paper 10498.
Edmonds, Eric. and Caroline Theoharides. (2019). “The Short Term Impact of a Productive Asset Transfer
in Families with Child Labor: Experimental Evidence from the Philippines.” NBER Working Paper
26190.
Field, Erica. (2007). “Entitled to Work: Urban Property Rights and Labor Supply in Peru,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 122 (4), 1561–1602.
Frankenberg, Elizabeth, James P. Smith and Duncan Thomas. (2003). “Economic shocks, wealth and
welfare,” Journal of Human Resources, 38.2:280-321.
Frankenberg, Elizabeth and Duncan Thomas (2018). “Human capital and shocks: Evidence on education,
health and nutrition” in Christopher Barrett, Michael Carter and Jean-Paul Chavas (eds.) The Economics of
Poverty Traps, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gregory, A. W. and M. R. Veall. (1985). Formulating Wald tests of nonlinear restrictions. Econometrica, 146568.
Jacoby, Hanan G. (1993). “Shadow Wages and Peasant Family Labour Supply: An Econometric Application
to the Peruvian Sierra,” Review of Economic Studies, 60 (4), 903–921.
Jacoby, Hanan and Emanuel Skoufias. (1997). Risk financial markets and human capital in a developing
country. Review of Economic Studies. 64.3:311-35.
Jayachandran, Seema. (2006). “Selling Labor Low: Wage Responses to Productivity Shocks in Developing
Countries,” Journal of Political Economy, 114 (3), 538–575.
Jones, Maria, Florence Kondylis, John Loeser and Jeremy Magruder. (2019). “Factor Market Failures and the
Adoption of Irrigation in Rwanda.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, (9092).
Kaur, Supreet. (2019). “Nominal wage rigidity in village labor markets,” American Economic Review, 109 (10),
2585-3816.
Kochar, Anjini. (1999). “Smoothing consumption by smoothing income: Hours-of-work responses to
idiosyncratic agricultural shocks in rural India”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 81.1:50-61.
LaFave, Daniel and Duncan Thomas. (2016). “Farms, Families, and Markets: New Evidence on
Completeness of Markets in Agricultural Settings,” Econometrica, 84 (5).
Lambert, Sylvie and Thierry Magnac. (1998). “Implicit Prices and Recursivity of Agricultural Households’
Decisions,” Mimeo.
McKelvey, Christopher. (2011). “Price, unit value, and quality demanded,” Journal of Development Economics, 95:
157-169.
Paxson, Christina. (1992). “Using weather variability to estimate the response of savings to transitory income
in Thailand,” American Economic Review, 82.1:15-33.
Paxson, Christina. (1993). “Consumption and income seasonality in Thailand,” Journal of Political Economy,
101.1:39-72.
24

Pitt, Mark and Mark Rosenzweig. (1986). “Agricultural Prices, Food Consumption and the Health and
Productivity of Indonesian Farmers,” in Inderjit Singh, Lyn Squire, and John Strauss, eds., Agricultural
Household Models: Extensions, Applications, and Policy, Johns Hopkins University Press, pp. 153–182.
Rangel, Marcos and Duncan Thomas. (2019). “Decision-Making in Complex Households.” NBER Working
Paper 26511.
Rosenzweig, Mark. (1980). Neoclassical theory and the optimizing peasant: An econometric analysis of
market family labor supply in developing countries. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 94:31-56.
Rosenzweig, Mark. (1988). Risk, implicit contracts and family in rural areas of low income countries. Economic
Journal, 98.393:1148-70.
Rosenzweig, Mark and Oded Stark. (1989). Consumption smoothing, migration and marriage: Evidence from
rural India. Journal of Political Economy, 97:905-26.
Singh, Inderjit, Lyn Squire, and John Strauss. (1986). Agricultural Household Models: Extensions, Applications, and
Policy, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1986.
Stillman, Steven and Duncan Thomas. (2008). “Nutritional status during an economic crisis: Evidence from
Russia,” Economic Journal, 118.531:1138-1417.
Strauss, John. (1982). “Determinants of Food Consumption in Rural Sierra Leone: Application of the
Quadratic Expenditure System to the Consumption-Leisure Component of a Household-Firm Model,”
Journal of Development Economics, 11.33:327–353.
Strauss, John. (1984). “Joint Determination of Food Consumption and Production in Rural Sierra Leone:
Estimates of a Household-Firm Model,” Journal of Development Economics, 14.1:77–103.
Strauss, John. (1986). “The Theory and Comparative Statics of Agricultural Household Models: A General
Approach,” in Inderjit Singh, Lyn Squire, and John Strauss, eds., Agricultural Household Models: Extensions,
Applications and Policy, World Bank.
Suri, Tavneet. (2011). “Selection and Comparative Advantage in Technology Adoption,” Econometrica, 79.1:
159-209.
Thomas, Duncan, Kathleen Beegle, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Bondan Sikoki, John Strauss and Graciela Teruel.
(2004). “Education during a crisis,” Journal of Development Economics, 74.1:53-86.
Thomas, Duncan and Elizabeth Frankenberg. (2006). Household responses to the financial crisis in
Indonesia. In Ann Harrison (ed.) Globalization and Poverty, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Thomas, Duncan, Elizabeth Frankenberg, Jed Friedman, Jean-Pierre Habicht, Mohammed Hakimi,
Nick Ingwersen, Jaswadi, Nathan Jones, Christopher McKelvey, Gretel Pelto, Bondan Sikoki, Teresa
Seeman, James P. Smith, Cecep Sumantari, Wayan Suriastini, and Siswanto Wilopo. (2016). “Causal
Effect of Health on Labor Market Outcomes: Experimental Evidence,” Mimeo.
Townsend, Robert M. (1994). “Risk and Insurance in Village India,” Econometrica, 62,3:539–591.
Udry, Christopher. (1996). “Gender, Agricultural Production and the Theory of the Household,” Journal of
Political Economy, 104.1:1010–1046.

25

Udry, Christopher. (1999). “Efficiency in Market Structure: Testing for Profit Maximization in African
Agriculture,” in G. Ranis and LK Raut, eds. Trade Growth and Development: Essays in Honor of T.N.
Srinivasan, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Zimmerman, Frederick and Michael Carter. (2003). “Asset smoothing, consumption smoothing and the
reproduction of inequality under risk and subsistence constraints.”, Journal of Development Economics,
71.2:233-60.

26

Figure 1. Fertilizer prices: Heterogeneity across markets over time
A. Summarizing price heterogeneity across markets at start and end of study

% deviation in fertilizer prices from average for study area in each market at each time point

B. Variation in real fertilizer prices in three markets during study period

27

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics
Household Characteristics

ln(Community Prices in Rp)

(1)
Mean (se)
Share of Expenditure on […] (%)
Grains
16.66
(0.05)
Other foods
43.66
(0.07)
Goods for the home
19.68
(0.05)
Human capital related
20.00
(0.08)
Per Capita Expenditure
(Rp000/mo)

203.71
(0.95)

(2)
Mean (se)
Price of […]
Grains
Other foods
Goods for the home
Human capital related
Input Prices
Rice seed

Years of Education of […]

Primary Male
Primary Female

5.59
(0.02)
5.09
(0.02)

Age of […]

Primary Male
Primary Female
Household Size
Urban (%)
Rainy Season (%)

54.54
(0.08)
49.41
(0.07)
3.76
(0.01)
13.42
(0.20)
47.49
(0.29)

Kangkung Seed
(water spinach)

7.69
(0.0005)
8.85
(0.0002)
9.79
(0.0006)
7.75
(0.0005)
9.62
(0.0005)
9.89
(0.0011)

Insecticide

10.86
(0.0007)

Fertilizer

10.57
(0.0007)

N. Waves
N. Households
N. Observations

8
3825
29101

Notes: Table reports means and standard errors for variables of interest over the first waves of WISE
used in the demand system estimation. Column 1 reports household level characteristics and column 2
community level prices. The sample consists of households with farm businesses. Per capita expenditure
is in real Rp000/mo and all prices in log real Rp with January 2002 as the base (approximately 1USD).
See appendix tables 1 and 2 for detailed information on the consumption goods used in creation of the
composite expenditure shares and prices.

Table 2
Demand System Estimates
(1)
Grains
A. ln(consumption price indices)
Grains
Other foods

Share of household expenditure (in %age terms) on […]
(2)
(3)
Other foods

Goods for the
home

(4)

Human-capital
related

2.12**

-1.05

-0.42

-0.64

(0.84)

(1.22)

(0.64)

(1.15)

-0.18

2.01

0.37

-2.19

(1.57)

(2.28)

(1.20)

(2.15)

-1.36*

2.51**

-0.34

-0.81

(0.78)

(1.13)

(0.60)

(1.07)

1.91**

0.30

1.33**

-3.53***

(0.77)

(1.12)

(0.59)

(1.06)

2.28***

11.39***

-14.97***

1.30**

(0.39)

(0.56)

(0.30)

(0.53)

-4.11***

11.32***

-11.55***

4.34***

(0.57)

(0.82)

(0.43)

(0.78)

50th-75th %ile

-3.27***

7.35***

-11.38***

7.30***

(0.51)

(0.74)

(0.39)

(0.70)

75th-100th %ile

-0.92***

2.05***

-8.84***

7.71***

(0.25)

(0.36)

(0.19)

(0.34)

Goods for the home
Human-capital related
B. Ln(PCE) linear splines
0-25th %ile
25th-50th %ile

C. ln(prices of farm inputs)
Fertilizer
Rice seed
Kangkung seed
Insecticide
D. ln(wages)
Female labor

2.27***

0.93

0.31

-3.52***

(0.70)

(1.02)

(0.54)

(0.96)

0.74

-4.45***

2.40***

1.30

(0.81)

(1.18)

(0.62)

(1.11)

-0.62**

1.64***

-0.66***

-0.37

(0.29)

(0.42)

(0.22)

(0.40)

0.02

-0.98

-1.16**

2.12**

(0.72)

(1.05)

(0.55)

(0.99)

0.15

1.01

0.06

-1.22*

(0.51)

(0.74)

(0.39)

(0.69)

0.19

-0.26

-0.59

0.66

(0.49)

(0.71)

(0.37)

(0.67)

E. Joint tests for farm input prices
F statistic
p-value

3.69
0.005

6.18
0.0001

5.00
0.001

3.98
0.003

Observations
N. of Households

29101
3825

29101
3825

29101
3825

29101
3825

Male labor

Notes: Robust standard errors that take into account clustering below coefficient estimates. Dependent variables are shares (in %ages) of
household expenditure on the expenditure sub-aggregates in each column. All prices are in real terms. All models include household,
community and time fixed effects. All models also include the log of the local female and male daily agricultural wage, education and and
age of the primary male and female within the household, an indicators for whether or not the household is in an urban area, household
composition, and indicators for the wave, year, and season. Standard errors appear below the point estimates and are calculated allowing
for clustering at the household level.
*** Significant at the 1% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, * Significant at the 10% level

Table 3
Ratios of Price Effects and Tests of Equality
Share of Household Expenditure on […]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Other
Goods for Human
Grain
foods
home
capital
A. ln(Price) Coefficient Ratios
Fertilizer to Rice Seed
(std. error)
B. Pairwise ratio equality tests
Ratio relative to
Grain ratio
[p-val =1 ]
Other foods ratio
[p-val =1 ]
Home goods ratio
[p-val =1 ]

3.06
(3.49)

-0.21
(0.23)

0.13
(0.23)

-2.70
(2.39)

-0.07**
[0.013]

0.04**
[0.037]
-0.62
[0.241]

-0.88
[0.120]
12.86***
[0.006]
-20.77**
[0.012]

C. Overall ratio equality tests
All six pairwise ratios equal [p-val]
*** Significant at the 1% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, * Significant at the 10% level

[.027]**

Table 4
Non-linear Wald tests of equality of ratios of farm input price effects (p-values)
Summary
Number of pairwise ratios
Number of rejections at 5%
Number of rejections at 10%

Consumption sub-aggregates
Budget share A
Budget share B

1. Fertilizer to […]
Kangkung Seed
[1.2]
0.007
0.126
0.034

36
11
15

p-values of tests of equality of ratios of price effects of
2. Rice Seed to […]
Insecticide
Kangkung Seed
Insecticide
[1.3]
[2.1]
[2.2]
0.438
0.389
0.846
0.093
0.338
0.684
0.119
0.589
0.507

3. Kangkung Seed to
Insecticide
[3]
0.648
0.339
0.211

Grains

1. Other foods
2. Goods for home
3. Human capital

Rice Seed
[1.1]
0.013
0.037
0.120

Other foods

4. Goods for home
5. Human capital

0.241
0.006

0.275
0.005

0.601
0.660

0.557
0.814

0.037
0.064

0.039
0.062

Goods for home

6. Human capital

0.012

0.037

0.130

0.991

0.044

0.069

7. All price pairs

0.027

0.034

0.264

0.818

0.188

0.190

8. Overall - all price, good pairs

0.329

Notes: Table reports p-values from pairwise and joint tests of the ratio restrictions implied by separation in the agricultural household model. Each value represents the test for the pair of input prices in the
column and consumption goods in the row. The final column tests equivalence across all pairs of price ratios for the goods in the corresponding row (6 restrictions). The overall joint test examines equality of all
ratios reported in Table 3. Tests rejected at a 90% confidence level or above are highlighted in bold.

Table 5
Separation Ratio Test Results - Sample Stratified by Household Land Holdings (p-values)
A: Summary
Household Land Holdings Relative to
Community Mean
Below
Above
36
36
7
0
14
1

N. of Pairwise Ratios
N. of Rejections at 5%
N. of Rejections at 10%
B: Households with land holdings below their community mean
Ratio Test Results
Consumption sub-aggregates
Budget share A
Budget share B
Rice Seed
[1.1]
Grains
1. Other foods
0.022
2. Goods for home
0.117
3. Human capital
0.093

1. Fertilizer to […]
Kangkung Seed
[1.2]
0.021
0.181
0.059

Insecticide
[1.3]
0.353
0.263
0.149

2. Rice Seed to […]
Kangkung Seed
Insecticide
[2.1]
[2.2]
0.890
0.252
0.910
0.987
0.745
0.145

3. Kangkung Seed to
Insecticide
[3]
0.265
0.932
0.166

Other foods

4. Goods for home
5. Human capital

0.691
0.032

0.618
0.021

0.543
0.322

0.684
0.673

0.082
0.040

0.096
0.044

Goods for home

6. Human capital

0.055

0.095

0.582

0.644

0.046

0.064

7. All price pairs

0.115

0.112

0.498

0.975

0.204

0.224

8. Overall
0.565
C: Households with land holdings above their community mean
Consumption sub-aggregates
Budget share A
Budget share B
Grains

1. Other foods
2. Goods for home
3. Human capital

0.187
0.163
0.650

0.353
0.615
0.465

0.895
0.410
0.578

0.691
0.184
0.607

0.110
0.550
0.178

0.298
0.588
0.188

Other foods

4. Goods for home
5. Human capital

0.700
0.400

0.298
0.902

0.208
0.389

0.281
0.676

0.379
0.082

0.234
0.802

Goods for home

6. Human capital

0.504

0.508

0.170

0.971

0.286

0.237

7. All price pairs

0.595

0.363

0.500

0.525

0.766

0.589

8. Overall

0.944

Notes: Table reports p-values from pairwise and joint tests of the ratio restrictions implied by separation in the agricultural household model after stratifying the sample based on land holdings. Results for those
households who own less than the within community mean appear in Panel B (n=19711). Results for those households with greater than the witin community mean appear in Panel C (n=9390). Each value
represents the test for the pair of input prices in the column and consumption goods in the row. The final column tests equivalence across all pairs of price ratios for the goods in the corresponding row (6
restrictions). Demand system results for the stratified groups are available in Appendix Table A.6. Tests rejected at a 90% confidence level or above are highlighted in bold.

Appendix Table A.1
Expenditure sub-aggregates and budget shares
Sub-aggregate

Budget Share (%)

Groups of goods (in survey)

Budget Share (%)

Staple grains

16.66

Rice

12.48

Other staples

1.59

Dried foods

2.59

Noodles, rice noodles, uncooked noodles, macaroni, shrimp
chips, other chips

Meat and fish

4.58

Beef, mutton, goat, chicken, duck, salted meat and canned meat,
fresh fish, salted fish, smoked fish

Vegetables

3.77

Kangkung, cucumber, spinach, mustard greens, tomatoes,
cabbage, katuk, green beans, string beans and the like, beans like
mung-beans, peanuts, soya-beans

Fruits
Tofu, tempe
Milk, eggs, other dairy

2.84
3.94
3.22

Papaya, mango, banana and the like

Sugar

4.27

Javanese (brown) sugar, granulated sugar

Oil

3.47

Coconut oil, peanut oil, corn oil, palm oil

Spices

3.10

Sweet and salty soy sauce, salt, shrimp paste, chili sauce, tomato
sauce, shallot, garlic, chili, candle nuts, coriander

Beverages

1.59

Drinking water, coffee, tea, cocoa, soft drinks (Fanta, Sprite, etc.),
alcoholic beverages (beer, wine, etc.)

Tobacco products
Prepared food

5.21
7.67

Utilities and transportation

6.32

Household items

2.21

Laundry soap, cleaning supplies, personal toiletries, domestic
servants

Household equipment and repair

0.35

Tables, chairs, kitchen tools, bed sheets, towels, repairs

Housing costs

10.80

Education

6.05

Health costs

2.24

Rent paid or rent that would be paid if home was rented
Fees, tuition, books, school supplies, transport, meals and
housing expenses
Hospitalization costs, clinic charges, physician’s fee, traditional
healer’s fee, medicines

Clothing (for adults & children)

2.40

Other foods

Goods for the home

Human capital related
goods

43.66

19.68

20.00

Detail
Hulled, uncooked
Corn, sago/flour, cassava, tapioca, dried cassava, sweet potatoes,
potatoes, yams

Eggs, fresh milk, canned milk, powdered milk, cheese

Cigarettes, tobacco, betel nut
Food prepared out of the home
Electricity, water, fuel, transportation, including bus fare, cab fare,
vehicle repair costs, gasoline

Shoes, hats, shirts, pants, clothing for children

Ritual Ceremonies, Charities, Gifts 6.69

Weddings, circumcisions, tithe, charities, gifts

Recreation

Arisans, lotteries, outings, sport equipment

2.62

Notes: Table provides a guide to the disaggregated goods in the WISE consumption module that are included in each of the composite goods used in the demand system estimation.

Appendix Table A.2
Composite Price Sources and Weights
Source of price Weight in price
data
index

Price aggregate

Individual item

Grain

Cassava
Cassavachip
Cassava leaves
Corn
Flour
Noodle
Potato
Rice
Sweet Cassava

Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Toko/Warung
Toko/Warung
Pasar
Toko/Warung
Pasar

0.01
0.07
0.02
0.03
0.09
0.17
0.16
0.41
0.04

Other Food

Apple
Beef
Cabbage
Carrot
Chicken
Chili
Cigarettes
Coconut
Coffee
Cucumber
Eggs
Garlic
Green Bean
Kangkung
Lima Bean
Milk Powder
Mineral Water
Mujair
Nuts
Oil
Onions
Oranges
Papaya
Pindang
Salak
Salt
Spinach
Sugar
Sweet Milk
Tea
Tempe
Teri
Tobacco
Tofu
Tomato
Tongkol

Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Toko/Warung
Toko/Warung
Pasar
Toko/Warung
Pasar
Toko/Warung
Toko/Warung
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Toko/Warung
Toko/Warung
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Toko/Warung
Pasar
Toko/Warung
Toko/Warung
Toko/Warung
Toko/Warung
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar
Pasar

0.04
0.09
0.01
0.01
0.04
0.01
0.14
0.002
0.01
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.12
0.07
0.03
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.04
0.0002
0.03
0.02
0.003
0.005
0.02
0.07
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.04

Home Goods

Detergent
Gas (LPG)
Kerosene
Soap

Toko/Warung
Pasar
Toko/Warung
Toko/Warung

0.09
0.50
0.19
0.22

Human Capital

Cotton
Dress
Notebook
Pants
Slippers

Pasar
Pasar
Toko/Warung
Pasar
Toko/Warung

0.02
0.02
0.90
0.02
0.03

Notes: Table summarizes the individual prices that are utilized in constructing composite prices.
Weights are determined using the 2002 SUSENAS detailed expenditure survey for households in
Purworejo kabupaten.

Appendix Table A.3
Demand Systems for Stratified Samples
Farm household land holdings that are
less than the community mean
Share of Household Expenditure on […]
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Goods for the
Grains
Other foods
home
Human capital
A. ln(consumption price indices)
Grains
Other foods
Goods for the home
Human capital related
B. Ln(PCE) linear splines
0-25th Percentile
25th-50th Percentile
50th-75th Percentile
75th-100th Percentile
C. ln(prices of farm inputs)
Rice Seed
Kangkung Seed
Insecticide
Fertilizer
D. ln(wages)
Female labor
Male labor

2.14**
(1.06)
-0.50
(1.98)
-0.34
(0.99)
3.23***
(0.97)

-1.30
(1.48)
3.65
(2.75)
2.21
(1.37)
0.25
(1.35)

-0.20
(0.76)
-0.54
(1.42)
-0.34
(0.71)
0.67
(0.70)

-0.64
(1.35)
-2.61
(2.52)
-1.53
(1.26)
-4.15***
(1.24)

2.29***

11.46***

-15.10***

(0.45)

(0.63)

(0.32)

-3.37***

11.33***

(0.70)

(0.97)

-2.71***

7.95***

Farm household land holdings that are
greater than the community mean
Share of Household Expenditure on […]
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Goods for the
Grains
Other foods
home
Human capital
2.02

-0.91

-0.79

-0.31

(1.34)

(2.16)

(1.19)

(2.16)

0.59

-1.59

2.54

-1.55

(2.50)

(4.05)

(2.23)

(4.04)

-3.32***

2.68

-0.25

0.89

(1.24)

(2.00)

(1.10)

(2.00)

-0.85

0.54

2.86***

-2.55

(1.24)

(2.02)

(1.11)

(2.01)

1.35**

2.02***

11.00***

-14.58***

1.56

(0.57)

(0.77)

(1.25)

(0.69)

(1.25)

-11.64***

3.68***

-5.91***

11.29***

-11.25***

5.87***

(0.50)

(0.89)

(0.97)

(1.57)

(0.86)

(1.56)

-12.08***

6.84***

-4.54***

5.92***

-9.97***

8.59***

(0.66)

(0.91)

(0.47)

(0.83)

(0.79)

(1.28)

(0.70)

(1.28)

-0.09

2.70***

-8.94***

6.33***

-1.89***

1.29**

-8.74***

9.34***

(0.34)

(0.48)

(0.25)

(0.44)

(0.34)

(0.55)

(0.30)

(0.54)

1.75*

-5.23***

2.32***

1.16

-1.22

-2.89

2.45**

1.65

(1.02)

(1.42)

(0.73)

(1.30)

(1.31)

(2.11)

(1.17)

(2.11)

-0.57

1.89***

-0.67**

-0.66

-0.81*

1.04

-0.56

0.33

(0.37)

(0.51)

(0.26)

(0.47)

(0.47)

(0.76)

(0.42)

(0.75)

2.69***

-0.47

0.50

-2.72**

1.20

3.69**

-0.12

-4.77***

(0.88)

(1.22)

(0.63)

(1.12)

(1.13)

(1.83)

(1.01)

(1.83)

-0.74

-1.07

-1.00

2.81**

1.68

-0.97

-1.46

0.76

(0.91)

(1.26)

(0.65)

(1.15)

(1.18)

(1.91)

(1.05)

(1.90)

-0.40

-0.11

-0.04

0.56

1.17

3.12**

0.33

-4.62***

(0.64)

(0.89)

(0.46)

(0.82)

(0.80)

(1.30)

(0.72)

(1.30)

0.31

-0.42

-0.68

0.78

0.07

0.04

-0.40

0.29

(0.62)

(0.85)

(0.44)

(0.78)

(0.78)

(1.26)

(0.70)

(1.26)

E. Joint tests for farm input prices
F statistic
p-value

3.464

6.265

4.179

2.962

2.228

1.871

1.894

1.917

0.008

0.00005

0.002

0.02

0.063

0.112

0.109

0.105

Observations

19,711

19,711

19,711

19,711

9,390

9,390

9,390

9,390

Notes: Table reports demand system estimates similiar to those in Table 2, but for stratified sample. Households are divided by their landholdings relative to the within community mean. Outcomes are shares of
household expenditure on the composite good in each column, and all prices are expressed in real terms as the log of 2002 Rp0,000. Knots in the log PCE distribution are placed at the 25%, 50% and 75%
percentile. Additional controls include the log of the local daily agricultural wage for men and women, the education and and age of the primary male and female within the household, an indicators for whether
or not the household is in an urban area, household composition, and indicators for the wave, year, and season. Standard errors appear below the point estimates and are calculated allowing for clustering at the
household level.
*** Significant at the 1% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, * Significant at the 10% level

