                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 TARGETS AND INSTRUMENTS OF MONETARY POLICY




                            Benjamin M. Friedman




                           Working Paper No. 2668




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  July 1988




This research is part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #2668
                                         July 1988


                 TARGETS AND INSTRUMENTS OF MONETARY POLICY


                                   ABSTRACT



                                              is basic to the conceptual framework
     The notion of targets and instruments
                                    economic analysis to bear on practical issues
that economists hav used to bring
of how central banks can and/or should conduct monetary policy. This paper
surveys the literature of targets
                                   and instruments of monetary policy, focusing
                                              developments during the past two
primarily on the progression of analytical      central to this entire line of
decades. The two issues that have been most
                                         - what  price or quantity the central bank
research are the "instrument problem" -
                                               operations - - and the "intermediate
should fix directly through its open market
                         role (if any) the central bank should assign to
target problem" - - what                          which it can exert substantial
variables that it cannot set directly but over
                                                    being the money stock). Other
 influence (the most obvious example, of course,
                                           this literature include how best to
 issues that have figured prominently in bank choose to do so; the potential
control money growth, should the central
                                              variables as sources of information
 role of money, credit, and other financial         the implications of alternative
 that might guide the central bank's operations;
                                        available   to  the economy's private sector;
 policy frameworks for the information
                                                   when and whether any given
 the positive empirical question of determining        one kind of targeting strategy
 central bank has actually based its operations on
                                      for making normative choices among different
 or another; and the empirical basis
                                       concludes by drawing connections to some
 targets and instruments. The survey
                                          discretion and activism versus
 broader issues, including rules versus
 nonresponsivefless, as well as to the long-standing issue "why money?'




                                           Benjamin M. Friedman
                                           Department of Economics
                                           Harvard University
                                           Littauer Center 127
                                           Cambridge MA 02138
                                                                           Revised
                                                                           May 1988


                    TARGEIS AND INSTRUMENTS OF MONETARY POLICY



                                Benjamin M. Friedman*
                                 Harvard University



     The desire to provide normative guidance to public policy is a fundamental

theme that has motivated much of monetary economics, almost since the inception

of the subject as a recognizable field of economic inquiry. The connection is

readily understandable. Because "money" in any modern economy is a commodity

either provided by government or, at the least, provided by the private sector

under authority and conditions set by government, the link connecting monetary

influences on economic activity to specific actions by identifiable public

institutions is immediate and direct. Investigating how those public

institutions' actions affect the principal dimensions of macroeconomic activity

has traditionally constituted the heart of what monetary economics is all about.

As long as some macroeconomic outcomes are clearly preferable to others -     -
stable   prices rather than inflation, for example, or prosperity rather than

widespread unemployment - -   the   question of what government actions are more

likely to lead to more desirable outcomes is not just natural but inevitable.

     The literature of targets and instruments of monetary policy has evolved in

response to the desire to bring monetary economics even closer to the actual

operations of central banks. Following the vocabulary made familiar in a

broader policy context by Tinbergen (1952) and others at the outset of the post

World War II period, research on the subject has proceeded from the distinction

between prices or quantities that a central bank can uniquely determine,
                                        -2-




directly through its own operations (the "instruments" of monetary policy), and

those aspects of economic activity that it intends for its operations, along

with other elements of public policy as well as independent forces, to affect

(the "targets"). In addition, because of the role often advocated in the

specific context of monetary policy for economic variables that neither fall

under the central bank's direct control nor possess social significant on their

own --   the leading example, of course, is the stock of money or its rate of
growth -    the literature has also emphasized yet a third category of prices or
quantities now commonly understood as "intermediate targets."

     The apparent practical importance of this line of research has increased

significantly during the course of the post-war period, as central banks around

the world have demonstrated their willingness not merely to change the

conceptual framework underlying their monetary policy operations but, indeed, to

do so in response both to abstract analysis and to the associated empirical

research which it has spawned. This process gained momentum in the 1970s, as

many central banks adopted different forms of monetary aggregate targets, and it

has continued in the 1980s as the growing disenchantment with such targets has

created a conceptual vacuum at the core of the monetary policy process in many

countries. At the same time, specific new questions raised by the application

of these ideas to actual policy operations have continued throughout this period

to provide fresh ground for new research, so that the interaction between policy

practice and policy research has been a two-way influence.

     Notwithstanding this quite practical orientation, the literature of targets

and instruments of monetary policy also bears fundamental connections to a

variety of broader economic and political questions. Most obvious among these

are the issues qf rules versus discretion, and of an active versus a passive

orientation, in economic policy more generally.1 For example, having      specific
                                          -3-




institutionalized target regularizes monetary policy responses to entire

categories of independent influences and events. Whether a target implies some

kind of rule even more broadly, however, and if so whether the rule is

necessarily simple and rrrnresponsive, remain open and serious questions. In

addition, as is frequently the case in debates of rules versus discretion

("government by laws versus government by men"), a motivation often advanced for

some kinds of monetary policy targets is to provide a mechanism for holding

economic policymakers politically accountable.

     This paper surveys the major conceptual developments in the literature of

targets and instruments of money policy, with particular emphasis on the

broader, 'strategic" issues defining the overall framework within which policy

operates. The paper therefore devotes less attention to empirical findings and

to more detailed questions about institutional arrangements, both of which have

tended, on the whole, to be a good deal more specific to the case of individual

countries.2 Another limitation worth noting at the outset is that this paper

focuses primarily on the analysis of monetary policy in closed economies.3

     Section I examines "the instrument problem" --     that   is, the selection of

the specific price or quantity which the central bank directly and immediately

controls --   beginning   with the standard analysis introduced by Poole (1970)

comparing the relative merits in this context of interest rates and monetary

aggregates. A central issue that goes beyond Poole's demand-side-only analysis

arises, however, as soon as behavior governing the supply of goods and services

also matters in a nontrivial way. It is then necessary first to resolve such

prior questions as whether systematic monetary policy affects just nominal

magnitudes or also affects real economic activity, and, in turn, to determine

the appropriate objective to be pursued by monetary policy. Extension of the

Poole analysis to models including a role for aggregate supply behavior hinges
                                         -4-




  crucially on such matters.

       Section II considers the implications of the fact that what most people

 mean by "money" in discussions of monetary policy is not a plausible
                                                                              policy
 instrument at all because it is endogenous in the kind of fractional reserve

 banking system common to most modern market economies. Hence money is at best

 an "intermediate target" of monetary policy. Under what circumstances is it

 useful to have a monetary policy based on money - -   or,   for that matter, any
 analogous endogenous variable -- as an intermediate target? If an economy's

 reality does not meet these conditions, is there any other role for such

 endogenous variables in the monetary policy process?

      Section III turns to the subsidiary issue, which has been of great

 practical importance at various times and in various countries, of how the

 central bank can best control a monetary aggregate should it choose to do so.

 In part the issues here are analogous to those that arise in the Poole analysis

and extensions to it, but the literature of this subject has also prominently

featured questions about the structure of the fractional
                                                              reserve banking system
which renders money endogenous in the first place. Such practical issues as

what constitutes the best short-run
                                      forecasting process, and what degree of

monetary control generates undesirable side effects like interest      rate

volatility or even potential dynamic instability, have also been important here.

     Section IV reviews more briefly several specific issues      that have also
arisen within the literature of targets and instruments of monetary policy.

These include the implications of alternative
                                                monetary policy frameworks for the
information available to the economy's private sector, the positive empirical

question of when and whether any given central bank has      actually based its

operations on one kind of targeting strategy or another, and the empirical basis

for making normative selections of monetary policy targets and instruments.
                                      -5-




     Section V briefly draws connections to some broader issues, including rules

versus discretion and activism versus nonresponsiveness, as well as to the

long-standing issue "why money?"
                                            -6-




  I. The Instrument Problem

      A central bank operating in a modern fractional reserve banking
                                                                                system
 typically has several different tools at its disposal for affecting private

 economic and financial behavior. In most economies these include the               ability to

 determine (usually within legislatively specified limits) what reserves banks

 and other depository institutions must hold in relation to their deposits, to

 vary the supply of such reserves by buying and selling securities (usually

 government securities) for the central bank's own account, to lend reserves

 directly to banks, to set minimum conditions for particular kinds of credit

 transactions (for example, stock market margin requirements), and to regulate a

 variety of aspects of ordinary banking and other financial activities. 4
                                                               -           ..         Among
 these several devices, the buying and selling of securities        -   - usually   called
 "open market operations" --   is   typically the primary focus of the monetary

policy function.5

     The "instrument problem" of monetary policy arises because of the need to

specify how the central bank will conduct its open market operations. In

particular, the instrument problem is the choice of a variable to be set

directly by the central bank via buying and selling securities, and hence the

value of which is to serve as the principal guide in carrying out that buying

and selling function. Because open market operations are in essence a trading

activity, the instrument variable used may be either a quantity or a price. The

central bank may buy or sell a specified amount of securities, thereby

inelastically providing or withdrawing that amount of bank reserves.

Alternatively, it may buy or sell whatever amount of securities other traders in

the market want to transact at a specified
                                                  price, thereby elastically letting

"the market" determine the quantity of reserves to be held at that price.

Beyond this more fundamental choice, of course, it is also         necessary for the
                                        -7-




central bank to decide exactly which quantity variable it is setting (for

example, total reserves, nonborrowed reserves, the monetary base, reserves or

the monetary base adjusted for changes in reserve requirements, and so on), or,

alternatively, just which price variable (for example, the interest rate on

overnight interbank reserve borrowings, the Treasury bill rate, and so forth).

     Whether to key open market operations to a quantity or a price is an issue

of first-order importance in normative monetary economics, and has been so for a

long time.6 The modern literature of the subject dates from the formalization

by Poole (1970) of the insight that the optimal choice between quantity and

price in this context depends both on familiar parameters describing economic

behavior and on the relative magnitudes of the different sources of uncertainty

affecting the economy.7 In the context of the instrument problem --     in   contrast

to the intermediate target problem, which is the subject of Section II below - -

Poole's   analysis related the choice between exogenously setting a monetary

quantity and exogenously setting an interest rate to the relative magnitudes of

the unpredictable elements of the nonbank public's behavior in the market for

goods and services and the market for financial assets, respectively.



Models Based Only on AEregate Demand

     Poole's analysis relied on a simplified one-period Hicks-Keynes framework

including an aggregate spending (IS) relation and an aggregate money demand (LM)

relation,



                                                                             (1)
                                y— -a1r+u


                                                                             (2)
                                m—fl1y-fl2r+v
                                           -8-




where y is income; m is "money," supplied by central bank securities sales and

withdrawn by securities purchases; r is the interest rate (the price of the

securities bought and sold); u and v are zero-mean disturbances to aggregate

spending and money demand, respectively, with variances a2 and a2 and covariance

a; coefficients a,,      and 2 are all non-negative; and all variables are in

natural logarithms, so that (with constant terms omitted) they bear the

interpretation of deviations from deterministic base values.8 Here disturbances

u and v reflect not only the stochastic character of private spending and money

demand behavior but also any other uncertainties due to influences on such

behavior from fiscal or other policy actions, changes in asset values, events

abroad, or any other factors assumed to be independent of monetary policy

actions.

     The model consisting of (1) and (2) is prototypical of the vehicles used

for formal analysis of this kind, in that the number of solvable restrictions

exceeds by one the number of potentially endogenous variables, so that there is

one degree of freedom left to represent the choice of a policymaker. On the

assumption that the central bank's objective is to stabilize income around its

deterministic normal value, and that the values of all coefficients are known,

this model has the solution




                                                                          (3)
                                  E(Y2)j



when the interest rate Is exogenous, and




                                  fl2a
                                           +     - 2a12a                  (4)
                      E(y2)Im —
                                                 +
                                              -9-




when the money stock is exogenous.

        Comparison of (3) and (4) clearly indicates the nature of the trade-off

involved in choosing the instrument of monetary policy. Fixing the interest

rate --    that   is, supplying money perfectly elastically - -     shields    income from

any disturbances affecting portfolio behavior but provides no protection against

disturbances to spending behavior. By contrast, inelastically fixing the money

stock forces the interest rate to rise or fall so as partially to damp the

impact of disturbances to spending, with the extent of damping given by


o   <                  <    but only at the cost of exposing income to disturbances to
                   2
             +

portfolio    behavior. Given values of the three "slope" coefficients (and the

correlation between the two disturbances), a larger variance of disturbances to

spending relative to disturbances to portfolio behavior therefore makes the

money stock more likely to be the preferable instrument, and vice versa.9 In

the end, however, the choice is inherently empirical. Which instrument is

preferable, in the sense of delivering a smaller variance for income, depends on

the values of the two respective variances (and the covariance) as well as on

the values of the model's three behavioral parameters.

        The choice of either instrument amounts to a rule requiring, at least for

the single time period under consideration, specified responses of open market

operations to the two classes of disturbances under study. From the standpoint

of the price of securities, money as the instrument means varying the price in

response to either form of disturbance, while the interest rate as              the

instrument means varying the price in response to neither. From the perspective

of the quantity of securities, the interest rate as the instrument means buying

or selling in response to either form of disturbance, while money as              the

instrument means - -       subject   to the qualification below -   - buying   or selling in
                                             -10-




response to neither.

     Poole also demonstrated that, if the central bank is able to implement a

more richly structured response system, in general there exists a policy rule

that dominates either the simple interest rate instrument or the simple money

stock instrument. In particular, supplying money neither perfectly elastically

nor perfectly inelastically but rather according to a more general relation of

the form (again omitting the constant term)




                                                                                   (5)




for the optimal choice of -y1, delivers a value of E(y2) at least as small as

the smaller of E(y2)J     and E(y2)I. The solution for the optimal elasticity

of money supply is




                       1 —
                                        +         + ll         2'uv
                                            alv +
                                              2
                                                    uv
                                                                                   (6)




for which the value of the objective is



                                                         a
                                                          uv    2
                                             221
                                            aa il-ia a
                         E(y)
                                2
                                    —
                                            uv u V
                                               +    + 2iuv                         (7)




The greater generality of the finite-elasticity response policy is readily

apparent In that use of the interest rate as a straight instrument (1l )

follows   for a2 — 0 (and of course then a —         0),     while use of money as a

straight instrument follows for combination: of values of a and a (and auv)
                                       -11-




for which     — 0.

    Apart from these two special cases, the central bank's optimal policy

amounts to closing Poole's threevariable-tWO-re5triCti0n model by adding a

third nontrivial restriction, rather than by taking a unique variable as

exogenous. Morever, inspection of (6) shows that, even apart from effects due

to the covariance of the two disturbances, it is impossible to say a priori

whether this optimal response policy is to supply money with positive or

negative interest elasticity. The choice is again empirical.       In intuitive

terms, the optimal money supply response amounts to whatever is necessary to

offset the slope and variation in money demand behavior, so as to render the
                                                                   inelastic as
model's solved-out money market equilibirum as nearly interest

possible --   in   other words, to produce a vertical LM curve)°

     The Poole analysis in this general form has proved highly useful in a
                                                              policy issues but
variety of different settings, including not just monetary

such questions as fixed versus flexible exchange rates and nominal versus

indexed wages.11 The common features of this kind of analysis       include the

relation of a policy choice to the relative variances of different sources of

uncertainty affecting the relevant aspects of economic behavior, the dependence
                                                             the dominance in
 of optimal actions also on key behavioral parameters, and
                                                           fixing one variable or
 general of optimally structured constraints over simply

 another. A key part of its contribution has been to establish the inescapably

 empirical nature of policy questions like those under study here.



 Supply-Demand Model          itraI Monetary Policy

      At least since the mid l970s, when the effects of price      increases imposed

                                                  increased macroecOnomists'
 by the international petroleum cartel greatly
                                                                     thrust of the
 interest in many aspects of aggregate supply behavior, a major
                                                  -12-




literature of targets and instruments of monetary policy has been to move beyond

a demand-only framework to models incorporating nontrivial representations of

aggregate supply. Extending Poole's analysis to a complete supply-demand

context is not straightforward, however. One reason is that doing so

immediately raises the issue of whether systematic monetary policy is or is not

neutral, in the sense of affecting only nominal magnitudes while leaving real

economic activity unchanged. Moreover, in models in which monetary policy does

affect both nominal and real magnitudes, there is no ready analog to the obvious

policy objective of stabilizing "income" in Poole's model.

     For models in which monetary policy is neutral, Sargent and Wallace (1975)

demonstrated that the classic choice between money and the interest rate as the

exogenous policy variable is really no choice at all in that, with rational

expectations, prices in the goods and services market are indeterminate under an

interest rate instrument. A simplified version of Sargent and Wallace's model

expands Poole's IS-LM framework both by adding the representation of aggregate

supply behavior due to Lucas (1972, 1973) and by distinguishing between real and

nominal magnitudes for both quantity variables and interest rates. The

resulting three-equation-four-variable model is then




                            a1 [r -          (E1(p+i)         -
                                                                  p)}   + Ut   (8)




                       -
                           Pt
                                —
                                    i       t -   2      r + Vt                (9)




                       —
                           l            -
                                            Ei(p))         + x1+ zt            (10)




where x now denotes j output and spending; p is the price level; r is

specifically the nominal interest rate; z is a zero-mean disturbance t
                                     -13-




                                            denotes the expectation operator
aggregate supply, with variance a; E1
conditional on information as of time t-l; and all variables are again in

logarithms, and all constants are omitted.

     Because of the structure of (10), with its imposition of a "natural rate"

of output except for price misperceptions and the random disturbance z, any

predetermined nonstochastic value of mr that economic agents are assumed to

                                                 neither the expected value nor any
incorporate into expectations E1(.) affects
                                                                     is neutral.12
other aspect of the distribution describing x. Monetary policy

Money is a plausible instrument variable;    but it affects prices only, not real


output.

     By contrast, the model simply breaks down if the exogenous policy

instrument is not money but the interest rate. In that case, the model's real

variables are overdetermined, while there exists an extra degree of freedom in

                                                             level and the nominal
 the solution for all nominal magnitudes. Both the price

money stock are indeterminate.   Unless prices are of no concern to policymakers

                                                    indicates that the interest rate
 at all, therefore, the Sargent-Wallace analysis
                                                            priori basis. Unlike in
 instrument is not just inferior but implausible on an a
                                                                 issue.
 Poole's analysis, the instrument problem is not an empirical
                                                             that this
      McCallum (1981) subsequently demonstrated, however,

 indeterniinancy of prices under an interest rate instrument would follow only in
                                                            placed no weight at all
 the case in which the central bank's ultimate objective
                                                                  contrast, as
 on prices -- what McCallum turned a "pure interest rate peg." By
                                                  weight on prices in formulating
 long as the central bank places at least some
                                             determinate solution for all variables.
 monetary policy, the model does yield a

      McCalluni actually showed this result for the case in which the central
                                                             that the interest rate
 bank's objectives include money, rather than prices, so

  is exogenously set as a linear combination of an arbitrary
                                                                value (r1 in
                                          -14-




McCallum's example based on a preference for interest rate smoothing over time)

and the value consistent with any arbitrarily selected value for the money

stock, and hence the policy rule is



                                      *
                              — 4)   r + (1      -
                                                     4))
                                                           r1                    (11)




where r is rt such that Ei(mjr) —                for m arbitrary. It is clear,
                                           m
however, that McCallum's result carries over to the case in which the central

bank's objective includes not just money but any nominal variable. For example,

a joint preference for smooth interest rates and stable prices, which would

again imply (11) where r is instead r such that Ei(p1r) —            t-l'   would work

just as well. At an intuitive level, the Sargent-Wallace indeterminancy result

simply amounts to the point that there must be some nominal anchor to determine

the absolute price level in any economy. Exogenously fixing the nominal money

stock is one way to provide such an anchor, but there are also many others.



Supply-Demand Models with Non-neutral Monetary Policy

     Even in models based on rational expectations and aggregate supply ,behavior

that exhibits the natural rate property, systematic monetary policy may affect

real economic activity for a variety of reasons. Following the early

contributions of Fischer (1977a) and Phelps and Taylor (1977), the literature

has primarily emphasized failures of neutrality due to less than perfectly

flexible wages and/or prices. At its most basic level, the point has long been

familiar. An economy needs a nominal anchor to determine its absolute price

level, but it does not need two of them. Money can only be neutral if it is the

only exogenously set nominal variable.13

    The immediate effect of introducing some inflexibility to either wages or
                                                    -15-




prices in this context is to alter the aggregate supply function. For example,

Fischer's equivalent to a reduced form for (8)-(lO), based on two-period nominal

wage contracts and assuming         —   1       for simplicity, is



                                        + E 2(e1t - e2)                                 (12)
   xt —   m + (e1 + e2) + E 1(eit - e2)

                                                                              a function of the
where e1 is the disturbance to aggregate supply expressed as
                                                                 demand expressed as a function
real wage, and e2 is the disturbance tO aggregate

of real balances (that is, a solved-out form of (8) and (9)) with elasticity
                                                                           based on a model
also assumed equal to one. Phelps and Taylor's equivalent,

with prices fixed one period in advance, is



                                                                          +
                   —
                         (E(p)                  -
                                                           + 2 (m -           et
                                                                                         (13)




where     and 02 are combinations of the coefficients in their model's

 underlying behavioral equations, and e is a combination of the disturbances in
                                                                        prominently in the
 these equations. Still another variant that has figured

 literature of targets and instruments of monetary policy is Beans S (1983)



                    —               - E1(p)) + 2 Ei(z)] + z                               (14)




 where z is now the technological disturbance to an underlying Cobb-Douglas

 production function, and the three coefficients bear the structural

 interpretations
                                    1-st
                              -ri




                                            9
                               2        +0
                                                     -16-




                                             1




where -          is   the wage elasticity of labor demand (in other words, where (l-4)

is the labor coefficient in the production function), and -3-—                is   the wage

elasticity of labor supply. Yet another variant prominently used in the

analysis of monetary policy is Turnovsky's (1987)



               Xt —   '1
                               -
                                   Etl(pt))        + 2 Ei (z) + 73 Et (zr) + zt           (16)




where the coefficients bear the structural interpretation



                                   11 — 73 (1 -       r)

                                        —                                                 (17)
                                            73   ()
                                             I -
                                   Y3



where    -     and      are again the wage elasticities of labor demand and labor

supply, respectively; r is the extent to which wages are indexed to prices,

o   r        1; and E(z) indicates the contemporaneous perception of z, which may

or may not equal z.

        Any of these supply functions renders monetary policy nonneutral, even

under rational expectations, so that further analysis of the instrument problem

requires a particular policy objective specifying the weight placed on real

versus nominal targets. Perhaps for that reason -               - and   also perhaps because of

the widespread dissatisfaction with the results of using interest rates in this

role earlier on --         there   has been little analysis in the literature examining
                                                -17-




the choice of monetary policy instrument at this level. Such an analysis is

easily possible, however, as an example based on the model used by Aizenmann and

Frenkel (1986) - -   though   carrying out an exercise they did not undertake -      -

readily   illustrates.

     In order to establish a plausible objective for monetary policy in the

presence of potential disturbances to aggregate supply, Aizenmann and Frenkel

based their analysis on maintaining equilibrium in the labor market

characterized by labor demand



                                           —     (
                                                      -   w +    z)             (18)




and labor supply



                                               — 9 (w -     p)                  (19)




where w is the (logarithm of the) nominal wage, and z is a zero-mean percentage

disturbance to production for given capital and labor. If (18) represents                the


first-order condition derived from a Cobb-Douglas production function with labor

coefficient 8, then      —       and the quantity of output is



                                  x —          [6(p    - w) +     zI.            (20)




The corresponding market-clearing equilibrium is invariant to the specification

                                                                                of
 of aggregate demand or to any disturbances affecting aggregate demand,

 course, but it does vary with z.              In particular, 2d — 1s implies



                                           e
                               (w -   p)
                                                       -18-




                                     —   9   (          ) z                                        (21)




                                     — (1 + 9)          ()        z



where the e superscript indicates equilibrium values)4 In the absence of some

specific impediment, the ordinary working of the labor market would establish a

new equilibrium at these values following the emergence of any non-zero

realization of the production disturbance z. At the same time, nothing in the

equilibration process represented by (21) anchors the value of any nominal

magnitude (wages w, prices p, or nominal income x +                          p).
     Following Gray (1976), Fisher (1977) and Phelps and Taylor (1977), it                               is
useful to suppose that the impediment which prevents the automatic establishment

of the new equilibrium given in (21) is less than perfect flexibility of nominal

wages. In the limit, if nominal wages are rigid (w —                           0),   then reaching the

equilibrium in (21) requires p —               -   () z                If the model's demand side is as

in (8) and (9), and the zero-mean property of z implies zero expected price

inflation in this one-period context, then the monetary policy that exactly

delivers the price movement required to achieve the market-clearing real wage

despite the rigidity of nominal wages can be expressed equivalently as15




              m   —   v   -
                              12)        u +       ___        (1       +       -   —) - 1 z        (22)




or



                              re —   —
                                     1
                                             u     -
                                                       11+9)
                                                              j    (       ) z.                    (23)
                                                        a1
                                                               -19-




Here the equilibrium movement in the money stock accommodates any disturbance to

money demand on a one-for-one basis, fully offsets any disturbance to real

aggregate demand (with allowance for the relevant elasticities a1 and 2' and

responds to the supply disturbance in just the fashion necessary to deliver

                 z.16      The eilibrium movement in the interest rate does not depend
p — -

at all on the money demand disturbance,                            but it again fully offsets any real

aggregate demand disturbance (with allowance for al) and it again responds to
                                                                          -
the supply disturbance so as to deliver p —.
                                                                e    e
        Clearly, implementing the monetary policy described by in or r requires
                                                                              three disturbance terms (only u and
knowledge of the realizations of the model's

z in the case of re). In the absence of such knowledge, the choice that

corresponds to the classic form of the monetary policy                                     instrument problem would

be to fix either m — 0 or r —                           0, consistent with a zero prior expectation for
 each disturbance. Either in — 0 or r —                            0, however, delivers values of output,
                                                                      will then differ from the corresponding
 prices, labor input and real wages that

 market-clearing equilibrium. In order to evaluate the relative merits of these

 two policy alternatives in so rich an environment,                                     it is therefore necessary to

                                                                                           if the sole criterion of
 have a well specified policy objective. For example,

 monetary policy is the variance of output around the equilibrium given in (21),

 then the solution to the instrument problem hinges on
                                                                                           a comparison between



                                           2
                                           2    (-l)
                                                          2
                                                               2
                                                                          a2 (-l) 2
         E(x -   x)        in
                                   —
                                                A
                                                    2          u
                                                                      +
                                                                                A
                                                                                    2        v



                                                                                                 1)2
                                                        2a1 (2 + 1) (9 + 1)
                 +
                      c4
                           A
                               2
                                       +   1)
                                                    -
                                                              A (4i + 8)
                                                                                        +——
                                                                                         (9 +

                                                                                         (4' + 8)
                                                                                                       22     (24)
                                                                    -20-




and



                                       -
                                           1)2                                                                              + 1)
              e 2                                           2                                                           ___________
                                                                                                                        2a1
                                                                                                                                                            )
      E(x-x)              —                                         +           _______________                     -
                                                            U                                2
                     r             (   - 1 ÷ a)                                       1 +
                                                                                                      a1)
                                                                                                                        ( -             1   +
                                                                                                                                                 a1)(   +



                                   (0 ÷ 1)2

                                   () a
                                                       2 2
                               +                                                                                                                        (25)
                                                2           z



where A —                 +                + 64)) +                 and for simplicity both expressions omit
             a116ç8                2(a1                 a,,
all relevant covariance terms.17 Alternatively, if the sole objective of

monetary policy is to stabilize output around the deterministic (x — 0) value,

rather than around the new market-clearing equilibrium value --                                                                             in   other words,

to avoid fluctuations in output, even in response to real production shocks - -

the choice between m — 0                    and r —     0 hinges on the comparison of


                         (4)       - 1)2               a (4)            - 1)2                              a            +       1)2         2
                                           au2 +
        2
      E(x)       —                                                                    a
                                                                                          2
                                                                                          v
                                                                                                  +
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                                 a2z    (26)
                               2                                    2
             m            A                                     A                                                           A



and



                                               (4)-i)
                                                        2
                                                                                              a
                                                                                                  22  4)

                         E(x               —                                          +
                                                     -1 +               2
                                                                            C
                                                                                U                     -                     2       z                   (27)
                                       r       (4)
                                                                a)                                         1.   +




where again both expressions omit all covariance terms. Both of these sets of
                                                                                 18
comparisons are clearly empirical matters.

       While there is no reason to presume that the stabilization of output per

Se, around either the ex ante or the ex post equilibrium, is necessarily the
                                                  -21-




only criterion governing monetary policy, at least some other suggested

objectives amount to the same thing. For example, the policy objective

suggested by Aizenmann and Frenkel for their own model is equivalent to

minimizing the expected area of a triangle representing the welfare loss due to

disequilibrium in the labor market in terms of consumers' and producers'

surplus. On the assumption that firms are always on their labor demand curves,
                                                               that measure for this model is
so that 2 — 2d regardless of whether



                            —    (1   -
                                          2e) [(w -        )S       (w -   p)]                       (28)




where (w -   p)
                  s.is the supply price of labor, equal to                  1
                                                                                 2 from (19).
                                                                                                19


For this policy objective, however, the solution to the instrument problem

simply hinges on the comparison of



                                 E() —            ?CE(X    -
                                                               x)                                    (29)
                                          m                           m



and



                                 E(t)         —    k.E(x   -   xe2
                                                                 )                                   (30)
                                          r                           r



 where   —
             28   ( - 1)2
      In sum, the basic insight of the Poole analysis -                         - relating   the choice of

 instrument of monetary policy to the relative variances of different categories

 of disturbances affecting the economy, as well as to the values of specifically

 identifiable parameters of economic behavior -                 - carries         over to models

                                                                                      as there is some
 incorporating nontrivial aggregate supply behavior, as long
                                     -22-




contradiction of perfectly classical assumptions that prevents the economy from

automatically equilibrating on its own in the first place (and, at the same

time, renders monetary policy non-neutral.)2°
                                       -23-




II. The Intermediate Taret Problem

      A potentially important problem inherent in the entire mode of analysis

reviewed in Section I is that what most people mean by "money" in discussions of

monetary policy is not a quantity set directly by the central bank. Under the

kind of fractional reserve banking system in use in almost all modern economies

in the western world, most of the money used by the public, either as a means of

payment or as a liquid store of value, represents the liabilities of private

depository institutions, Although the central bank can influence the

money-creating activities of these institutions, that influence is not the same

as its being able to set the money stock exogenously, as if money were a genuine

policy instrument. Instead, the quantity variable which the central bank can

set directly, if it chooses, is at best some measure of its own liabilities - -

for   example, bank reserves or the monetary base (reserves plus currency).

      One solution to this problem, of course, is simply to define "money' so

that it is potentially exogenous --   that    is, to define money as some measure of

the central bank's direct liabilities --      regardless of common usage. In that
case "money demand" functions like (2) or (9) represent the derived demand for

central bank liabilities, based on the underlying fractional reserve system

(and, if the measure used is the monetary base, on the public's demand for

currency), and the analysis can proceed just as before. Nevertheless, this

confounding of the respective portfolio behavior of the banking system and the

nonbank public runs counter to the rich and long-standing tradition of distinct

analysis of money demand behavior (meaning that of the nonbank public) and money

supply behavior (meaning that of the banking system). In addition, keeping the

two analytically separate in this context as well is more consistent with the

principle of distinguishing among the respective implications of disturbances to

the economy arising from different sources.21
                                                  -24-




     Merely extending the analysis of the instrument problem in Section 1 to

allow for the endogeneity of "money" is fairly straightforward. Following

Modigliani, Rasche and Cooper (1970) and others, a standard representation of

bank portfolio behavior that can be construed as either the supply of money or

the demand for reserves is



                                       m —            +         +   q                       (31)
                                                61h       52r


where h is the quantity of nonborrowed reserves (or any other potentially

exogenous measure of central bank liabilities), and q is a zero-mean disturbance

with variance c2.22 The classic instrument problem is then the choice between
               q
reserves and the interest rate, rather than between money and the interest rate,

as the variable to be set exogenously by monetary policy.

     Combining (31) with (1) and (2) gives an expanded version of the

demand-only model analyzed in Section I, for which the solution is again as in

(3) for the interest rate instrument and




     E(y2) —   11 2                + 62)2
                                            [2 +                    +       + mu2


                               +            +              +
                                    62uv                                -
                   -

                       21(a2                    2m1(2           82uq        2c7vq]
                                                                                            (32)



for the reserves instrument where a                   and a         are the covariances of q with u
                                                uq            vq
and v, respectively. As in the comparison between (3) and (4), the advantage of

supplying reserves perfectly inelastically is to damp the effect on income due

to disturbances to aggregate demand, with damping factor
                                                -25-




           +
0 <
             62)              <   • The     associated disadvantage is that doing so
                          2
      (a11 +    ÷
                    62)
exposes income to effects due to disturbances to both money demand behavior and

money supply (reserves demand) behavior, both of which a policy of supplying

reserves perfectly elast ally would eliminate. Similarly, combining (31) with

a supply-demand model like that consisting of (8), (9), and (18)-(20) would have

analogously straightfoward effects on comparisons like (24) versus (25), or (26)

versus (27).

      By contrast, the issue that is not straightforward when money is endogenous

is what role money itself can or should play in the monetary policy process.

The intermediate target problem is the choice of just such a variable, usually a

readily observable financial quantity (or price), that the central bank will

treat, for purposes of some interim-run time horizon, as if it were the target

of monetary policy -      - even   though everyone recognizes that the quantity (or

price) in question actually bears no ultimate significance at all. Jhat it

means to base monetary policy on an intermediate target, and under what

conditions doing so is sensible, has been the focus of a substantial literature.



General Statement of              Problem

      It is easiest to understand the use of any given intermediate target

variable for monetary policy as a two-stage procedure. In the first stage, the

central bank determines the value of the intermediate target which would be

consistent with the desired ultimate policy objective under a variety of cx ante

assumptions --   for   example, zero values for all relevant disturbances. At the

second stage, the central bank proceeds, in some ex post fashion, to treat

achieving this value of the intermediate target (set ex ante) if doing so were

the objective governing policy. In practice many central banks have implemented
                                      -26-




intermediate target strategies at least approximately according to this

two-stage manner.

     The distinction between the "ex ante" assumptions employed in the first

stage of this process and whatever makes the second stage "ex post" is clearly

crucial. Since the passage of time per se is not a significant issue here, the

literature analyzing the intermediate target problem has largely focused on the

availability of new information as time passes. The key role of the

intermediate target variable, then, is to provide a rule for processing and

acting on this new information.

     Friedman (1977) suggested several plausible circumstances under which money

(or, for that matter, any other endogenous variable) may provide such useful

information. All arise in a dynamic setting in which a relevant value of the

intermediate target variable is observable before some policy decision, or some

adjustment to an earlier policy decision, is made, while the corresponding

value(s) of the variable(s) constituting the ultimate policy objective are not.

This realization of the intermediate target is then part of the information set

underlying the choice of a final value for the policy instrument.

     The most obvious context in which this kind of segmented information flow

arises is an inherently dynamic system in which the relevant economic behavior

exhibits leads and lags distributed through time. For example, if people demand

money for transactions purposes, and tend on average to accumulate money in

advance of actual spending, then in general the observed value of the money

stock at any time conveys information about the future strength of aggregate

demand. Similarly, in models in which some individuals' or businesses' ability

to spend depends in part on their ability to borrow, and loan transactions tend

to precede actual spending, the observed volume of credit conveys information

about the future state of aggregate demand. In either case, such information is
                                         -27-




at least potentially useful whenever monetary policy actions affect economic

behavior with a lag.

     An endogneous variable like the money stock can also provide such useful

information, even in the absence of behavioral economic lags, if there are lags

in the availability of relevant data. For example, in a context in which

disturbances to economic behavior are serially correlated, observations of the

recent values of key endogenous variables convey information that is potentially

useful for anticipating future outcomes. If observations of endogenous

financial variables like money (or credit, or interest rates) are available on a

more timely basis than observations of variables like income and prices -     - as    is


the case in most economies -   - then   the information given by those financial

variables in general has a role to play in setting the optimal value of the

policy instrument. Equivalently, if observations of financial variables are

available continuously throughout the "period" of analysis but observations of

variables like income and prices are not, and if it is possible for the central

bank to adjust the value of its policy instrument as time passes within the

period, then again these available observations in general have a role to play

in the policy making process.

     Even so, finding that some variable like money conveys potentially useful

information is not the same as establishing that the central bank should

specifically use that variable as an intermediate target. Much of the
                                                                                   this
literature of the intermediate target problem has focused on analyzing just

distinction.



Intermediate Targets j Models Based QjJ Arezate Demand
      Friedman (1975, 1977) analyzed the intermediate target problem in the

context of a demand-only model consisting of (1), (2) and (31),       with serially
                                           -28-




correlated disturbances. For zero expectations of disturbances u, v and q,

whether the policy that delivers the smaller variance of income in such a model

 is r — 0 or h — 0 depends upon the comparison of (3) and (32).23 In either

case, the potential role in this context for money, an endogenous variable in

either case, is to provide information indicating a likely non-zero realization

of some relevant disturbance, and therefore -        - if   this information is in hand in

time to react to it -   - warranting   a different value of the policy instrument.

     If each of the three disturbances u, v and q follows a first-order

autoregressive process with autocorrelations u'              and
                                                                   Pq respectively,
knowing the values of each of the model's three endogenous variables at time t-l

facilitates using (1), (2) and (31) to discover the values of
                                                                        u1, v1, and
     and then calculating "informed" expectations of the three disturbances for

period t as pu1 v1 and                        The optimal value of the policy

instrument for period t, given this information, is then




                                       —
                                                  ut_I                             (33)




under the interest rate instrument, or



            h —   -
                             [2 +      utl -       a1 PvVtl + a1 Pqqtl]            (34)
                      a151


under the reserves instrument. By contrast, if observations of            m1 and
whichever of rtl or h1 was endogenous are available, but t-l remains

unknown, it is not possible to solve (1), (2) and (31) for
                                                                     u11, v1 and
and hence not possible to implement either (33) or (34).

    Using money as an intermediate target variable in this context amounts to
                                                     -29-




setting r or h so as to achieve Ei(m) — o.24                          This policy is either



                                             2   2
                                                     +
                                                             2
                                                                 + i'       +

              r   —     i

                      a11   +
                                2                    +       + 2iuv                        ]
                                                                                                       (35)




with an interest rate instrument, or



                                           fl122) — m1
                                h—       £i (a11 +
                                                                                                       (36)




                                                                                     of all three variances
where      and 2 are appropriately weighted combinations
                                                                                     with a reserves
a2       and a2) and all three corresponding covariances,
 u v          q
instrument. Hence under either instrument the model breaks down in such a way

that targeting the money stock in this context requires responding only to the

 information contained in m1 but not whichever of hi or rtl is endogenous.
                                                                                           is that in general
        The criticism of this policy argued in Friedman (1975)
                                                                           minimizes the variance of
 neither (35) nor (36) is the policy that actually

 income, given the available information contained in the observations mtl and
                                                                       Ei(y) is instead either
 either ri or hi. The policy that minimizes



                                         — 91pci + puauv                    1
                                rt   —
                                         a  22    2
                                                                                m
                                                                                    t-l
                                                                                                        (37)
                                         1               +   a   +   21a,J

 or



                                ht —- 11+aS
                                             a                       .—
                                                                      w.
                                                                                in
                                                                                     t-l
                                                                                                         (38)
                                        -30-




where       and    are analogous (though not identical) to         and w2. Comparison

of (35) to (37) (or of (36) to (38)) shows that treating money as an

intermediate target of monetary policy does not in general deliver the

instrument value consistent with minimizing the variance of income, given the

information contained in lagged values of the endogenous financial variables.

Under special conditions, of course, the two may be identical. For example,

Friedman pointed out that if fl2   —    — 0 --    that   is, if money demand is both

interest inelastic and nonstochastic -   - then   both (35) and (37) trivially reduce

to rt —              m1. In general, however, the policy based on money as an
              a1
intermediate target variable is not even the best way for monetary policy to

take advantage of the information contained in observations of money itself,

much less an optimum way of processing all available information in general.25



Intermediate Tarzets in Supply-Demand Models

        For the same reason that they make the analysis of the instrument problem

so straightforward, demand-only models like the one used above offer only

limited possibilities for investigation of various intermediate targets of

monetary policy. Because "income" is typically the model's only endogenous

nonfinancial variable, and hence the obvious ultimate policy target, there is no

remaining nonfinancial variable to suggest as an intermediate target. The

choice of an intermediate target must therefore be from among the model's set of

endogenous financial variables.

    Models incorporating both aggregate supply and aggregate demand behavior

also admit analysis of policies based on the use of some financial variable as

an intermediate target variable, although the literature has not pursued this

aspect of the subject in any depth.26 For example, making the money stock
                                           -31-




endogenous in a model like that of Aizenmann and Frenkel (1986) would merely

require adding a money supply function like (31) to the system consisting of

(8), '(9) and (18)-(20). The policy of exogenously setting m —       0, analyzed in
Section I, would not then be feasible, but treating money as an intermediate

target variable -   - that    is, setting either reserves or the interest rate such

that either E1(mIr) — 0 or E i(mIh) — 0 for any given information set - -

would be. Computing the resulting variances corresponding to E(x - Xe)2        in (24)

and (25), E(x2) in (26) and (27), or E(A) in (29) and (30), would then be

relatively straightforward. The general inferiority of any such policy,

compared to the policy of setting either r or h at the value derived by directly

minimizing the ultimate policy objective, would emerge in a way that is

analogous to the result shown above for the demand-only model.

      Analysis of intermediate monetary policy targets within supply-demand

models has instead primarily focused on the potential use of nonfinancial

variables like prices or nominal income. In this context too, it is crucial to

distinguish between analysis based on supply-demand models in which systematic

monetary policy is neutral and the contrasting analysis of nonneutral policy.

When policy does not affect the distribution of real magnitudes, the price level

(or, equivalently, nominal income) becomes the only plausible ultimate

macroeconomic policy target. Hence the analysis of price or nominal income

targets in such models typically has little if anything to do with the

intermediate target problem. By contrast, when policy does affect real

magnitudes, a price target for monetary policy is clearly an        intermediate target

 (unless real variables receive no weight at all in policymakers preferences)

and a nominal income target is also an intermediate target unless the        ultimate

                                                                                in the
policy objective also exhibits the one-for-one weighting system implicit

y —   x   + p definition.27
                                            -32-




         Aizenmann and Fenkel (1986), for example, analyzed both a price             target and
 a nominal income target as if these variables were potential policy instruments
  --   that   is, on the assumption that either p — 0 or x +        p   — 0 in the model used

 above could be set exogenously. They showed that, in their model with nominal

 wages rigid, fixing nominal income is equivalent to holding employment constant

 while fixing prices is trivially equivalent to fixing the real wage. Which of

 these alternatives is preferable therefore depends on the relative wage

 elasticities of labor demand () and labor supply (8) -             - and of course, on the
 objective governing policy. For the welfare-analytic objective               given in (28),
 for example, the choice between p — 0 and x +       p   — 0 depends on the comparison

 be tween




                             E()f -    ÷[                ]2     2
                                                                                       (39)




and



                                       -                        2
                            E(&)   +            8(       9) ]                          (40)




so that the price target is more likely to be preferable if labor demand                is the

less elastic, while the nominal income target is more likely to be preferable if

labor surnl.,y is the less elastic.

        In fact, no central bank operating in a market economy can simply set

either prices or nominal income exogenously. The feasible analogs to the

policies considered in (39) and (40) would therefore consist of evaluating E()
 -   - or,   for that matter, any other specific objective -    - not     for p —   0 and x + p
— 0
    but for the respective values of reserves or the interest rate consistent
                                              -33-




             — 0 and E1(x +               — 0 for a given information set in general
with Et
indicating nonzero expectations for the model's disturbance           terms.28

     The principal contribution in the literature to date that has investigated

either price or nominal income targeting along these lines is Bean's (1983)

analysis of nominal income, based on the aggregate supply function given in (14)

together with the solved-out aggregate demand relation



                                  x —   ' (m    -
                                                     + et                         (41)




where for simplicity "money" is taken as the exogenous policy instrunlent.29 As

in the analysis above of the demand-only model, the potential role for an

intermediate target variable here arises from the assumption of serially

correlated disturbances. Specifically, Bean assumed that each of z in

(14) and e in (41) consists of the sum of a random walk component and a

white-noise component. Bean also posited as the objective governing monetary

policy minimizing the variance of real output around the corresponding

equilibrium value in the presence of supply shock z, which for (14) is just



                 -
                           — 11         - Ei(p)) + 2      (z -
                                                                 El(z))]          (42)




     Given observations on the model's endogenous variables in period t-l, the

policy that minimizes Ei(x -            x)2   in the presence of rigid nominal wages is a

feedback rule relating m to the random walk components of z and e in period

t-l, but not to the corresponding white noise components. Either fixing the

money stock at m — 0 without reacting to this information or using nominal

income as an intermediate target variable --          that   is, setting m so as to render

E1(x + PIm)      — 0   -   - is   in general inferior to this optimal feedback policy.
                                                         -34-




The resulting variances are




        Ei(x -
                         x)2
                                 —       +              )2   [Cep +     2l        +     -
                                                                                                 2]     (43)




and




 Ei(x -                                           +     1
                                                                          +)-           -   +
                                                                                                i]2ap   (44)
                 x)2               +                            [




where         is the minimum feasible value of Ei(x -                         x)2     achieved by the optimal

feedback policy, and                   and a2 are the one-period variances of the random ji
                                 ep          zp
components of the disturbances to aggregate demand and aggregate supply,
                    30
respectively.

        The m — 0 policy is inferior to the optimal feedback rule, therefore, in

that it always fails to take proper account of what is known about the demand

disturbance, and except when —                    I   it also fails to take proper account of the

supply disturbance. Similarly, although the policy of setting Ei(x +                                           —0

does eliminate the effect of the predictable component of the demand

disturbance, it too is inferior to the optimal feedback policy in that it fails

to take proper account of the supply disturbance (except trivially when                                   —

which from (15) implies an inelastic labor supply, so that supply disturbances

do not affect the equilibrium output level in the first place). Hence the

choice between these two sub-optimal policies rests on the comparison between

(43) and (44). Because a sufficient condition for the variance in (44) to be

less than that in (43) is ,               < 1,    and indeed the available empirical evidence

suggest a less-than-unit elasticity of real aggregate demand with respect to
                                        -35-




real balances, Bean concluded that monetary policy based on nominal income as an

intermediate target is likely to be preferable to a policy based on exogenously

fixing "money."31

     West (1986), however, showed that this apparently straightforward

conclusion hinges cruciaLy on the choice of minimizing Ei(x) as the

objective governing monetary policy. As an example, West showed that when

minimizing Ei(x) is the policy objective, the conclusion in a highly similar

model is just the opposite. In that case a nominal income target is preferable

to a fixed money stock if and only if the elasticity of aggregate demand with

respect to real balances is greater than unity.32 The main point here,

therefore, is not just the inherently empirical nature of the key choices

involved in designing monetary policy but also, in a model encompassing both

supply and demand, the importance of the choice of policy objective.

     A further generalization of the idea of using either a price or a nominal

income target for monetary policy is Hall's (1984) analysis of an "elastic"

price target, whereby the central bank sets its policy instrument so as to

 achieve



                                                                              (45)
                                    E1(p) — U

 where U is the difference between the actual unemployment rate and the

 corresponding "full employment" benchmark, and the base from which the
                                                   normalized to zero, as usual) is
 percentage price deviation p is measured (here

 specifically intended to be constant over time. When the targeting rule's

 elasticity   equals the reciprocal of the elasticity relating unemployment to

 real income --   that   is the "Okun's Law" coefficient (usually estimated

 empirically to be around one-third for the United States) -
                                                             -   this   elastic price
                                     -36-




standard is equivalent to nominal income targeting. A larger value of       places

relatively greater implicit weight on unemployment (real output), while a

smaller value places relatively greater implicit weight on the price level.

Instead of making explicit the objective implied by (45) and working out

analytically the relevant variances that follow from implementing it under some

specific model, Hall performed simulations based on empirical estimates of the

time series of the respective disturbances to aggregate demand and aggregate

supply for the United States, and on an assumed value (one-half) for the

elasticity of the supply curve relating price setting to the level of

unemployment.

     In a similar vein, Taylor (1985) used simulations of a bivariate

autoregressive process generating prices and real income, estimated using U.S.

time series data, to evaluate several different versions of a nominal income

targeting procedure. Taylor also explicitly considered, but did not simulate, a

generalization of this procedure analogous to Hall's elastic price standard. In

their reliance on empirical simulations rather than analytical solutions, both

Taylor's and Hall's analyses are in the spirit of the earlier empirical work

evaluating alternative monetary policy rules on the basis of simulations of

large econometric models.33 Nevertheless, generalization of the use of prices

or nominal income as an intermediate target variable to a rule like (45), with

its readily intuitive constant-elasticity form, is easily compatible with the

more explicitly analytical line of development of this literature in recent

years.



Th Information Variable Atrnroach

     The repeated analytical demonstration of the inferiority of using some

endogenous variable as an intermediate target of monetary policy, compared to a
                                     -37-




more general feedback rule optimally relating the value   of the policy instrument

to the observed value of that variable, has shaped the subsequent monetary

policy literature in recognizable ways. It was readily apparent in work like

that of Friedman (1975) and Bean (1983) that the optimal feedback rule which

dominates the intermediate target strategy is a vehicle for exploiting the

information contained in observations of the endogenous variable in question.

Under such a rule, the endogenous variable is not an intermediate target    but an

"information variable" in the sense earlier made explicit in a monetary policy

setting by Kareken et al. (1973).

     The basic idea at work in the information variable approach is again

dynamic, arising in just the context discussed above, of either behavioral lags

or economic lags discussed above as the motivation for the intermediate target

strategy. Observations of a variable like the money stock are potentially

useful for anticipating future stochastic movements of variables    like income and

prices that enter the central bank's objective, or for estimating

contemporaneous stochastic movements of these variables before the relevant

direct data became available. In either case, feedback rules like those derived

by Friedman and Bean constitute the optimal way of exploiting that information,

 given the assumed behavioral model and policy objective.34

      One implication of this "information variable" approach   is that issues of

 behavioral causation, which had dominated much of the earlier discussion, became

 secondary.35 Whether the money stock does or does not "cause" movements of

 future income or prices is not the issue here. All that matters     is whether

                                                                     predict future
 observed values of the money stock provide information that helps

 movements of these variables. Hence statistical analyses along the lines of
                                                              about whether such
 Granger (1969) and Sims (1972) are apt, despite questions
                                                       causation.36 In addition,
 tests are capable of saying anything about economic
                                      -38-




Friedman (1984b) showed that tests of whether or not money provides such

information can also be performed within a structural model context.

     Another implication of the conceptual shift from an intermediate target

approach to an information variable context is that there is no longer any

compelling reason to limit the focus of the central bank's policy setting rule

to only one such endogenous variable. In principle, of course, it is always

possible to employ some appropriately weighted combination of two or more

endogenous variables is an intermediate target. In practice, however, the

intermediate targets proposed in the literature have almost always been

univariate or, like nominal income, an unweighted combination usually regarded

as a single variable anyway.37 By contrast, under an information variable

approach there is no reason to restrict monetary policy to respond only to one

endogneous variable, unless there is evidence suggesting that observations of

that one variable contain all (or nearly all) of the available information

relevant to achieving the central bank's objectives. Instead, it is in general

optimal to follow the approach, intuitively outlined earlier on by Guttentag

(1965), of exploiting all relevant sources of information.

     Friedman (l982a, 1983) explored along these lines the implications of

basing monetary policy on both a money stock variable and a credit variable, on

the basis of empirical evidence for the United States showing not only that

credit (defined as the outstanding indebtedness of all U.S. obligors other than

financial intermediaries) contains approximately as much information about

subsequent movements of income and prices as does any conventional measure of

money, but also that the interaction between the effects of credit and the

narrow (Ml) money stock is such that both variables together provide

significantly more information in this context than does either taken alone. At

an intuitive level, the principal argument here is that using a credit variable
                                     -39-




in this way diversifies the information base underlying monetary policy

responses to observations of ongoing events, in that credit describes the

liability side of the nonbank public's balance sheet while measures of money

describe the asset side. Subsequent contributions by other researchers

investigated further the potential role of a credit variable in guiding monetary

policy, relying either on empirical evidence on the relationship of credit to

macroeconomic variables or on theoretical arguments, along the lines of Blinder

and Stiglitz (1983) or Bernanke and Gertler (1986). In addition, Modigliani and

Papadernos (1983) developed a theoretical argument relating the relative

usefulness of money and credit variables in this context to issues of financial

market structure.

     Like the optimal feedback rules derived in the various models considered

above, the information variable approach to monetary policy -   - whether   based on

one information variable, or two, or many - - makes explicit the need for a

clearly articulated objective to govern policy, as well as a model stating        the


relationship between the variable(s) comprising that objective and the central

bank's policy instrument. Given these basic tools, the question of what further

role additional endogenous variables can play in the policy process is largely

an empirical issue of what (if any) readily observable financial prices or

quantities contain potentially useful information to guide the setting of the

policy instrument in order best to achieve the objective.38 At the same time,
                                                                                   use
the optimal choice of policy instrument is not independent of the potential

of information variables in this way. Which instrument delivers     the smallest

variance for a given objective in a given model depends in general on       the


appropriately conditioned variances of the principal stochastic disturbances

affecting economic behavior, and variances conditional on different information

 sets are not the same.
                                      -40-




III. Implementing Monetary Targets: The Instrument Problem Once Again

    Notwithstanding the analytical shortcomings of monetary (or other)

intermediate targets as a basis for monetary policy, beginning in the 1970s,

central banks in an increasing number of countries adopted -     - or   at least

professed to adopt -- monetary aggregate targets. Given the endogeneity of the

quantities that most of these central banks meant by "money," the issue of how

best to achieve these targets became a logical next step in the development        of

the targets and instruments literature, indeed a step that antedated either the

attention to supply shocks or the formal analysis of the intermediate target

strategy emphasized in Section II.

     The separate literature of controlling monetary aggregates made clear the

fundamentally two-stage character of the monetary policy process based on an

intermediate target variable. Here the existence of a specified target value

for the money stock, presumably determined via some prior analysis involving

macroeconomic variables of genuine policy consequence, is simply a given. The

remaining question is how the central bank is to set its exogenous policy

 '-strument so as to render the actual value of the money stock as close as

possible to this target value, in the context of different stochastic

disturbances affecting money supply and money demand. The fact that the

realizations of these disturbances will in general affect the value of the money

stock that is consistent with achieving the underlying macroeconomic objectives

of this policy -.   which is, in the end, the basic analytical flaw in the
 intermediate target strategy itself -   - went   unconsidered here.




 Analysis Under Fixed Institutional Arrangements

      Pierce and Thomson (1972) first explicitly framed the money stock control

 problem in a conceptional framework analogous to Poole's (1970), also using a
                                                                -41-




demand-only model like Poole's. More specifically, they examined whether

nonborrowed reserves or a short-term interest rate is the superior policy

instrument for minimizing the variance of the money stock around some given

target value when money is determined by the interaction of the money demand and

supply functions (2) and (31), with income taken as pre-determined but not known

with certainty in advance. The alternative solutions to this problem are




            E(m2) —
                                  a2 +           a2 +
                                                        2a                                                 (46)




                  2
                          —                  1          122
                                                        2 C +
                                                              22        C       +
                                                                                           22
                                                                                            a
            E(m                                    2    L       v           q                y
                      h            2+62)

                                                            +               -                              (47)
                                                                2fl16a
                                      -
                                             2S22Cvq                            2fi12S2   Cqy]



       2.                     .                                     .
where a is the variance of the forecasting error associated with y (and

covariances a         and a               are defined analogously).
             vy      qy
     The result here is parallel to those derived above. Which policy

instrument minimizes E(m2) depends upon the relative magnitudes of the three

relevant variances (and the covariances), and on the respective elasticities

describing the nonbank public's money demand behavior and the banking system's

money supply behavior. The interest rate instrument exposes                                      the money stock to

money demand disturbances and to effects on money demand due to unexpected

movements in income, both on a one-for-one basis, but entirely shields the money

stock from money supply disturbances. The reserves instrument damps money
                                                                                                        both with
demand disturbances and the effects of unexpected income variation,

                                         2
 damping factor 0 <                              < 1, but exposes the money stock to money supply
                                  2          2
                                      +
                                                                           -42-




disturbances. Which instrument is superior under these assumptions is an
                            39
empirical matter.

       McCallum and Hoehn (1983) carried out an analogous investigation in the
                                                                                                                     40
context of the supply-demand model consisting of (8)-(l0) and (31).                                                       Here the

alternative solutions are (apart from covariance terms)



                               2
                                        1'1 2 2     2
                                                                     1 +                       -   1   2
                                                                                                               2
                           E(m) —a +         a
                                               U    V
                                                                                   +                       a
                                                                                                               z
                                                                                                                            (48)
                               r     a1+71                                                  a1+-y1

and



                                                                1 +
                                                                       fl1y1 .2        1a181 - 1 12 2
         2
      E(m )        —
                           1
                                            a
                                                2
                                                v
                                                        +                    I a2 +    I           Ia+
                                                                                                    z
                                                                                                                   2 2
                                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                            (49)
                  h (1÷)2                                   a1+-y1 j u                 (   a1+-i1J

                   1
where         —
                       2
                           a       a1
                                        +   a
                                            '1              J
                                                                 +
                                                                      2       As usual, the interest rate instrument


exposes the money stock to disturbances to money demand behavior on a

one-for-one basis, and to disturbances to real spending and to aggregate supply

•   ighted by the relevant elasticities. The reserves policy damps the effect on
                                                                                                                             1
money due to all three of these disturbances, with damping factor 0 <                                                                  2
                                                                                                                          (1 +   /')
1, but exposes the money stock to disturbances to money supply behavior. Which

instrument is superior is again an empirical question.



Analysis               Alternative Institutional Arranzements

        Although it is possible to think of numerous changes in the institutional

structure of a country's financial markets that might affect its central bank's

ability to achieve the objectives motivating monetary policy, the monetary

economics literature has not taken up such suggestions in any systematic way.41
                                        -43-




By contrast, suggestions for changing institutional arrangements so as to

improve the efficacy of the central bank's control over the money stock have

attracted substantial attention.

     Given the fractional reserve system underlying the money supply process in

nearly all market economies, the chief focus of this attention has been the

structure of reserve requirements. Davis (1971) early on catalogued many of the

familiar slippages in the control of monetary aggregates via open market

operations, and Poole and Lieberman (1972) subsequently elaborated the potential

importance in the U.S. context of more uniform reserve requirements, both across

different forms of monetary liabilities and across different categories of

money-issuing institutions. Especially in the context of the large realized

month-to-month (and even quarter-to-quarter) variations in U.S. money growth

during the 1979-82 period, during which the Federal Reserve System publicly

maintained that controlling money growth was its chief operating priority,     the


specific aspect of this subject that attracted the most attention was the

presence of a time lag in the requirement that banks hold reserves based on

their deposits.

     McCallum and Hoehn (1983) analyzed the implications of lagged reserve

requirements in the context of the supply-demand model consisting of (8)-(1O),

 as immediately above, and instead of (31) a reserves demand relationship given

by


                                   —
                                       61h   +
                                                 &2r   +
                                                           q                (50)




                                                               affect the
 Because the moneysupp1y/reservesdemand equation does not

 determination of the money stock anyway when the exogenous monetary policy

 instrument is the interest rate, the substitution of (50) for (31) leaves
                                        -44-




        in (48) unchanged. By contrast, under lagged reserve requirements the

corresponding variance when the stock of reserves is the policy instrument is



                                (
                                    +   .2 2       (Q11
                                                          -l   -2 2
               2            2
                            V +I                                       + i2   2
                                               +
                                                   Ii÷iJ                          (51)
                        —                I                     I
            E(m )
                                I ai+iJ U
                                                                   z          q
                    h


Because the exogenous reserves policy in this context is equivalent to the

exogenous interest rate policy except for the addition of some slippage (2) in

setting the interest rate, it is clearly inferior in that it provides no damping

of the three disturbance terms in (48) but merely adds a fourth.

     Under a system of lagged reserve requirements, therefore, the interest rate

unambiguously dominates the stock of reserves as the policy instrument for

controlling the money stock.42 Despite the unusual (for this literature)

emergence of a result that is not inherently empirical, the subsequent

literature on this issue has nonetheless largely focused on empirical questions

like how large the increase in variance from (49) to (51) really is, especially

in more fully specified and disaggregated models of money supply and demand, and

to what extent the use of the reserve demand relation (50) together with

macroeconomic relations like (8)-(l0) is consistent with the typically very

short time delay involved in most actual lagged reserve systems.43

     Apart from the timing, coverage and uniformity of reserve requirements, the

principal issues of institutional arrangements discussed in the literature of

controlling money as an intermediate policy target have been the central bank's

discount window procedure for lending reserves to banks, responses to technical

factors like variations in float and currency in circulation, problems of

timeliness and accuracy of data, and the ever-present problem of seasonal

adjustment. Poole and Ljebertnan's (1972) early review of the subject
                                         -45-




encompassed most of these issues, and more recently Levin and Meek (1981),

Santomero (1983), Coodfriend (1983) and others have focused in particular on the

role of discount window borrowing.



Problems    Volatility       Instability
     Another set of issues that arises when the central bank uses some measure

of money as an intermediate target, especially in the context of reserves as the

exogenous policy instrument, is the prospect of excessive volatility of interest

rates. In simple models like those analyzed above, there is no apparent reason

why interest rate volatility should be a policy concern. In fact, however, most

central banks have historically sought to minimize interest rate volatility, and

it is not difficult to posit richer models of income determination in which
                                         44
interest rate volatility can matter.

     In a one-period context, interest rate volatility simply means the variance

of the interest rate - -   or,   more generally, of the entire constellation of

interest rates -- around the corresponding expected value(s). Here the

connection to the choice of policy instrument is clear enough. Under an

interest rate instrument, whatever interest rate the central bank sets

exogenously has zero variance in this sense. Under a reserves instrument,         the

variance is nonzero. In the model consisting of (8)-(lO) and (31), for example,

the one-period variance of r when h is exogenous in general incorporates the

respective variances (and covariances) for each of u, v, z and q.       Under most

familiar theories of asset pricing, this larger one-period variance for a
                                                                  variances for other
specified short-term interest rate implies larger one-period

interest rates as well.

      In a dynamic context, the question is both richer and more subtle. Here
                                                                            around its
 the issue is not just the within-period variance of any interest rate
                                     -46-




expected value but the movements of interest rates from one time period to the

next, including whatever deterministic component renders each period's expected

value not the same as the prior period's realization. Although the literature

has typically been vague at best in distinguishing these two senses of interest

rate volatility, central banks have typically exhibited concern for both.

Within the research literature, the empirical work of Tinsley et al. (1981) has

been an exception in focusing explicitly on interest rate volatility in both

senses.   Whether interest rate volatility in this second, dynamic sense is

likely to be greater under an interest rate instrument or some other policy

strategy is not clear a priori. Using a reserves instrument, or using money as

an intermediate target, exposes each period's interest rate to a variety of

shocks as in the models analyzed above. By contrast, if use of an interest rate

instrument leads to increased variation in price inflation, and if realized

inflation affects the central bank's subsequent setting of the interest rate --

as is the case, for example, if the inflation rate exhibits inertia, and the

interest rate that matters for economic activity is the real interest rate - -

then the period-to-period variance of (nominal) interest rates may be greater
under an interest rate instrument. More generally, any monetary policy system

that results in a volatile inflation rate is likely to increase the

period-to-period volatility of nominal interest rates.

     Finally, in a dynamic context the extent of period-to-period interest rate

volatility also depends on the objective specifying how rapidly the central bank

seeks to restore income (or prices, or money) to the corresponding targeted

path, once a departure from that path has occurred. The point at issue here is

a straightforward application of Holbrook's (1972) analysis of the problem of

instrument instability, which can arise whenever the effects of policy

instruments on policy targets are distributed through time. Ciccolo (1974),
                                      -47-




Enzler and Johnson (1981), Freedman (1983) and others have analyzed the

potential instability that can result from excessively close control of a money

target, given the extensive evidence indicating that money demand behavior

exhibits a lagged response to interest rates.45 The point is presumably

applicable in a broader context as well, given the even more substantial

evidence documenting lags in the response of nonfinancial behavior to movements

in financial prices and quantities.
                                           -48-




IV.    Other   Issues

        In addition to the central analytical issues reviewed in Sections I, II and

III, the literature of targets and instruments of monetary policy has also

encompassed a variety of specific related questions. The most prominent among

these include the implications of the central bank's operating procedures for

the behavior of the private sector, positive questions about whether central

banks did or did not in fact use a particular operating procedures during a

particular time period (a question often taken up in the context of a central

bank's own public assertion that it did so), and the voluminous empirical

literature examining which financial quantities best display the properties

appropriate for a monetary policy target.



Monetatary Policy and Private Information

       A central theme running throughout the targets and instruments literature,

and especially in the analysis of the intermediate target problem as laid out in

Section II, is the central bank's exploitation of available information. At the

    ame time, however, it should be clear that the structure of the policy process

-   - what   potential instrument variable is exogenous, what (if any) intermediate

target variable provides the basis for automatic responses of the instrument,

and so on --     also   affects the information available to the economy's private

sector. To the extent that that is so, holding private-sector behavior fixed

for purposes of analysis like that above is potentially misleading.46

       Dotsey and King (1986), building on King's (1982, 1983) earlier work,

reconsidered Poole's (1970) original evaluation of interest rate versus money

stock instruments in the context of a model in which private-sector decision

makers learn from observing market prices, including nominal interest rates, and

in which inadequacies of information are by assumption the only impediment to
                                     -49-




                                             47
achieving the equilibrium level of output.        Their analysis shows that an

interest rate target rule, by which the central bank uses a feedback rule to set

Ei(r) on the basis of observed economic outcomes in period t-l, but then

allows disturbances to the economy to affect the corresponding actual

realization rt, is equivalent to a feedback rule similarly relating the value of

the money stock to observed economic outcomes. Dotsey and King also showed that

in their model either of these feedback rules in general dominates either a

fixed interest rate policy or a fixed money stock policy, so that the analogy to

Poole's original result is even more complete.

     Siegel (1985) used a much simpler model, again incorporating flexible

prices, to consider what properties make a monetary aggregate a useful

"indicator" of unobservable variables like income and prices. As in Dotsey and

King's work, but in contrast to the line of analysis in Sections I-Ill, the

presumption is that with full information the private economy on its own will

operate at equilibrium, so that the purpose of variables that provide

information is to facilitate this private-sector process rather than to enable

the central bank to assist the private sector in reaching equilibrium. Siegel

showed that monetary assets with demands that are j income elastic in general

provide the most information about both prices and real income, while monetary

assets with demands that are highly income elastic provide the most information

about nominal income. Siegel also emphasized the more familiar point that

monetary assets that are extremely closely related to the reserve base provide

little information about any endogenous variables when the central bank uses

reserves as its exogenous policy instrument. Both of these conclusions are

especially relevant in the context of the empirical literature discussed below.

Moreover, Siegel's conclusions are also favorable to simultaneously using more

than one aggregate as information variables, along the lines discussed in
                                         -50-




Section II.



What the Central Bank Did or Didn't Do

     The adoption of at least some form of monetary target for monetary policy

became widespread during the 1970s - -   at     least according to what central banks

said about their own policies. By contrast, economists and other observers of

monetary policy (both official and private) have often expressed doubts that

some central banks' adoption of such targets was more than rhetorical. Most

often, skepticism of this kind has ensued when an announced policy based on a

monetary aggregate target did not deliver the results previously claimed in

behalf of such a policy by its advocates. A logical question in that case is

whether the policy was unsuccessful or, alternatively, was simply never tried.

This issue became especially lively in the United States in the wake of the

emphasis on monetary aggregate targets which the Federal Reserve System

officially said it adopted in 1979 and abandoned in 1982.48

     An early contribution along these lines was DeRosa and Stern's (1977)

e'fort to establish whether the Federal Reserve System had adopted (at least in

part) a monetary aggregate target in 1970. Their analysis, which largely set

the pattern for future efforts along these line, involved empirically estimating

a central bank reaction function of the form



                             —
                                 t-l       -
                                                t-l'   X.1)                    (52)




where r is the change in the interest rate used as the exogenous policy

instrument, iN is the growth rate of whatever monetary aggregate is in question

as the supposed intermediate policy target, tM* is the corresponding announced

target value, and   is a vector of other variables (like price inflation or
                                       -51-




unemployment) to which monetary policy may plausibly respond.49 Addressing the

question of the adoption of a monetary target as of a specific date then amounts

to testing for a change in the reaction function coefficients, in particular the

coefficient on the (M -   M*)   term, at that point in the data sample. DeRosa

and Stern reported statistically significant evidence of such a change for the

United States in 1970.

     The subsequent literature has evolved along roughly the same lines.

Prominent examples for the U.S. case are tests by Feige and McGee (1979) and by

Lombra and Moran (1980) for Federal Reserve behavior following the 1975 adoption

of a Congression resolution calling for monetary aggregate targets, and by Hoehn

(1983) for Federal Reserve behavior during the controversial 1979-82 period. In

each case, the evidence again indicated a statistically significant change at

the time indicated.

     As Lombra and Moran emphasized, however, statistical significance and

economic significance are not always the same. In their results, for example,

the post-1975 response of the federal funds rate to observed deviations of money

growth from the corresponding target value was statistically significant, but so

small (compared to the benchmark provided by empirical estimates of the interest

elasticity of money demand) as to cast doubt on how large a role the monetary

target actually played in the Federal Reserve System's decisions setting

interest rates. This point has featured prominently in the subsequent

literature, especially since empirical estimates almost always indicate a very

small (in absolute value) interest elasticity of money demand in the short run,

so that a correspondingly large response of interest rates to observed movements

in the money stock would be necessary to correct such movements within any short

time frame.
                                     -52-




Evidence Comoarinz Alternative Target Variables

     One of the most troublesome contrasts between the world described by simple

models like those surveyed throughout this paper and the world in which actual

central banks make monetary policy is the multiplicity (in the latter) of

different deposit instruments, and hence the multiplicity of different monetary

aggregates. Before it can take advantage of the insights of a typical model

including a single variable labeled "M" and called "money," therefore, a central

bank operating in any well developed financial system must decide just which

variable "M" is. Moreover the experience of many countries has now cast strong

doubt on the proposition, sometimes offered as a way of minimizing the

importance of this choice, to the effect that all of the potential "M's"

typically move together anyway. That may be so in the context of a

hyperinflation, but in countries experiencing ordinary business fluctuations

under moderate inflation different "M's" often display widely disparate growth

rates, even for periods of several years at a time. Hence even saying whether

monetary policy is tight or easy, or has tightened or eased, often depends

crucially on which deposit aggregate is construed as "money."

     The approach that the literature has ta1en to this question is primarily

empirical, and the resulting body of available empirical research is both large

and extensive, covering different time periods and different countries and

employing a variety of statistical methodologies. Although it is not the

purpose of this paper to survey this empirical literature in any detail, it is

us   1 nonetheless to indicate how its main strands relate to the analytical

issues discussed in Sections IIII.

     By far the greatest part of this empirical research, and the part with the

longest history, has investigated the connection between alternative financial

aggregates and macroeconomic variables plausibly construed as defining the
                                      -53-




ultimate objectives of monetary policy. The earlier efforts along these lines

primarily employed the statistical methodology that grew out of the work of

Friedman and Meiselman (1963) and Andersen and Jordan (1968). The question

usually asked in this line of research is which aggregate delivers the best

"fit" when employed as K in equations of the form




                             —                                          (53)
                                      1
                                          "it-i' X1)


where Y is the growth rate of nominal income, N is the growth rate of the

aggregate, X is a vector of other variables affecting Y (frequently used

elements of X include a fiscal policy measure and a dummy variable indicating

major labor union strikes), and the w. are a set of distributed lag weights to

be estimated. Following the work of Granger (1969) and Sims (1972), however,

the question more typically asked has become not just whether some K can predict

the future variation of Y but, more specifically, whether K can predict that

part of the variation in Y not already predictable from the observed movement of

Y itself. This subsequent line of research has therefore relied on equations of

the form




                         —
                                 —1   jtj i    — 1   jt-j               (54)




where the    are distributed lag coefficients analogous to the

     Empirical research along the lines of either (53) or (54) bears a fairly

direct relation to the analytical issues under discussion in Sections I-Ill. In

either case, the object is to find the aggregate that, if employed by the

central bank as its intermediate target variable in the case of deposit or loan
                                      -54-




aggregates that are necessarily endogenous, or if employed as the exogenous

policy instrument in the case of aggregates like nonborrowed reserves or the

monetary base, would deliver a smaller variance of income about its expected

value. Further, the recognition that nominal income may be less relevant than

real income and prices separately in defining the ultimate objective of monetary

policy has often led to trivariate (and sometimes higher-order) generalizations

of (54), with separate equations for real income and prices, respectively.

     An even more traditional line of empirical work that some researchers have

also brought to bear on the selection of an aggregate for monetary policy

purposes is the estimation of money demand functions. Here the connection to

the analytical issues considered in Sections I-Ill is even more straightforward.

While equations like (53) or (54) at best represent reduced-form solutions to

the models that typically underlie the analytical side of this literature,

empirical money demand functions are, in principle, direct implementations of

equations like (9) which are clearly central to the analysis. Consequently,

empirical estimation of money demand functions can provide values of such

crucial behavioral parameters as elasticities    and    and variance       in (9).

Especially in the wake of the trend toward deregulation and private innovation

in the financial markets of many countries, the literature of empirically

estimated money demand functions has grown enormously in recent years.5'

     There has also been a substantial amount of empirical research focusing on

the relationship between alternative monetary aggregates and variables that

comprise potential exogenous instruments of monetary policy. Here what is at

issue is the monetary control problem, as outlined in Section III, and the

connection to the underlying analytical issues is typically both direct and

explicit. Much of the work along these lines has exploited empirical models of

money demand and money supply to estimate the variance that would be associated
                                     -55-




with the use of a specific instrument variable (for example, nonborrowed

reserves or the federal funds rate) to affect a given endogenous monetary

aggregate used as an intermediate target variable.52 An alternative approach,

employed by Johannes and Rasche (1979), is to use time-series methods to

estimate what amounts to a reduced-form equivalent of such models.

     Two specific aspects common to all three of these lines of empirical

research bear explicit comment as they relate to the literature of targets and

instruments of monetary policy. First, whether or not "money" exhibits

properties that bear implications for choosing a particular monetary policy

framework is increasingly not an independently testable question, at least on

the basis of historical data, because central banks can and do use the results

of statistical studies like those described above as a basis for deciding how to

define "money" in the first place.53 Second, a striking feature of this entire

field of empirical investigation is the remarkable extent to which researchers

who otherwise profess strong sympathy with Lucas' (1976) criticism of the use of

econometric models for policy purposes, on the ground that a change in policy

procedures will in general induce a change in economic behavior and will

therefore invalidate the model, have simply ignored this criticism as it applies

to these kinds of exercises as a basis for selecting the best "M".
                                         -56-




V.   Some Broader Issues

     In conclusion it is also useful to consider briefly the relationship

between the main line of analytical issues developed in the targets and

instruments literature and some other broad issues involved in the conduct of

monetary policy. The most obviously relevant among these are the traditional

issues of rules versus discretion, and of activism versus nonresponsiveness, in

the making of economic policy more genearally.54

      In a single-period context, the entire subject of targets and instruments

of monetary policy falls squarely into the general discussion of rules for

guiding policy. In this sense the choice of an exogenous policy instrument, and

in some cases also of an intermediate policy target, amounts to picking a rule

for determining how the economic system -       - here   including the actions of the

central bank -   - will   translate the various disturbances to which the economy is

subject into effects on its overall performance. Some of these implied rules

are simple. Others, including feedback rules of the kind derived in Section II,

are more complicated. In the end, however, within the context of a single

oeriod each is a rule nonetheless.

      Following the work of Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Gordon

(1983), however, the modern literature of rules versus discretion is mostly

about what happens in a dynamic context, and here the connection to the targets

and instruments literature is less straightforward. Is the central bank

presumed to make the same choice of instrument variable (and intermediate target

variable, if any) in each period? What       aspects     of the economy's condition

inherited from the previous period does it take into account in defining the

objective which motivates its actions in each period? What kind of feedback

rules does it employ in relating the value of its instrument (and its

intermediate target, if any) to those conditions? In what way does its
                                            -57-




objective take account of the implications of its current actions for future

time periods?       The relationship between the issues reviewed in Sections I-Ill

and the rules versus discretion debate hinges importantly on the answers to

questions like these.

      One line of thinking that implicitly addresses many of these questions,

clearly articulated by Tobin (1983), for example, is that in the world of actual

policymaking "rules" necessarily mean simple rules. In that case the analytical

issues reviewed in this paper do bear quite directly on the rules versus

discretion debate, since the typical outcome of the line of analysis surveyed

here is to demonstrate the inferiority in general of simple rules -            - fix   the

reserve base, fix an interest rate, fix the expected value of the money stock,

and so on - - compared to rules specifying responses that take account of at

least some of the available information about the disturbances affecting

economic behavior. If rules must be simple ones, therefore, the targets and

instruments literature not only demonstrates the qualitative inferiority of

rules but provides guidelines for quantifying that inferiority. Nevertheless,

the issue remains open, not only because of questions about the empirical

magnitudes involved but also because others who have thought about these issues

--   for   example, MeCallum (1985) -    - reject   the view that rules must be simple in

order      to be practically relevant.

       The literature of targets and instruments of monetary policy is also

closely related to the issue of activism versus nonresponsiveneSs.

Nonresponsiveness essentially means a simple rule -          - fix   this, or fix that - -

while      activism means responding to initial conditions, or to evidence of

disturbances, according to one feedback rule or another. Even so, because the

nonresponsive rules that have attracted the most attention over the years               have

typically referred to some endogenous variable like money, rather than to some
                                          -58-




variable that the central bank can set directly (like nonborrowed reserves), in

the end the real question is not whether or not to respond to anything at all

but rather which classes of phenomena merit a response and which do not. This

kind of question is clearly at the analytical heart of the targets and

instruments literature surveyed in Sections I-Ill.

     Framing the issue in this way also makes clear the limited applicability       of

Friedman's (1953) classic criticism of activist policy on the ground that

varying policy from the no-response, or base, position in general introduces

uncertainty, and with sufficient ignorance may introduce sufficient uncertainty

to increase the variance of the policy objective rather than reduce it. The

targets and instruments literature brings to center attention the problem of

defining the base position in the first place in a stochastic environment. Does

it refer to an interest rate, to the reserve base, or to money? Does it refer

to levels or to changes of whatever variable is at issue?

     Analysis along the lines of the targets and instruments literature

indicates how to answer such questions on the basis of any given model, and

typically any given model will imply that in general at least some degree of

 responsiveness dominates a purely nonresponsive policy, even after allowing for

uncertainty surrounding the model's coefficients as illustrated by Brainard

 (1967). Although many economists have argued as if an even deeper level of

 uncertainty -   - in   particular, ignorance about what is the right model - - somehow

 implies that fixing some measure of money constitutes the appropriate definition

 of the base position for purposes of this issue, there is no obvious reason to

 accept this presumption. In the absence of at least some articulated model

 indicating the likely implications of the central bank's policy actions for its

 policy objectives, no conclusions of this kind are possible at all. There is no

 more reason for presuming that qualitative propositions about "money" uniquely
                                        -59-




survive the absence of a model than for the presumption that empirical evidence

involving "money" uniquely survives Lucas (1976) point about public policy and

private behavior.

     Finally, although it is easy enough as a matter of abstract analysis to

discuss all of these aspects of monetary policy as if "policy" and "politics"

did not have the same root, political considerations are hardly irrelevant to

the issues involved in the targets and instruments literature. A frequently

expressed motivation underlying the intermediate target strategy -    - articulated
by Poole (1980), for example --   is   to provide a mechanism enabling higher

governmental authorities as well as the general public to hold the central bank

politically accountable for its conduct of monetary policy. Whether this

argument is compelling must in the end depend both upon the quantitative degree

of inferiority of the intermediate target strategy compared to a given

alternative, determined along the lines analyzed here, and on the risks and

consequences associated with the relevant central bank decision makers may do in

the absence of such an accountability mechanism. That these risks and

consequences are difficult to specify does not necessarily make them less real.

At least thus far, however, this difficulty has largely prevented the

development of any substantial body of monetary policy research incorporating

them.
                                        -60-




                                      Footnotes

     *This paper was prepared for the Handbook Q. Monetary Economics (B.M.

Friedman and F. Hahn, eds.), North-Holland Publishing Company, forthcoming.      I


am grateful to Alan Viard for research assistance, and to the National Science

Foundation and the Harvard Program for Financial Research for research support.



1.   See the treatment of rules versus discretion in Stanley Fischer's

     contribution to this Handbook.



2.   See, for example, the useful surveys by Cagan (1982) and McCallum (1985),

     and the more recent references cited in Friedman and Kuttner (1988)



3.   See the treatment of monetary policy in open economies in Rudiger Dornbusch

     and Alberto Giovannini's contribution to this Handbook.



4.   Throughout the remainder of this paper, "banks" will be taken to include

     all financial intermediaries making loans and taking deposits subject to

     reserve requirements set by the central bank or a parallel regulatory body.



5.   In some countries, direct lending of reserves --   the   "discount window' --

     is   also of substantial importance. More typically, however, variations in

     discount policy are considered significant largely to the extent that they

     are signals of intended future open market operations. See Lombra and

     Torto (1977) for evidence pertinent to the U.S. case.



6.   See, for example, Cagan's (1978) review of the billionist controversy in

     England in the nineteenth century, and Friedman and Schwartz's (1963)
                                        -61-




     account of the debate over gold (or bimetallic) standards in the United

     States.




7.   This idea was familiar in a less formal way earlier on, however. For

     example, the debate between Friedman and Meiselman (1963, 1965) and Ando

     and Modigliani (1965a, 1965b), over the relative stability of the

     money-income and investment-multiplier relations, was clearly in part about

     the usefulness of money as a target of monetary policy, although neither

     side expressed the issues in Poole's terms of IS and LM curve variances.

     See also Brunner and Meltzer (1964, 1967, 1969) and the papers in Federal

     Reserve Bank of Boston (1969) for key pre-1970 contributions.



8.   These conventions of notation --    all   constants set to zero, lower-case

     variables in logarithmic form and interpreted as deviations from

     equilibrium values, all coefficients non-negative --      will   be maintained

     throughout the paper.



9.   If a2 — a2 —   0, the problem is trivial and either instrument implies
     E(y2) —   0.


10. See Tobin (1983) for a useful intuitive discussion along these lines.



11. For examples of applications to these specific contexts see Aizenmann and

     Frenkel (1985), Gray (1976) and Fischer (l977b).



12. Sargent and Wallace also demonstrated that under rational expectations the

     real interest rate                           is invariant with respect to such
                                        -62-




       choice of m.



13. Standard references on this subject include Modigliani (1963)     and Patinkin

       (1965). Although the more recent literature has focused on explicit (and

       analytically tractable) rigidities like contracts specifying fixed nominal

       wages, it is more plausible to regard wage and price rigidities of a more

       implicit nature as pervasive throughout the economy; see, for example,

       Fischer (1980)



14. To recall, all constants are suppressed, so that (21) gives equilibrium

       values stated as percentage deviations around the corresponding

       deterministic values that would obtain with z —   0.



15. Alternatively, if the zero-mean property of z were taken to imply Ei
                                                                               u   -
              —   0, then (21) would be unaltered but (22) would be r —   a1
       l+a +9
                               z.




16. Fischer (1985) used a similar model assuming         — 1 and 9 — 0 to argue that

                                                                                        but
        the optimal money supply policy is unresponsive to supply disturbances,

        that result is clearly a special case. For more general values of              and


        9,    may be positive or negative.



 17.    In other words, the solution shown here rests on the assumption that the

        three disturbances are independent.



 18. As is familiar, in both cases r — 0 shields x from any disturbance to money
                                     -63-




    demand while m — 0 exposes x to the money demand disturbance but damps the

    spending disturbance.



19. Alternatively, the assumption .2 —   mn   {1S .2d} would lead to a criterion

     that switched according to 2d



20. The role of rigid nominal wages in providing this impediment to equilibrium

     (and hence a source of policy non-neutrality) makes clear the intimate

     connection between the problem of choosing a monetary policy instrument

     with the degree of wage indexation (here zero) taken as given, and the

     problem of choosing a wage indexation system with the conduct of monetary

     policy taken as given. This equivalence is explicit, for example,     in Karn

     (1983), Aizenmann and Frenkel (1986) and Turnovsky (1987).



21. For example, Brunner and Meltzer (1964, 1972,     1976 and elsewhere) have

     consistently taken this approach.



22. To be strictly accurate, what economists usually construe as     nonborrowed

     reserves (or the nonborrowed monetary base) is not a quantity directly set

     by the central bank either. In the United States, for example, such
                                                                          Banks,
     technical factors as float, Treasury deposits at Federal Reserve
                                                                     and accounts ot
     Federal Reserve holdings of foreign currencies, gold flows,

      foreign central banks all stand between the economist's concept and the

      quantity directly altered by the Federal Reserve's securities transactions
                                                                 reserves on a
      Moreover, economists almost always refer to nonborrowed

      seasonally adjusted basis, and on a basis adjusted to reflect changes in

      reserve requirements. Omitting such matters from attention in a survey
                                          -64-




        like this reflects the usual presumption that, over whatever is the minimum

        time   horizon that matters for macroeconomic purposes, the central bank can

        successfully offset such factors to within a tolerance sufficient to allow

        analysts outside the central bank to neglect them altogether.



23. As in the Poole analysis reviewed in Section I, in general the policy that

        minimizes the variance of income is to supply reserves with some non-zero

        yet finite elasticity.



24. Jith zero expectations for all three disturbances, the policy consistent

        with E(m) — 0 would be just r — 0 or h —   0.


25. Specifically, the variance E1(y) that follows from (35) or (36) is in

        general greater than the corresponding variance given in (37) or (38),

        respectively.



-   .   A plausible reason is that the analytical shortcomings of using money as an

        intermediate target variable were already known before the use of

        supply-demand models for the analysis of monetary policy issues became

        widespread.



27. Hall's (1984) work, discussed below, makes this concept explicit; some

        proponents of nominal income targeting appear to have based their advocacy

        of the idea on just this notion. Others, like Tobin (1983) and McCallum

         (1984), have relied more on the stochastic structure of aggregate supply

        behavior. See the discussion below.
                                              -65-




28.   If the expectations of all disturbances are zero, then r — 0 or h — 0

      implies E(p) — E(x + p) — 0, and targeting prices or nominal income is

      indistinguishable from any other kind of policy.



29. The usual interpretation of an aggregate demand function like (41) is as a

      solved-out IS-LM system. If the underlying spending and money demand

      relations are as in (8) and (9), then (apart from price expectations)

                   a1
       —                     and e — __________
                                          +       (2u
                                                        -
                                                            a1v).     Alternatively, allowing
           a11.1        '2           a11 2
      for the endogeneity of money as in the analysis above based on the

      demand-only model would require writing (41) as x —                  (61h
                                                                                    -
                                                                                         p) + e, which
      can similarly be interpreted as a solved-out version of (8), (9) and (31)

                                a1                   2 +     62)
                                                                    u -    (v   -
                                                                                    q)
      where now          —                 and e —                                         Use of


      either version, of course, presumes that the central bank does not choose r

      as the policy instrument.



30. The minimum value 2 is in general non-zero because of the white-noise

      components of z and e, and the one-period innovations to the random walk

      components of z and e.



31. Bean did not consider the further problem associated with the endogeneity

      of most plausible definitions of "money." See again footnote 29.



32. West's result is both necessary and sufficient, while Bean's is merely

      sufficient, because of the simpler structure of West's model. Instead of

      (14), West used the aggregate supply function in (10), with adaptive price

      expectations as the device rendering monetary policy non-neutral. (West
                                     -66-




    showed that it is the difference in objective, not the difference in supply

    behavior, which accounts for the difference between his result and Bean's.)



33. See for, example, Cooper and Fischer (1972a, 1972b).



34. Leroy and Waud (1977) made the dynamic nature of this approach still more

    explicit by drawing the analogy between the use of an information variable

     and Kalman filtering.



35. Tobin (1970) is the classic statement of the objection to money as an

     intermediate target based on questions of causation.



36. What remains, of course, is the question of whether the results of

     Granger-Sims tests, based on data from a sample in which the central bank

     conducted monetary policy under one set of principles, continue to be

     pertinent after a change in those principles. See Lucas (1976) and Sims

     (1982) for opposing viewpoints on this issue.



37. Hall's (1984) "elastic price standard" is an exception.



38. A further question in this context is why restrict the information

     variables to financial ones. Unlike the intermediate target strategy, the

     information variable strategy can in general be centered on nonfinancial

     variables. Although this point is familiar enough (see, for example, B.

     Friedman (1984a)), the literature to date has not explored in a formal way

     the possibility of feedback rules based explicitly on nonfinancial sources

     of information.
                                         -67-




39.   It is also straightforward to calculate the optimal elasticity of reserves

      supply, analogous to Poole's optimal elasticity of money supply in (6)

      that will in general dominate either r — 0 or h — 0.



40. Because systematic monetary policy does not affect real variables in their

      model, the only basis for choosing a target value for the money stock is

      presumably to influence prices. The basic flaw in the intermediate target

      strategy still obtains, however.



41. A possible exception here is the large literature on institutional

      arrangements facilitating (more typically, impeding) the coordination of

      monetary and fiscal policies. That subject lies beyond the scope of this

      survey, however.



42. In most models the same conclusion would hold for the choice of a policy

      instrument to affect prices or (with a source of nonneutrality) income.



43. For example, the U.S. case which motivated McCallum and Hoehn's analysis

      involved a two-week lag. By contrast, the shortest time period introduced

      in macroeconomic discussions along the lines of (8)-(l0) is usually one

      calendar quarter, and it is often much longer. Subsequently, the Federal

      Reserve System shortened the lag to two days, but this change did not put

      an end to analysis of its operations as a lagged reserve requirement; see,

      for example, Goodfriend (1984).



44. Even so, given the traditional importance of this subject in both academic

      and practical discussions of monetary policy it is surprising how little
                                        -68-




      literature has arisen examining such potential effects. Two exceptions are

      Johnson (1981) and Friedman (1982b).



45. See also Higgins (1982), Radecki (1984) and Lane (1984).



46. The   basic   point here is related to Lucas' (1976) criticism of economic

      policymaking based on econometric models, but here it is more general in

      form in that what changes is private agents' information sets. A more

      direct application of Lucas' point is Walsh's (1984) analysis of the

      consequences of the choice of instrument variable for money demand

      behavior.



47. In other words, no nominal rigidity provides a source of nonneutrality like

      that considered in Sections 1 and II.



48. See, for example, the discussion among B. Friedman (1984b), M. Friedman

      (1984) and McCallum (1984).



49. Conceptual antecedents of this procedure are Reuber (1964) and Friedlaender

      (1973). The switch to upper-case notation here reflects the fact that

      variables are not necessarily in logarithms, and do not necessarily bear

      the interpretation of deviations from deterministic base values.



50. For references to many of the specific contributions over the years, see

      again Cagan (1982) and McCallum (1985).



51.   See, for example, the papers cited by Judd and Scadding (1982) and, more
                                        -69-




      recently, Roley (1985).



52.   See, for example, Pindyck and Roberts (1976).



53. See, for example, the empirical evidence presented by Simpson et al. (1979)

      in   support of the Federal Reserve System's 1980 redefinition of the U.S.

      monetary aggregates.



54. Again see the review of these issues in Stanley Fischer's contribution to

      this Handbook.
                                    -70-




                                 References



Aizenmann, Joshua, and Frenkel, Jacob A. "Optimal Wage Indexation, Foreign
     Exchange Intervention, and Monetary Policy." American Economic Review,
     75 (June, 1985), 402-423.

Aizenmann, Joshua, and Frenkel, Jacob A. "Supply Shocks, Wage Indexation,
     and Monetary Accommodation." Journal of Money. Credit and Bankinz,
     18 (August, 1986), 304-322.

Andersen, Leonall C., and Jordan, Jerry L.  "Monetary and Fiscal Actions: A
     Test of Their Relative Importance in Economic Stabilization." Federal
     Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Economic Journal (November, 1968), 11-24.

Ando, Albert, and Modigliani, Franco. "The Relative Stability of Monetary
     Velocity and the Investment Multiplier." American Economic Review, 55
     (September, l965a), 693-728.

Ando, Albert, and Modigliani, Franco. "Rejoinder." American Economic Review,
     55 (September, l965b), 786-790.

Barro, Robert J., and Cordon, David B. "Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in a
     Model of Monetary Policy." Journal of Monetary Economics, 12 (July, 1983),
     101-121.

Bean, Charles R. "Targeting Nominal Income: An Appraisal." Economic Journal,
     93 (December, 1983), 806-819.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Gertler, Mark. "Agency Costs, Collateral, and Business
     Fluctuations." Mijneo: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1986.

Blinder, Alan S., and Stiglitz, Joseph E.  "Money, Credit Constraints, and
     Economic Activity." American Economic Review, 73 (May, 1983), 297-302.

Brainard, William. "Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy." American
     Economic Review, 57 (May, 1967), 411-425.

Brunner, Karl, and Meltzer, Allan H.  "The Federal Reserve's Attachment to the
     Free Reserve Concept." U.S. Congress, House Committee on Banking and
     Currency, Subcommittee on Domestic Finance. 88th Congress, 2nd Session.
     Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964.

Brunner, Karl, and Meltzer, Allan H. "The Meaning of Monetary Indicators."
     Horwich (ed.), Monetary Process and Policy: Symposium. Homewood: Richard
     D. Irwin, 1967.

Brunner, Karl, and Meltzer, Allan H.   "The Nature of the Policy Problem."
     Brunner (ed.), Targets and Indicators of Monetary Policy. San Francisco:
     Chandler Publishing Company, 1969.

Brunner, Karl, and Meltzer, Allan H. "Money, Debt, and Economic Activity."
     Journal of Political Economy, 80 (September/October, 1972), 951-977.
                                       -71-




Brunner, Karl, and Meltzer, Allan H. "An Aggregative Theory for a Closed
     Economy." Stein (ed.), Monetarism. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing
     Company, 1976.

Cagan, Phillip. "Monetarism in Historical Perspective." Mayer et al. ,
     Structure of Monetarism. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1978.
Cagan, Phillip. "The Choice Among Monetary Aggregates as Targets and Guides
     for Monetary Policy." Journal of Money. Credit, and Banking, 14 (November,
     1982, Part 2), 661-686.

Ciccolo, John H.  "Is Short-run Monetary Control Feasible?" Federal Reserve
     Bank of New York, Monetary Aggregates and Monetary Policy. New York:
     1974.

Cooper, J. Phillip, and Fischer, Stanley. "Simulations of Monetary Rules in
     the FRB-MIT-Penn Model." Journal of Money. Credit, and Banking, 4 (May,
     l972a), 384-396.

Cooper, J. Phillip, and Fischer, Stanley. "Stochastic Simulation of Monetary
     Rules in Two Macroeconornetric Models." Journal of the American Statistical
     Association, 67 (December, 1972b), 750-760.

Davis, Richard G. "Short-run Targets for Open Market Operations." Board of
     Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Open Market Policies and Operating
     Procedures -- Staff Studies. Washington: 1971.

DeRosa, Paul and Stern, Gary H. "Monetary Control and the Federal Funds Rate."
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 3 (April, 1977), 217-230.

Dotsey, Michael, and King, Robert G. "Informational Implications of Interest
     Rate Rules." American Economic Review, 76 (March, 1986), 33-42.

Enzler, Jared, and Johnson, Lewis. "Cycles Resulting from Money Stock
     Targeting." Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, New Monetry
     Control Procedures. Vol. I. Washington: 1981

Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. Controlling Monetary Aggregates. Boston:
     1969.

Fiege, Edgar L., and McGee, Robert. "Has the Federal Reserve Shifted from a
     Policy of Interest Rate Targets to a Policy of Monetary Aggregate Targets?"
     Journal of Money. Credit, and Banking, 11 (November, 1979), 381-404.

Freedman, Charles. "Some Theoretical Aspects of Base Control." Purvis (ed),
     The Canadian Balance of Payments: Perspectives and Policy Issues.
     Montreal: Institute for Research on Public Policy, 1983.

Fischer, Stanley. "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal
     Money Supply Role." Journal of Political Economy, 85 (February, l977a),
     91-205.

Fischer, Stanley. "Long-term Contracting, Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy:
     A Comment." Journal of Monetary Economics, 3 (July, l977b), 317-323.
                                     -72-




Fischer, Stanley. "On Activist Monetary Policy with Rational Expectations."
     Fischer (ed.), Rational Expectations and Economic Policy. Chicago:
     University of Chicago Press, 1980.

Fischer, Stanley, "Supply Shocks, Wage Stickiness, and Accommodation." Journal
     of Money. Credit, and Banking, 17 (February, 1985), 1-15.

Friedlander, Anne F. "Macro Policy Goals and Revealed Preference." Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 87 (February, 1973), 25-43.

Friedman, Benjamin M. "Targets, Instruments, and Indicators of Monetary
     Policy." Journal of Monetary Economics, 1 (October, 1975), 443-473.

Friedman, Benjamin M. "The Inefficiency of Short-run Monetary Targets for
     Monetary Policy." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, (No. 2, 1977),
     293-335.

Friedman, Benjamin M. "Time to Reexamine the Monetary Targets Framework."
     Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, New England Economic Review (March/April,
     1982a), 15-23.

Friedman, Benjamin M. "Federal Reserve Policy, Interest Rate Volatility, and
     the U.S. Capital Raising Mechanism." Journal of Money. Credit, and
     Banking, 14 (November, 1982b, Part 2), 721-745.

Friedman, Benjamin M. "The Roles of Money and Credit in Macroeconomic
     Analysis." Tobin (ed.), Macroeconomics. Prices and Quantities: Essays in
     Memory of Arthur M. Okun. Washington: The Brookings Institution, 1983.

Friedman, Benjamin M. "Lessons from the 1979-82 Monetary Policy Experiment."
     American Economic Review, 74 (May, 1984a), 382-387.

Friedman, Benjamin M. "The Value of Intermediate Targets in Implementing
     Monetary Policy." Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Price Stability and
     Public Policy. Kansas City: 1984b.

Friedman, Benjamin M., and Kuttner, Kenneth N. "Money, Income and Prices After
     the l98Os." Mjmeo: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1988.

Friedman, Milton. "The Effects of a Full-Employment Policy on Economic
     Stability: A Formal Anlysis." Friedman, Essays in Positive Economics.
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1953.

Friedman, Milton. "Lessons from the 1979-82 Monetary Policy Experiment."
     American Economic Review, 74 (May, 1984), 397-400.

Friedman, Milton, and Meiselman, David. "The Relative Stability of Monetary
     Velocity and the Investment Multiplier in the United States, 1897-1958."
     Commission on Money and Credit, Stabilizations Policies. Englewood Cliffs:
     Prentice-Hall, 1963.

Friedman, Milton, and Meiselman, David. "Reply to Ando and Modigiliani and to
     DePrano and Mayer." American Economic Review, 55 (September, 1965),
    753-785.
                                     -73-




Friedman, Milton, and Schwartz, Anna Jacobson. A Monetary History of the United
     States. 1867-1960. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1963.

Goodfriend, Marvin. "Discount Window Borrowing, Monetary Policy, and the post-
     October 6, 1979 Federal Reserve Operating Procedure." Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 12 (September, 1983), 343-356.

Goodfriend, Marvin. "The Promises and Pitfalls of Contemporaneous Reserve
     Requirements for the Implementation of Monetary Policy." Federal Reserve
     Bank of Richmond, Economic Review, 70 (May/June, 1984), 3-12.

Granger, Clive W. J. "Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and
     Cross Spectral Methods." Econometrica, 37 (July, 1969), 424-438.

Gray, Jo Anna. "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach." Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 2 (April, 1976), 221-235.

Guttentag, Jack F. "The Strategy of Open Market Operations." quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 80 (February, 1966), 1-30.

Hall, Robert E.  "Monetary Policy with an Elastic Price Standard." Federal
     Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Price Stability and Public Policy. Kansas
     City: 1984.

Higgins, Bryon. "Should the Federal Reserve Fine Tune Monetary Growth?"
     Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review (January, 1982), 3-16.

Hoehn, James C. "Recent Monetary Control Procedures and the Response of
     Interest Rates to Fluctuations in Money Growth." Federal Reserve Bank of
     Dallas, Economic Review (September, 1983), 1-10.

Holbrook, Robert S.  "Optimal Economic Policy and the Problem of Instrument
     Instability." American Economic Review, 62 (March, 1972), 57-65.

Johannes, James M., and Rasche, Robert H. "Predicting the Money Multiplier."
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 5 (July, 1979), 301-325.

Johnson, Dana, and others. "Interest Rate Variability under the New Operating
     Procedures and the Initial Response in Financial Markets." Board of
     Governors of the Federal Reserve System, New Monetary Control Procedures.
     Vol. I. Washington: 1981.

Judd, John P., and Scadding, John L.   "The Search for a Stable Money Demand
     Function: A Survey of the Post-l973 Literature." Journal of Economic
     Literature, 20 (September, 1982), 993-1023.

Kareken, John H., Muench, Thomas, and Wallace, Neil. "Optimal Open Market
     Strategy: The Use of Information Variables." American Economic Review, 63
     (March, 1973), 156-172.
                                                                           91
Karni, Edi. "On Optimal Wage Indexation." Journal of Political Economy,
     (April, 1983), 282-292.

King, Robert C. "Monetary Policy and the Information Content of Prices."
                                     -74-




    Journal of Political Economy, 90 (April, 1982), 247-279.

King, Robert G.  "On the Economics of Private Money." Journal of Monetary
     Economics, 12 (July, 1983), 127-185.

Kydland, Finn E., and Prescott, Edward C. "Rules Rather than Discretion:
     The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans." Journal of Political Economy, 85
     (June, 1977), 473-491.

Lane, Timothy D. "Instrument Instability and Short-term Monetary Control."
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 14 (September, 1984), 209-224.

LeRoy, Stephen F., and Waud, Roger N.  "Applications of the Kalman Filter in
     Short-Run Monetary Control." International Economic Review, 18 (February,
     1977), 195-207.

Levin, Fred, and Meek, Paul. "Implementing the New Procedures: The View from
     the Trading Desk." Board of Covenors of the Federal Reserve System,
     Monetary Control Procedures. Vol. I. Washington: 1981.

Lombra, Raymond, and Moran, Michael. "Policy Advice and Policymaking at the
     Federal Reserve." Brunner and Meltzer (eds.), Monetary Institutions and
     the Policy Process. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1980.

Lombra, Raymond E., and Torto, Raymond C. "Discount Rate Changes and
     Announcement Effects." quarterly Journal of Economics, 91 (February,
     1977), 171-176.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money." Journal of
     Economic Theory, 4 (April, 1972), 103-124.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation
     Tradeoffs." American Economic Review, 63 (June, 1973), 326-334.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique." Brunner
     and Meltzer (eds.), The Phillios Curve and Labor Markets. Amsterdam:
     North-Holland Publishing Company, 1976.

McCallum, Bennett T. "Price Level Determinancy with an Interest Rate Policy
     Rule and Rational Expectations." Journal of Monetary Economics, 8
     (November, 1981), 319-329.

McCallum, Bennett T. "Monetarist Rules in the Light of Recent Experience."
     American Economic Review, 74 (May, 1984) 388-391.

McCallum, Bennett T. "On Consequences and Criticisms of Monetary Targeting."
     Journal of Money. Credit, and Banking, 17 (November, 1985, Part 2),
     570-597.

McCallum, Bennett T. and Hoehn, James C. "Instrument Choice for Money Stock
     Control with Contemporaneous and Lagged Reserve Requirements." Journal of
     Money. Credit, and Bpnkjnz, 15 (February, 1983), 96-101.

Modigliani, Franco. "The Monetary Mechanism and its Interaction with Real
                                    -75-




     Phenomena." Review of Economics and Statistics, 45 (February, 1963,
     Part 2), 79-107.

Modigliani, Franco, Rasche, Robert, and Cooper, J. Phillip. "Central Bank
     Policy, the Money Supply, and the Short-term Rate of Interest." Journal of
     Money. Credit. and Banking, 2 (May, 1970), 166-218.

Modigliani, Franco, and Papademos, Lucas D. "The Structure of Financial
     Markets and the Monetary Mechanism." Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
     Controlling Monetary Aggrezates III. Boston: 1983.

Patinkin, Don. Money. Interest, and Prices; an Integration of Monetary and
     Value Theory. New York: Harper and Row, 1965.

Phelps, Edmund S., and Taylor, John B. "Stabilizing Powers of Monetary Policy
     Under Rational Expectations." Journal of Political Economy, 85 (February,
     1977), 163-190.

Pierce, James L., and Thomson, Thomas D. "Some Issues in Controlling the Stock
     of Money." Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Controllinz Monetary Agzrezates
     II; The Implementation. Boston: 1972.

Pindyck, Robert S., and Roberts, Steven M. "Instruments, Intermediate Targets,
     and Monetary Controllability." International Economic Review, 17 (October,
     1976), 627-650.

Poole, William "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instrument in a Simple
     Stochastic Macro Model." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84 (May, 1970),
     197-216.

Poole, William. Comments on James Tobin, "Stabilization Policy Ten Years
     After." Brookings Papers, on Economic Activity (No. 1, 1980), 79-85.

Poole, William, and Lieberman, Charles. "Improving Monetary Control."
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (No. 2, 1972), 293-335.

Radecki, Lawrence J.  "Targeting in a Dynamic Model."   Federal Reserve Bank of
     New York, Quarterly Review (Summer 1984), 9-15.

Reuber, Grant L.  "The Objectives of Canadian Monetary Policy, 1949-61:
     Empirical 'Trade-offs' and the Reaction Function of the Authorities."
     Journal of Political Economy, 72 (April, 1964), 109-132.

Roley, Vance. "Money Demand Predictability." Journal of Money. Credit, and
     Banking, 17 (November, 1985, Part 2), 611-641.

Santomero, Anthony M. "Controlling Monetary Aggregates: The Discount Window."
     The Journal of Finance, 38 (June, 1983), 827-844.

Sargent, Thomas J., and Wallace, Neil. "Rational Expectations, the Optimal
     Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule." Journal of
     Political Economy, 83 (April, 1975), 241-254.

Siegel, Jeremy J. "Monetary Aggregates as Indicators of Economic Activity:
                                     -76-




    A Theoretical Analysis." Mimeo. University of Pennsylvania, 1985.

Simpson, Thomas D., et al. "A Proposal for Redefining the Monetary Aggregates."
     Federal Reserve Bulletin, 65 (January, 1979), 13-42.

Sims, Christopher A.  "Money, Income, and Causality." American Economic Review,
     62 (September, 1972), 540-552.

Sims, Christopher A. "Policy Analysis with Econometric Models."   Brookinzs
     Pat,ers on Economic Activity. (No. 1, 1982), 107-152.

Taylor, John B. "What Would Nominal Income Targetting Do to the Business
     Cycle?" Brunner and Meltzer (eds.), Understanding Monetary Reirses.
     Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1985.

Tinbergen, Jan. On the Theory of Economics Policy. Amsterdam:     North-Holland
     Publishing Co., 1952.

Tinsley, Peter A., Fries, Gerhard, Garrett, Bonnie, and von zur Muehlen, Peter.
     "Appendix C - - Estimated Monetary Policy Consequences of Reserve Accounting
     Procedures." Mimeo: Federal Reserve Board, September, 1981.

Tobin, James. "Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?" Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 84 (May, 1970), 301-317.

Tobin, James. "Monetary Policy: Rules, Targets, and Shocks." Journal of
     Money. Credit, and Banking, 15 (November, 1983), 506-518.

Turnovsky, Stephen J. "Supply Shocks and Optimal Monetary Policy."
     Oxford Economic Paoers, 39 (March, 1987), 20-37.

Walsh, Carl E. "Interest Rate Volatility and Monetary Policy." Journal of
     Money. Credit. and Banking, 16 (May, 1984), 133-150.

West, Kenneth D. "Targeting Nominal Income: A Note." Mimeo: National Bureau
     for Economic Research, 1986.
