                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       THE ESTIMATION OF PREWAR GNP:
                       METHODOLOGY AND NEW EVIDENCE




                              Nathan S. Balke

                              Robert 3. Gordon




                           Working Paper No. 2674




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF EGONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Maasachuaetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 August 1988




The authors are, respectively, Assistant Professor of Economica at Southern
Methodist University and Stanley G. Harris Professor in the Social Sciences
at Northwestern University.  They are indebted to the National Science
Foundation and the Sloan Foundation for financial support, to Moses
Abraaovitz, Brad DeLong, Ian Domowits, Solomon Fabricant, Robert Gallaan,
Chriatina Romer, Mark Watson, and David Weir for stimulating correspondence
and discussions, to Gabriel Sensenbrenner for help with the regressions and
graphs, and to members of the Northwestern Economic History Workshop for
constructive suggestions. Ihey owe special thanks to James 3. Heckman, whose
insightful comments and editorial instructions redirected their earlier
research toward its present aryle, format, and new substantive results. This
research is part of NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations. Any
                                                                       Bureau
opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National
of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #2674
                                         August 1988


                         THE ESTIMATION OF PREWAR ON?;
                         METHODOLOGY AND NEW EVIDENCE


                                    ABSTRACT


     The paper develops new siethodology for the estimation of prewar GNP,

taps previously unused data sources,   and develops new estimates for the

periods 1869-08 and 1869-28.    Primary among the new data sources are direct

measures of output in the transportation,    communications,   and construction

           and estimates of the consumer price index.    New measures of real
sectors,

GNP, nominal GNP, and the ON? deflator are developed.      The new estimates

of real ON? are as volatile on average over the business cycle as the trad-

itional Kuznets-Kendrick aeries but dampen the amplitude of some cycles

while raising the amplitude of others.      The new estimates of the ON?

deflator are distinctly less volatile than the traditional series and in

fact no more volatile than in the postwar period.




Nathan S. Balke                             Robert J. Gordon
Department of Economics                     Department of Economics
Southern Methodist University               Northwestern University
Dallas, TX 75275                            Evanston, IL 60208
                                                        GNP Volatility,   Paga   ].




                                  I.    IN'rRODUCTION



    Until recently,      one of the   least controversial stylized facts    in

macroeconomic history was the reduced volatility of output in the U. S. after
                                                                      American
World War II.     Indeed, Arthur Burns (1960) devoted his entire 1959

Economic Association Presidential Address to explaining the phenomenon of a

more stable postwar economy.      The real GNP data upon which Burns relied had

been developed in the preceding three decades primarily by Simon Kuznets
                                                                were subsequently
(1938, 1941, 1946, 1961), whose pioneering contributions

extended,    revised,   and converted into our present National Income and Product

Accounts (NIPA) by the Department of Commerce for the period since 1929 and

for the period before 1929 were subsequently revised by Robert Gallman (1966)

and reworked to be consistent with Commerce definitions        by John Kendrick

(196l).l

     Innumerable    studies of important macroeconomic relationships       have been

based on these "standard"      output series.   Among these are the well-known

studies of money and output by Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz (1963, 1982).

Other examples include the research on the division of nominal GNP changes

between inflation and quantity changes by Schultze (1981, 1986) and Cordon
                                                                         after
(1980, 1982).      Taking for granted the reduction of output volatility

World War II, John Taylor (1986) has argued that stability was achieved

destte      the greater persistence of price movements that tends to make output

less stable, while Bradford DeLong and Lawrence Summers (1986) claim that, on
                                                                            to
the contrary,    greater postwar price persistence has contributed directly

output stability.
                                                          GNP Volatility, Page 2



        Recently the stylized fact of postwar stabilization has been disputed in

a series of papers by Christina Romer (1986a, 1986b, 1987a, l987b), which

argue that the volatility of industrial production,          unemployment, and real GNP
after 1947 is little different than before 1929 when revised measures are used

(the high volatility of the economy in the 1930s is not disputed). Stimulated

by the challenge of Romer's work to traditional output measures, this paper

provides a new methodological analysis of output estimation that can be

applied to any situation where data are signficantly worse prior to some

"borderline"      date than afterwards.   What is the best statistical procedure for

using the superior information available after the borderline date to

"backcast" key variables for the pre-borderlineperiod? We apply the analysis

in the development of new estimates of U.        S.   GNP for the period 1869-1908, but

it is equally applicable to the creation of annual real GNP or price estimates

prior to 1869 in the U. S., or in any other country prior to some borderline

date when the coverage of available data exhibits a marked improvement.


Contribution of This Pacer

        Our methodological discussion compares the alternative "components' and

"indicators"      approaches to backcasting real GNP before a borderline date,

e.g.,    1909 in the subsequent empirical analysis.       We show that the components

method makes better use of the available information, some of which is

discarded by the indicators method, and examine the circumstances in which

measurement error could offset this advantage of the components method.

        Our   empirical   section develops new estimates of real CNP by both the

components and indicators methods for the period 1869-1908.          These estimates

go beyond the work of Kuznets, Galiman, Kendrick, and Romer, in three
                                                     CNP Volatility,   Page 3



directions.     First, unlike prior research that develops estimates of

noncommodity output entirely from an assumed ratio or regression relationship

to commodity output, we include direct measures of output in the construction,

transportation,    and commun&cations sectors in addition to that in the

commodity-producingsecto'        Second, both our components and indicators

estimates    of real GNP take advantage of the painstaking research by Ethel

Hoover (1960) and Albert Rees (1961) on prices actually paid by consumers

during the period prior to World War     I.   Third, because no previous estimate

of the GNP deflator before 1919 has made use of the Hoover-Rees CPI studies,

we develop new estimates of the GNP deflator and the implied time series of

nominal CNP to complement our new real GNP series.

     Our substantive conclusions are striking.      Our new real GNP series is as

volatile as the standard Kuznets-Kendrickseries, but our new series behaves

differently over individual business cycles, with cycles of smaller amplitude

in some episodes snd s greater amplitude in others.       Perhaps aore surprising

is the finding that the aggregate     price level is substantially   jj volatile
than in traditional    data.   As a result, we conclude that the U. S. economy

exhibits postwar stabilization of real output without any tendency for prices

to become less volatile over the business cycle.


Plsn of the Paper

     We begin in Part II with a general methodological analysis of the

alternative components and indicators approaches      to "backcasting".   This is

followed in Part III with a summary of the available indexes for real ON?, as

well as important components of real CNP and other indicators of output

movements.     In this section we also discuss methods of detrending and
                                                       GNP Volatility, Page 4



alternative meaaures of volatility.        Part IV evaluates the quality of

alternative data series and yields a set of variables to be included in the

subsequent regression analysis.      Then Part V presents several alternative

regression equations and the volatility of the associated "backcast"

estimates,    using both conventional price deflators and new deflators based in

part on the Hoover-Rees CPI data.         Part VI summarizes the results on

volatility and measures their statistical significance.          Part VII concludes.



                            II.   METHODOLOGICAL ISSUES


     As we go backwards in time, the quality of available data deteriorates.2

Our discussion ignores the continuous nature of the deterioration and

simplifies by treating the deterioration as occurring at a discrete point in

time, called the "borderline'     year.    Before the borderline year some crucial

data are missing but are available after the borderline year.          Any method of

estimating or "backcasting"    aggregate    economic activity before the borderline

year must infer the level of output in the sectors lacking data.

     In this paper we take the borderline year to be 1909; our taak is the

estimation of real CNPannually for the period 1869-1909.          An important

simplification is our treatment of the quality of post-1909 data as

homogenous,    thus ignoring the gradual improvement that occurred between 1909

and 1929.     The specific problem in developing estimates of real GNP for the

period before 1909 is that data are missing for most of the non-commodity-

producing sectors, particularly trade and services.

     The set of data available    for use in solving this inference problem can

be classified as either "components" or "indicators."        A   component is a
                                                       CNP Volatility,   Page 5



variable that is an actual element of real GNP, such as agricultural or

manufacturing output.     An indicator is a time-series variable which is

correlated with real GNP    in   the post-borderline   time period when real GNP is

assumed to be known.     Examples of indicators include the index of industrial

               the unemployment rate, the number of building permits,      and ton-
production,

miles of railroad traffic.       Some variables,   such as manufacturing output, can

be both a component of real GNP and also an indicator,        that is, correlated

with aggregate real GNP after the borderline date.         Other variables,   such as

agricultural output, may be a component of real GNP but not an indicator,

having a low correlation with aggregate real GNP after the borderline date.

     This classification of available data into components and indicators

provides a convenient way of conceptualizing        the issues involved in estimating

pre-borderline real GNP.     The components method of estimating GNP involves

obtaining     estimates of various components of GNP either directly or indirectly

and adding them together.        This is the method used by Kuznets to obtain his

original GNP estimates.      While Kuznets used assumed ratios to develop indirect

estimates     of the missing non-commodity output sectors on the basis of the

known behavior of commodity output, alternatively the level of output in the

missing sectors could be estimated by regression analysis, using as
                                                                    in the post-
explanatory variables the behavior of one or more indicators

borderline period.      The advantage of the components method is that direct

information on the level of real GNP is used to extent of the available data,

and changes in economic structure in the pre-borderlineperiod are

                                      of the various components change through
automatically captured as the weights

time.   A possible disadvantage of the components method is that there may be
                                                             CNP Volatility,   Page 6



measurement errors in the data on one or more individual components, but

measurement errors can contaminate the indicators methods in the same way.

        The indicators method involves estimating a regression of aggregate real

GNP on a set of one or more variables          (which can be components or indicators)

for the post-borderline estimation period and applying this relationship to

the pre-borderline "backcast" period.           Ku.znets'   "Regression Series" is a

single-variableversion of the indicators method, based on the use of

commodity output as the only indicator.


Comoarison of the Two Methods

        In comparing the two methods, we asaume that both methods use the same

information      set, i.e. the same set of extrapolators.        The difference between

the two methods lies in how efficiently they use this information set.                  To

capture the difference in the two methods in the simplest of contexts, we

first examine the case where the estimation procedures are conducted in

levels.       Subsequently we analyze the more complex case in which the estimation

is carried out for deviations from trend.           It is this second case which is

relevant for our subsequent empirical analysis,             as well as for the previous

implementation of the indicators method by Kuznets (1961) and Romer (1987b).

        Let   real   GNP,       consist of two components


(1)                  —      +


where          is a vector of components for which we have data in the pre-

borderline period and             is a vector of "residual" components for which we

lack data.      We have no direct means of measuring the vector                therefore we

must form estimates of these components.           One way to accomplish this is to
                                                             GNP Volatility, Page 7



 estimate an equation for a sample period in which the values of the residual

 component   are known.      Our estimate of          would be


                  —          +         +
 (2)
                      a1X1       a2Z       e2
Here      are any additional variables for which we have data in both the

estimation and extrapolation period, and                 ia an error term.
                                                    e2                       Using the
estimated coefficients from (2), the components estimate of real GNP is


             QC   —
 (3)
                      (l+a1)X1 + a2Z + e2.

       The indicators eatimate of real GNP is also based on a
                                                              regression in
which the same explanatory variables appear, and in which the dependent

variable is aggregate real GNP rather than the residual component                     The
                                                                  X2.
indicators regression is


                  —          +         ÷
(4)
                      b1X1       b2Z

Notice that the indicators and components methods in (3) and (4) are

obaervationally equivalent.        However,      the components   method makes uae of an

additional identifying restriction.             This leads to more precise parameter

estimates.

       The above discussion is for the case where GNP ia
                                                         originally estimated in
levela.   However,    our regression estimates below use deviations from trend

rather than levels.       The existing estimates of GNP (the original Kurnets

components estimates as revised by Kendrick and Gallman) are generally thought

to be acceptable measures of trend economic
                                            activity;             only the cyclical

properties of these series are at issue in the debate over the reduction in
                                                                             CNP Volatility,   Page 8



real GNP volatility after World War II.                           By separating each variable into

trend and cyclical components,                     and assuming the trend values to be accurate,

we only need to carry out our analysis for the cyclical deviations from trend.

In the analysis below, we assume that we know the trend values                                          Q*t, and

        and that we can calculate the trend value of                           X2   (X*2t —   Q*t   -
                                                                                                        X*lt).
Lower-case letters will be used to represent deviations from trend,

i.e.        — (Qt   -   Q
                            *
                                &/Q
                                   *
       qt
       For the components method,                      recall that the components model for the level

of real GNP is given by


              QC        —          +     X2.

The deviation from trend of the missing component,                             x2t, is estimated by


(5)                     —       alxlt +     a2zt   +   e2t.

The components model thus implies that real GNP is described by


               C                      +     *
(6)           Qt        —                  X2t(l+alxlt4-a2zt+e2t),
and that the components estimate of real GNP is

                                             *
(7)           QC        —   X1         +    X 2t(1 +      alxlt   + a2zt),


which is the same as               (6)     without the error term.

       The indicators            method      estimates         the deviation from trend of total real

GNP:

(8)           q1t
                    — b1x1t+ b2zt               +       e't.

Based on the relationship given by equation (8), the indicators model implies
                                                                                 GNP Volatility,   Page 9



that real GNP is

                  I        —      *             *                                      I
(9)
                                 (Xi+X          2t1     +b1x1          +b2z+       e


and the indicators estimate of real GNP is

                                  *           x*
(10)          Q            —     (X       +             +
                                                            bixi + b2z).
The indicators method,                    then, estimates            the average deviation from trend of

both          and               and applies this average to totai trend GNP.
                      X2
        The most illuminating way to compare the two methods is to calculate

their respective errors in estimating the true deviation of real GNP from

trend             which by definition is

                                                *                *      *
(11)                      —
                                xi(X
                                      *             +
                                                        x2(X      /Q        ).
This    shows that the true deviation from trend is a weighted average of the

deviations of the two components,                                and          with weights that shift over
                                                                       x2,
time in response to changes in the trend share of the two components of real

GNP.     The error in the components                    estimate        is:



                      -           —             -           -
(12)                       qC             (x2       a1x1         a2zt)(X*2t/Q*t).
To highlight the difference in the error when the indicators method is used,

we take the indicators estimate of the deviation of real GNP from trend in                                  (8)

and rewrite the estimated coefficient b1 as the sum of the mean share of the

X1 component during the sample period of the regression, b11, plus a remaining
term
       b12:


                       —
                                (b11÷bi2)xi + b2z            +
                                                                     e'.
                                                         GNP Volatility,       Page 10




This allows us to write the error in the indicators estimate as:


(14)              -
                      I
                      q   —
                              'lt*
                                     lt"
                                        *
                                            t
                                                -   +
                                                            *
                                                        '2t1 2t
                                                                   *     -
                                                                             b12x1t
                                                                                      -
                                                                                          b2zt)].

       Now comparing the errors made in the two methods, we note that the error

in the components method (12) contains a single component,              that is, the error

in estimating the deviation of the residual component of GNP
                                                             (x2). multiplied
by the true trend share of that component.          In contrast,    the error in the

indicators method has two terms.           The first is the error introduced in

estimating the deviation of the known element of GNP (x1) by assuming a

constant share estimated from the regression interval rather than by using the

available information on the true trend share during the backcast period
          *
(X
  *
                  The second is the same as in the components method,           the error     n
estimating the deviation of the residual component                     except that this
                                                            (x2)
estimate of           is also contaminated by imposing a fixed trend share rather
                 x2
than the known variable trend shares.                                                          -




       As in our initial analysis for estimation conducted in levels, the

components method uses additional information about the relationship between

GNP and the independent variables that is not being utilized by the indicators

method.       However, unlike the case of estimation in levels, the two methods are

not in general observationallyequivalent.           Only if the composition of trend

GNP remains the same in both the estimation and backcast periods will the

indicators and the components method be observationallyequivalent.                    But even

in that unlikely case, the additional identifying restrictions inherent in the

components method will yield more precise parameter estimates.                Therefore,      in
                                                                   GNP Volatility,   Page 11



the absence of measurement error, the components method yields estimates of

real CNP in the backcast period that incorporate more information than does

the indicators method.


The Effect of Measurement Errp

       One of the pitfalls inherent in backcasting a real GNP estimate is the

presence of measurement error in the underlying data series.                     Thus,   an

examination of the sensitivity of the two methods to measurement error is

important.         In order to simplify the analysis, we assume that some of the

components series are measured with error in the extrapolation period but are

not messured with error in the estimation period.                      This assumption reflects

the fact that, in general,             the quality of almost any data series deteriorates

as we move back further in time.                  As in the preceding section, we also assume

that trend values are measured without error.

       Suppose that component           X1 is measured with error.          The observed

component in the extrapolation period is given by


                        —        + emt,
(15)         X°1

where emt is the measurement error (emt — 0 in the estimation period)                     .    If   the

extrapolation relationships             are estimated in terms of deviations from trend,

the estimates of deviations             of GNP from trend for the two methods are


                    —
(16)         qC             [(X*lt+alX*2t)/Q*tJxlt + a2(X2t/Qt)zt
                             +   e2t(X2t/Qt)        +    {(X*lt+alX*2t)/Q*tjemt/X*lt, and

                    —       bixit +
(17)         q1t                      b2zt   +   e't +   blemt/X*lt.
                                                     GNP Volatility,     Page 12



Thus,    the effect of measurement error depends upon the parameter values and

the relative trends of        and         As long as both methods use the same set
                                    X2.
of extrapolators, as assumed here, the effect of measurement error will be of

the same order of magnitude,    since the coefficients on the      e     terms in (16)

and (17) are likely to be of roughly the same size.        Recall that components

still has the advantage of being able to use information about the composition

of trend GNP.

        Given the superiority of the components method, the issue now becomes the

choice of which component variables to include.       Obviously,      if none of the

components were measured with error, then they should be included as

extrapolators. However, when a component is measured with error we run the

risk of introducing extraneous noise into our estimate.         Consequently,      there

is a tradeoff between the information content of      a   component    and the noise

caused by measurement error.

        Thus, before deciding to include or exclude a component,       we should carry

out two steps in the research.      First, we should study the source notes          for

each series for signs that measurement error might be present during both the

sample period and the backcast period.       Are the series based on primary data

for each year or for some years are they based on interpolationwith proxy

series?     What is the coverage of these proxy series?      Do the original creators

of these primary or interpolated series identify sources of weakness in the

data?     Second, for series that show signs of measurement error, we can examine

the interrelationswithin the sample period of the regression.             Does the

introduction of multiple explanatory variables lead to multicollinearity, or

do multiple explanatory variables significantly improve the regression
                                                            GNP Volatility,     Page 13



equations? If      so,   then the use of multiple explanatory variables may add more

in terms of extra information than is subtracted by the presence of

measurement error.


                  III.    THE BASIC DATA SERIES AND THEIR VOLATILITY


You   Can't   Tell the Players without a Playbill


      An essential contribution of this paper is to draw upon a broader

selection of data series than previous studies.               Our methodological discussion

in the previous section implies that it is desirable to use all of the

components (Xi) and indicators        (1)   variables    available,   particularly those
that are not contaminated with measurement          error.     The standard annual CNP

estiaates of Kuznets, Gallman, and Kendrick before 1919 rely simply on

commodity output data, "blown up" by assumed ratios to reflect distributive

margins.      In contrast, this study uses direct information not just on

commodity output, but also on output in the construction,              transportation,         and

communications sectors.

      Of necessity, our expanded coverage implies that our empirical work

relies on a complex data set.         To aid the reader in keeping track of the

different authors, methods, sectoral coverage,             and time interval coverage for

the many time-series      variables   utilized in this study, Tables 1 and 2 list the

Oramatis Personae.       Table 1 identifies and contrasts the alternative estimates

of real CNP that form the basic stock of knowledge regarding U.                S.    real output
behavior on which all applied macroeconomic             studies have relied.        Table 2,

discussed subsequently,      identifies     the alternative    annual measures of sectoral

output available in the application of the methodology developed in Part II
                                                    CNP Volatility,    Page 14



above.

     Table 1 begins with the basic Kuznets GNP series on which the subsequent

studies of Gallman, Kendrick,   and Romer are based.    The split between lines la

and lb identifies an important shift in Kuznets' methodology at the year 1919.

Beginning in that year, the Kuznets estimates of real GNP are based on the

"income-payments"    approach, which sums for each year the estimated values of

employee compensation,   self-employment   income, interest,   dividends,   rents, and

corporate profits.    Before that year, Kuznets used the "components" method

described above, applied to a single component of GNP, commodity output.           No

use was made of statistical regression for most components of noncommodity

GNP; instead total GNP was simply scaled up by multiplying the five major

subcomponents of commodity output (consumer perishibles, consumer semi-

durables,   consumer durables, producer durables, and construction materials) by

fixed ratios representing assumed distributive margins and transportation

charges.    The assumed unitary elasticity of transportation,      distribution,   and

construction output to changes in commodity output dominates the behavior of

annual changes in the Kuznets estimates of real GNP for 1869-1918.          The

accuracy of the annual movements in the Kuznets series hinges totally on the

elasticity assumptions and on the accuracy of the underlying estimates of

commodity output.3

     Kendrick's series, listed on line 2 of Table      1, makes   several

adjustments, mainly involving the treatment of government spending and tax

revenues,   to convert the Kuznets estimates to the ssme conceptual basis as the

current Commerce definition of GNP.4 Because government spending was a

relatively small part of GNP before World War I, the Kendrick adjustments are
                                                   GNP Volatility, Peg. 15



relatively minor in the 1869-1908 period that concerns us most in this paper,

amounting to less than one percent of GNP, for example, in 1889.          The Kendrick

adjustments   mainly matte: for the annual volatility of GNP during and after

World War I and, by adding in government spending, have the effect of making

GNP more volatile during this period.

     Callman's corrections to Kuznets' estimates are applied only for Census

years, primarily 1869 and 1879.     He raises the level of GNP in 1869, both by

revising the Shaw/Kuznets estimates of commodity output, and by using a

different ratio to scale up railroad construction from the output of

construction materials.     Gallman's estimates alter the trend of real GNP

between Census years but not the volatility of annual real CNP between Census

years.   This paper shares with Rower the adoption of the Gallman and Kendrick

revisions    to the original Kuznets GNP estimates for 1869-1908;   this is called

the "standard" CNP series in what follows.

     The next series, labelled "Commerce" in line 4, is that published

currently for the period 1909-28 by the Department of Commerce as part of the

National Income and Product Accounts.     However, unlike the NIPA in 1929 and

later years, the series before 1929 is not currently maintained by Commerce,

but rather has been inherited from work originally done in the l950s, i.e.

well before the publication of Kuznets (1961) and Kendrick (1961).          Commerce

has changed this inherited    series only by updating the base year for

deflation,    which currently is 1982.   Two criticisms of the Commerce series

have recently been made by Rower (l987a).     First,   the use of 1982 relative


prices is inappropriate    in evaluating business cycles during 1909-28;      in


particular,    the much higher relative price of government   purchases    in 1982
                                                      GNP Volatility,   Page 16



than in 1919 or 1929 causes the Commerce series to exaggerate the importance

of World War I government expenditures and thus to exaggerate the volatility

of GNP during and after the war.       This criticism is correct as applied to the

published Commerce series but can be overcome, since Commerce maintains

unpublished data on nominal and real expenditures for 12 components of

expenditures,   enough to allow recalculation of the series at the prices of any

desired base year, e.g.   ,   1919 or 1929.   The second and more serious criticism

is that the methods used in developing the Commerce series are undocumented,

in contrast to the copious documentation that underpins the Kurnets, Gallman,

and Kendrick series.     We follow Romer (1987a) in rejecting the Commerce series

from consideration as a CNP measure, simply because we do not know the sources

of the substantial difference between this series and that of Kendrick5

     Next,    line 5 lists an alternative     Kuznets real GNP series for 1869-1918

based on the indicators method discussed above in Part II.        This is not

developed from a formal statistical regression, but rather from a "freehand

regression curve" fit to a scatter plot for 1909-38 of the deviations from

trend of real GNP and real commodity output (Kurnets, 1961, p. 537).

Detrending is achieved by drawing linear trends between midpoints of five-year

overlapping decadal averages.       In the terminology of Part II, the resulting

Kusnets real GNP series uses the indicators method with a single explanatory

variable,    the component

     Romer's recent contributions,      listed on lines Ga and Gb, use two

different methods.     For 1909-18 Romer (l987a) replaces the Kuznets product-

side components estimate by a series based on a little-known income-side

series published by Kuznets (1961), to which she then applies the Kendrick
                                                           GNP Volatility, Page 17



adjustments to make her resulting 1909-18 series consistent with the existing

kendrick series for 1919-28 and the NIPA for the period since 1929.             For 1869-

1908 Romer uses the indic          orz method,   estimating a regression of detrended

real GNP (her series for 1909-18 linked to Kendrick for 1919-28) on detrended

Shav commodity output, covering a split sample period that includes 1909-28

plus 1947-85.    Detrending is achieved by running log-linear trends through the

value of "standard" real GNP in specific benchmark years (which are listed and

discussed further below).          Her coefficient on commodity output is allowed to

interact with a time trend, although the time trend is statistically

insignificant,    indicating support for a constant response over her entire

sample period.    Rosier's       1869-1908 estimates amount to an update of Kuznets'

indicators estimate of real GNP, using the same information set but (1) using

formal regression rather than a "freehand regression," (2) extending the

sample period to include the postwar years but to exclude 1929-38,            and (3)

using a trends-through-benchmarksrather than moving average method of

detrending.


Alternative Annual       Series    for Cornonents and Indicators


     No primary annual real GNP data exist before 1909.             Thus the estimation

of real GNP poses a problem of the optimal aggregation of available

information.     The    siost   important elements of the available information set are

listed in Table    2.     The methodological discussion in Part II allows the

information Set    to include      both components of GNP, e.g., manufacturing or

construction output, and indicators of economic activity that may be

correlated with real GNP, e.g., the unemployment rate and stock market prices.

We edit the list of series included in Table           2   by concentrating on estimates
                                                      ON? Volatility,    Page 18



of output or highly correlated indicators of output in specific sectors of

GNP.        Indicators that may be correlated with real CNP are excluded,   because

most are subject to difficult questions of estimation and interpretation.            For

instance,       existing estimates of unemployment are not independent of the real

CNP series listed in Table 1 and are currently subject to a debate regarding

estimation methodology between Romer (198Gb) and Weir (1986).           Stock market

prices are a fragile indicator in light of the ongoing debate regarding the

extent to which stock market prices reflect "fundamentals,"        i.e., underlying

economic conditions relevant for the prediction of future earnings,         or may

rather be subject to "bubbles,"       i.e., upward or downward movements in prices

that are not justified by fundamentals.

           In this light all the annual indexes listed in Table 2 are measures or

close proxies for real output in one of three major sectors of ON?.          First

listed is the basic Shaw commodity output series, which was originally

constructed by Shaw (1947) for 1869, 1879, and annually for 1889-1938,         and

which was extended by Kuznets to provide annual eatimates        for 1869-1888.    The

Shaw series for total commodity output and the various sectoral breakdowns,

e.g.   ,   producers durables and construction materials,   is the basis for all

previous annual pre-1909 real GNP estimates.6

           Listed next in lines 2 and 3 of Table 2 are two overlapping measures of

manufacturing output, Frickey's index for 1860-1914 and Fabricant's index for

1899-1939.        These indexes share with Shaw a dependence for basic data on the

Census of Manufactures,       which was conducted each decade until 1899,

quinquennially for 1899-1919, and biennially for 1919-1939.         They share with

Shaw a dependence on partial and fragmentary data for interpolation between
                                                      GNP Volatility,   Page 19



Census years.     But they differ from Shaw's series in a basic way:       Shaw took

nominal production at the disaggregated level and deflated by a price index,

while Frickey and Fabric nt base their indexes on a count of units produced.

Below we discuss in more detail the advantages and limitations of these

series.    The first section of fable 2 concludes on line 4 with the well-known

Federal Reserve Board Index of Industrial Production (FRBIIP), which commences

in 1919.     No use is iade in this study of the FRBIIP, since it does not extend

back to 1909 and thus cannot be used as an explanatory variable in our

regression equations.     The only use made here of the FRBIIP is to provide a

measure of postwar volatility comparable to that of the Fabricant index during

1899-1928.

     The next section of Table 2 covers available annual indexes of

transportation and communication.     One of our most surprising discoveries is

that no previous study of real GNP has made any use at all of the copious data

available on transportationoutput, which in the 1869-1928 period primarily

consisted of railroad output.     Because railroads   were regulated after 1890,

the available data on annual output are virtually complete,       and there is

little doubt that data on railroads provide the most reliable single index of

annual fluctuations in output over the period 1890-1929.        As shown in Table 2,

we make use of three annual indexes.     For 1869-1889 Frickey's index provides a

weighted index of output for railroads, street railways, canal traffic,

coastal trade, telephone conversations completed,      telegraph messages,

transmitted,    and revenue from postage stamps.7 Kendrick's annual

transportation index begins in 1889 and is primarily based on railroad output

through 1902, after which annual estimates    for street railways are included.
                                                  GNP Volatility,   Page 20



Line 6 summarizes Kendrick's communications index, which for annual movemencs

is entirely based on telephone calls prior to 1929 and for both telephone and

telegraph thereafter,

     The final section of Table 2 lists some of the available annual indexes

of construction output.    Shown first on line 7 is Shaw's measure of the output

of construction materials,   which he computed as the value of construction

materials divided by individual components of the wholesale price index.       Next

on line 8 is Kuznets' measure of the construction component of real GNP,

developed by scaling up Shaw's construction materials series, which Kuznets

extended back on an annual basis from 1889 to 1869.    It is important to note

that Kuznets shifts sources in 1915 from the scaled-up Shaw index to the

Labor-Commerce series listed in Table 2, line 10, and described below.8

     The Gottlieb (1965) measure listed on line 9 is quite different from the

pre-1915 Kuznets series.     Instead of scaling up the output of construction

materials, Gottlieb developed direct measures of construction output.9 The

methodology involves establishing totals of construction by decade from Census

data on assessed values of taxable total real estate and on the value of

farms.   The wealth data are converted into estimates of new building for each

decade by using the relationship between wealth and new building in Ohio.

Then annual movements withim each decade are determined as the average of

several independent interpolating    series, including Gottlieb's own series for

Ohio, and two different    series on the value of building permits developed in

earlier research by John Riggleman, Walter Isard, and Clarence Long.      We

choose to use Gottlieb's annual construction index rather than to rely on

earlier research, e.g., that of Abrsmovitz (1964), because Gottlieb's research
                                                       CNP Volatility.   Page 21



was the last to be completed of the various alternatives        and combinds results

of previous investigators with his own largely independent research on

construction in Ohio.

     Finally,     line 10 lists the basic data source on construction activity

since 1915, the volume of "constructionput-in place" in both current and

constant dollars, as maintained jointly by the Departments of Labor and

Commerce until 1959 and by Commerce alone since then.         This data set is

available     for 18 separate categories    of private and public residential      and

nonresidential construction,      although here we use only the total.      As stated

above, this series is used by Kuznets beginning in 1915, and, as we shall see,

it causes Kuznets' construction series to behave quite differently from Shaw's

index of construction materials       during 1915-1928 interval.


The Volatility of Real Outyut Series

     We turn now to the major focus of the paper, the comparison of the prewar

and postwar cyclical volatility of alternative estimates of real GNP.           We

require first a definition of "prewar" and "postwar,"        and a definition of

volatility.     Because the greater volatility of economic activity during the

Great Depression is not at issue, the various prewar time periods displayed in

Table 3 terminate     in 1928.   For the postwar period we take a comprehensive

definition,     1947-86,   and also a limited definition covering 1954-72,    the

period after the end of the Korean war but before the beginning of oil shocks.

We note in Table 3 in columns       (6)   and (7) on any of the first three lines that

our measures of postwar volatility are almost equal over the alternative 1954-

72 and 1947-86 periods.       Nevertheless,   we maintain the distinction between the

two separate periods for comparison with the prewar period, since several
                                                         CNP Volatility,   Page 22



series other than real CNP, e.g.     ,   construction   and various deflators,    behave

quite differently in the two alternative postwar intervals.

        The choice of a measure of volatility suitable for comparing the pre-1929

and postwar periods centers on two issues, alternative methods of detrending,

and alternative measures of the volatility of various detrended series.              In

this version of the paper we join Romer in adopting the method of log-linear

detrending through selected benchmark years.        To avoid debate, we adopt

Romer's selection of years that are, roughly speaking, "normal," which are

1873,    1884, 1891, 1900, 1910, 1924, 1947, 1955, 1962,       1972, and 1981.    This

choice eliminates two sources of disagreement in previous versions of our

paper and Romer's, namely, methods of detrending and the choice of benchmark

years.1° Our     only   difference is to adopt the initial year of the

investigation,    1869, as an additional benchmark year,       reflecting our finding
that major deviations from trend, partly or largely spurious, sometimes arise

when the 1873-84 trend is extended backwards to 1869.           Since 1869 was a Census

year,    it is natural to establish it as an initial benchmark.        The overall

effect of this extra benchmark is to reduce the volatility of GNP during 1869-

72 and hence of prewar GNP overall in comparison with postwar CNP.

        Finally, we share with Romer the use of    a    single volatility measure,
standard deviations of deviations from       trend)      Other measures,   e.g.

standard deviations of percentage changes, are inadequate measures of cyclical

volatility when trend growth rates vary over secular intervals.            Clearly, the

reliance in both papers on standard deviations of deviations from trend raises

the possibility that results could be sensitive         at least in part of

alternative choices of benchmark years.        But there is a limit to the
                                                     GNP Volatility, Page 23



dimensions of sensitivity that can be tested, and so we present our results

with only a single set of benchmark years and abstain from sensitivity

comparisons with other       ses.2
     The first seven columns in Table 3 display standard deviations of

deviations from trend in three separate 20-year prewar intervals,         two

alterative summary prewar periods ending in, respectively,      1908 and 1928, and

the two alternative postwar periods.       The last two columns provide    two

alternative ratios of prewar to postwar volatility,      with the truncated prewar

and postwar periods compared in column (8)       and the full prewar and postwar

periods in column (9).       Reading down the table, we begin with "standard"

measures of real GNP, linking Kuznets (1869-88) to Kendrick (1889-1928) to

NIPA (1929-86).    The only difference between lines 1 and 2 is the use in the

former of the undocumented Commerce series for 1909-28 in place of Kendrick.

Adopting the Kendrick series in preference to Commerce for 1909-28, we find in

the right-hand two entries on line 2 our "basic standard"      ratios of prewar to

postwar volatility,   1.72 and 1.67.     Thus our starting place is the presumption

that the economy in 1869-1928 was about one-and-two-third times as cyclically

volatile as the postwar economy.

     Romer's two new series, when linked to NIPA in 1929, imply a radically

different conclusion that the prewar economy was only about one-and-one-

quarter times as volatile as the postwar economy, as shown on line 3.            Her

results   thus call into question the longstanding presumption of postwar

stabilization.    However,    as we shall show, improved estimates   do not all point

in the direction of lower volatility.

     Since all estimates      of GNP before 1909 are based on fragmentary evidence
                                                      ON? Volatility,   Page 24



about the behavior of particular subcomponents       of CNP, conclusions depend on

which subcomponents    are included.    The importance of this choice is evident in

the bottom part of Table 3, which displays volatility measures for the major

available indexes.     The Shaw commodities output series displays a much smaller

prewar/postwar volatility ratio than any of the other series listed, when

compared to its closest available postwar equivalent (NIPA GNP originating in

agriculture, mining, and manufacturing).        The alternative manufacturing output

series obtained by linking the Frickey and Fabricant indexes with the postwar

Federal Reserve Board Index for manufacturing yields a substantially higher

prewar/postwar ratio.     The ratios for transportationand communication are

roughly 1.6, only a bit less than the basic ratio for "standard" GNP.

Finally,   and of considerable importance for our final results discussed below,

the volatility of conatruction is enormously greater than in the postwar

period, whether the Kuznets or alternative Gottlieb and Commerce construction

series is used (each is linked at 1929 to NIPA structures GNP).          Clearly, by

using evidence only on commodity output, and neglecting direct evidence on

output in the transportation,      communication,   and construction sectors, both

the "standard" and Romer GNP estimates may be biassed toward indicating too

little prewar volatility.



    IV.     DATA CHARACTERISTICS    AND THE   CHOICE AMONG METHODS AND VARIABLES


Chanses in   Sectoral Shares over Time

     Our analysis in    Part   II identifies   as a potential advantage of the
components method     the ability to take into account shifts over time in the

share of components in GNP.        The data sources listed in Table 2 allow us to
                                                         GNP Volatility,   Page 25



assess   the importance of such shifts in sectoral output shares.           Table 4

divides the "standard" real GNP series into three components for which data

exist --    commodities,    t   ansportation-communication,   and construction -- and a

residual component.        Taking the last century as a whole, it is evident that

until 1947 the share of commodity         output is relatively stable in the range of

36-39 percent.     Until 1918 this phenomenon is true by assumption rather than

as a revealed fact about the economy, since the aggregate real CNP series was

little more than a "scaled up" version of commodity output.            After 1919

measures of real GNP and commodity output are independent.

     However,    our measures of transportation-communicationand of construction

are independent of real GNP from the beginning, and these reveal very

substantial shifts    in sectoral shares, with an especially marked increase in

the share of transportation-communicationfrom 4.3 percent in 1873 to 12.0

percent in 1947, and marked oscillations          in the share of construction from a

high of 18.5 percent in 1891 to a low of 3.3 percent in 1981.              Since we do not

use postwar data in our subsequent regressions          that are used to "backcast'

real GNP before 1909, only the changes in shares in the prewar period are

relevant,    but these are not trivial.       Hence, this aspect of the historical

record supports the view that components estimates of real GNP are likely to

be more accurate than indicators estimates that essentially discard available

information about secular changes in sectoral shares.


Data Quality and the Choice of Variables

     To implement our earlier treatment of measurement error, we now review

the strengths    and weaknesses of the most important series, both those that

have been used before and those that are used here for the first time.                There
                                                    CNP Volatility,   Page 26



has been a tendency in some recent research to simplify the universe of

available     data in a white and black fashion as either uniformly excellent or

mediocre.     The reality is far different.   Most data series deteriorate as one

goes back in time, and most authors, particularly Kuznets and Thaw, are aware

of this and warn the reader of the limitations of their own estimates.13 In

this section we point out some of the weaknesses of the various series that

are used in previous research and of the additional series that we employ.       An

important conclusion is that the two series likely to be most accurate in

measuring year-to-year cyclical behavior have never before been used in

estimating real CNP behavior.     These are the relatively complete indexes of

transportationand communication output provided by Frickey and Kendrick, and

the studies of consumer prices by Hoover and Rees.

     The discussion is arranged by our rough estimated ranking of data

quality.    The series discussed below are, in order, the measures of sectoral

output in transportation and communication,    the Hoover-Rees research on

consumer prices (as contrasted to other sources of price behavior used by

Kuznets and Shaw), the Shaw and Fabricant measures of commodity output, the

Kuznets    income-side estimates, and the Cottlieb-Commerceestimates of

construction output.

     In any study of annual cyclical volatility, a basic distinction must be

made between data sources that provide primary data on annual changes, and

those that provide primary data only in periodic Census years ihile

interpolating between Census years on the basis of less complete data series

or proxies.     Vith two exceptions -- the estimates of transportation output and

of consumer prices, all the other data series discussed in this section use
                                                    CNP Volatility, Page 27



interpolating   series.

     The great advantage in using data on transportation and communications is

that these have been      reAlated industries for most of   the period under study.

Kendrick's index of railroad output, based on a weighted average of passenger-

miles and ton-miles, is "substantiallycomplete" after 1910 and is adjusted

for "slight" undercoverage in earlier years.      The Kendrick index also includes

minor forms of transportation,     mainly street railways, with increasing

coverage in later years.      These relatively complete annual transportation data

are supplemented by annual data collected by Kendrick on telephone        output,

representing the bulk of the communications     industry)'     The transportation

and communications index is extended back from 1889 to 1869 on the basis of

relatively complete annual data compiled by Frickey (1947)      .   The Frickey

estimates were laboriously compiled from the leading manual of that time on

railroad traffic, as supplemented by Census records and annual reports of the

railroads   themaelves.     The sampling was at the rate of roughly 50 percent in

each of six geographical regions, much greater than, say, the representation

of Shaw's interpolators      for l88998.15   Frickey supplemented the annual data

on railroad output, which carry more than two-thirds of the weight in his

transportation-communicationindex, with, in descending order of importance,

street railways, coastal trade, revenue from postage stamps, telephone

conversations completed, and Sault Ste. Marie canals traffic)6

     The deflators that underlie all the basic eatimates       by Shaw, Kuznets,    and


Kendrick,   can be contrasted with the quite different behavior of measures of

consumer prices compiled by Hoover (1960) snd Rees (1961).          Kuzneta did not

make use of the Hoover-Rees indexes because they were completed well after his
                                                   GM Volatility,        Page 28



 basic estimates were carried out.   He was aware of the fact that the new

 indexes

            "show less decline from the 1870's to the 1890's, and

           consequently less rise from the 1890's to World War I,

           than the price index implicit in our estimates   .   .   .   the

           long-term trends in the flow of goods to consumers       in

           constant prices would be relatively little sffected

           The effect on rates of growth over shorter periods is more

           marked" (Kuznets, 1961, p. 512).

As we show subsequently,   the differing year-to-year behavior of the Hoover-

Rees and Shsw-Kuznets price indexes is substantial and, taken
                                                              together,

implies quite implausible price behavior in the service and distribution

sectors.

     To undersore the achievement of Hoover and Rees, we
                                                         begin with the fact
that neither Shaw nor Kuznets used   gy   direct information on prices actually

paid by consumers.   Shsw converted his primary data on nominal commodity

output into real output by using wholesale price indexes which, he recognized,

became increasingly inadequate in coverage as he went back in time. More

important for our purposes, he recognized that his increasing need to

substitute price indexes of crude commodities for the missing indexes of final

products imparted to his implicit deflstors an excessive cyclical volatility,

which, with no evidence, he called "slight" in the following passage:

           "Of graver import is the lack of any price series whatever

           for many commodities.   Some of the gaps were filled by

           using indexes of the chief materials that enter into a
                                                        GNP Volatility,   Page 29



            commodity.   .    . The use of indirect    series   tends to make

            the composite    indexes flutuate a little more than they

            would if based on direct series alone, for it is generally

            recognized that prices of materials usually fluctuate more

            than prices of end products.      We believe, however,     that

            the better trend representativeness       more than compensates

            for this slight cyclical defect" (Shaw, 1947, pp. 288-9).

If we read closely in Shaw's notes on his price indexes,          we find repeated

indications    that indexes for specific finished goods are lacking in earlier

years, e.g.,       index for household appliances or luggage before 1913, no

index for the important categories of horse-drawn passenger vehicles before

1907, nor of locomotives and railroad cars before 1910.           The interpolations   by

Kuznets    that extend the annual commodity output estimates back from 1889 to

1869 are convoluted but appear to rely on remarkably few price series (see

Kuznets,   1946, notes to "Basic Tables," pp. 90-101).

     In contrast, the Rees contribution for 1890-1914 was to find as much

evidence as possible on prices actually paid by consumers.           He combined a

previous study of retail prices of food by Paul Douglas with a detailed study

of the prices of clothing and home furnishings from mail-order catalogues,             of

rents advertised in newspapers of six large cities, of a survey of gas

companies of retail price schedules in force, and of other diverse sources.

For our purposes it is important to note that most of the data on individual

prices are collected annually, not interpolated,         and that a substantial effort

is made to correct for quality change in clothing and home furnishings.              While

the use by Rees of mail-order catalogue data might suggest that his consumer
                                                     GNP Volatility, Page 30



price series is too sticky, i.e., cyclically insensitive, on an annual basis,

our own extensive data bank on mail-order catalogue prices in the postwar

period indicates no tendency for catalogue prices to be more sticky than the

corresponding producer price indexes for individual commodities.17

     Hoover's work, which covers the period 1850-80, is based on prices paid

on an annual basis by one or two respondents in each of more than forty cities

in sixteen states.     The main defects are a limited correction for secular

quality change and the stopping point of 1880, leaving a gap between 1880 and

1889 during which records of consumer prices are not based on actual retail

quotations, but rather are estimated by Hoover from wholesale price

quotations.    Interestingly,   Kendrick had a high evaluation of Hoover's work,

even though he did not use it in his own real GNP series.        He speculated in a

conference comment that Hoover might have exaggerated the limitations of her

own work:     "one wonders if these early statistics are really much inferior to

the data underlying modern indexes"     (Kendrick,   1960, p. 187).

     Next in reliability is the Fabricant index of manufacturing output that

begins in 1899 and is linked in Table 3 before that date to the Frickey

manufacturing index.     Romer's previous (1986a) criticism that prewar

production indexes are too volatile applies just to the Frickey index that is

based on only about 40 individual products, almost all of which are crude or

intermediate products.          Fabricant (1940) index, not mentioned by Romer

(1986a), is completely different,     as it is based on about 1000 individual

products (see Fabricant,    1940, pp. 382-600 for a detailed list).18     Like the

Shaw index of commodity output, the Fabricant index is based on primary data

in years of the Census of Manufactures and is interpolated between Census
                                                     GNP Volatility,   Page 31



years.   The advantage of the Fabricant     index is that it is based on units

produced rather than deflated nominal value, thus avoiding the need to use

possibly error-prone deflators,     as does Shaw.    For long-term comparisons an

index like Fabricant's that is based on a count of units produced is more

prone to miss improvements in quality and thus may be inferior to a deflated

value index like Shaw's.     But for cyclical comparisons Fabricant's index is

not subject to the error that may be introduced into Shaw's index by overly

volatile deflators.     Note that any quality change bias would cause the

Fabricant   index to understate the volatility of real output; if the average

quality of units declines in recessions, then "true" constant-qualityoutput

declines more than Fabricant's index.19

     Both the Fabricant and Shaw indexes are vulnerable to the criticism that

the interpolating indexes are not as comprehensive       as estimates for Census

years.   It is well to recall Shaw's own misgivings about his annual

interpolations,    which are based primarily on data from individual states.

Shaw describes severe problems with the inadequate number of states, and

incomplete coverage within states.        For 1889-98 interpolation is based on only

a single state,2° Shaw's "over-all        rating of the series based on state data

    is fair for 1899-1919 and poor for 1889-99"       (1947, p. 98).   In a detailed

listing of his series by overall rating on three different criteria,        Shaw

lists 8 good, 25 fair, and 12 poor for 1899-1919,       and none good, 8 fair, and

32 poor for 1889-99     (1947, p. 101).    It must follow that Kuznets'   backward

extension of Shaw's annual estimates for 1869-88 is even more inadequate than

Shaw's "poor" indexes, since Kuznets used even fewer data series as

interpolators     for both nominal values and deflators.
                                                      GNP Volatility,   Page 32



     The time periods shown in Table 3 are not appropriate       for comparing the

volatility of the Shaw and Fabricant series, since the figures shown for 1889-

1908 represent a mixture of Frickey and Fabricant.        The appropriate   comparison

is for 1899-1928,    for which the Shaw series exhibits a standard deviation of

deviations    from trend of 4.66, roughly half the Fabricsnt figure of 9.20.       The

associated prewar-postwar ratios (using 1947-86) are 0.98 and 1.63,

respectively.21 In light of the above comparison, we believe that the

Fabricant measure provides    the more accurate indicator of cyclical volatility,

and we are reassured by the fact that the prewar-postwar volatility ratios of

about 1.6 are almost exactly the same as for the transportation-communication

index (Table 3, line 7).

     We would rate the Kuznets income-side estimates of CNP for 1919-28 to be

little better than Shaw or Fabricant     and possibly worse.    Whereas at least

Shaw and Fabricant had         data available for year-to-year interpolation,

Kuznets has virtually none in a crucial sector, consumer services.          This

skeptical assessment may seem surprising, since Kuznets'       income-payments

estimates have been accepted without question by previous investigators,

including Kendrick and Romer, and indeed we adopt the Kendrick version aa the

dependent variable in our basic regressions below.        However,   the Kuzneta data

for the 1920s are relatively weak in coverage of entrepreneurial        income, which

is a crucial gap in view c     the importance of self-employed proprietors in

providing consumer services.

     In assessing the Kusnets estimates,       it is useful to study the behavior of

alternative   series during the aftermath of World War I, the five years 1919-

23, as in Table 5.    Kuzneta Variant   A   behaves as does the Kendrick series used
                                                   GNP Volatility,     Page 33



below in our regressions,    showing a relatively small decline in 1919-21        while

Variant B is much closer to the Commerce series.      The two Kuznets series

differ in that Variant A is based entirely on income estimates,        calculating

consumer services as a residual, while Variant B is based on independent

series on consumer services (Kuznets, 1946, Table I-4B, notes to column          1).

       While we do not know which series is correct, the large difference

between them raises a question regarding the accuracy of the Kuznets Variant A

series, on which the Kendrick data are based.     If anything,     the implied

behavior of productivity using Variant A, as shown on line 6, is not very

plausible,    since productivity is shown to rise by 4 percent from 1920 to 1921,

whereas it normally declines during short recessions.     Kendrick records a 7.4

percent drop in labor productivity in 1907-08, and similar sharp declines in

1913-14 and 1929-30.     Further, we might also ask how consumers could afford to

raise their   g]    expenditures on services by 13 percent, as in Kuznets Variant
A   over 1919-21, when over the same two-year period hours worked in

manufacturing declined by 28.3 percent and in transportationby 12.2

percent.22 With manufacturing hours declining by nearly two-thirds as much as

in the Great Contraction of 1929-33, how could the rest of the economy be

entirely unaffected, as implied by the Kuznets income-payments       series?     These

are questions worthy of further research; for this paper we include them only

to suggest that the 1919-28 Kuznets income-payments    estimates    are not without

possible flaws, and until these questions are resolved we are unwilling to

follow Romer (1987a) by adopting Kuznets' even cruder income-payments

estimates for 1909-18 as the basis for measuring real GNP volatility.

      We come last to the spliced Gottlieb-Commerceconstruction output series.
                                                     GNP Volatility,   Page 34



The high volatility of construction output in the prewar period relative to

the postwar period is central to the overall question of postwar

stabilization.    There is little question regarding the reliability of the

Commerce series that begins in 1915, and in fact Kuznets       switches   in this year

from use of scaled-up Shaw construction materials to the Commerce series.          The

Commerce series on "value-of-construction-put-in-place"      has been compiled

continuously since 1915 using the same methods.       It is calculated annually and

so does not rely on interpolators.      Thus we have some confidence that the huge

difference in volatility shown in Table     3,   line 10, for 1908-28 vs. either

postwar period is based on consistent and relatively reliable data.

     For the period before 1915 the Gottlieb data, as described above in Part

III, are based on a complex process     in which total construction is estimated

over decades, and then each decade is interpolated separately.         How adequate

are these   interpolators?   One source of data is detailed county-by-county

sessment    records for Ohio, which have relatively complete coverage during

1870-1910   (Gottlieb,   1966) and which have not been used by investigators      prior

to Gottlieb.     The other sources are two different series on the value of

building permits. Coverage is limited to 10 cities in 1868 and reaches 70

cities in 1900 and subsequent years.      The geographical coverage of these

cities is equivalent to or slightly better than the coverage of Shaw's

interpolators    for commodity output prior to 1899.23

     Further,    the Gottlieb construction series by definition includes all the

components that constitute s dwelling or nonresidential structure, whereas the

Kuznets-Shsw series on construction materials       (on which all previous real GNP

estimates have been based) is very fragmentary      in coverage,   particularly
                                                  GNP Volatility,    Page 35



 before 1889.   Kuznets took Shaw's output of construction materials in the

 census years 1869, 1879, and 1889 and interpolated between these years using

 data only on the production of nails and rails and of lumber for 1869-79 and

 adding cement and roofing slate in the period 1879-89.      This short list of

materials is a relatively flimsy basis on which to measure the volatility of

construction output, and use of the Gottlieb construction output series

provides additional information.   Below in Table   9   we report alternative

results for backcast" GNP which replace the Gottlieb-Commerce       construction

output series with the Kuznets-Shaw measure of construction materials output.

     Two factors reassure us about the Gottlieb series, which is linked at

1915 to the Commerce series and used in the subsequent
                                                       regression analysis.
First, in the 1908-28 period dominated by the "good" Commerce data, the

volatility of construction output is much higher than of Shaw's construction

materials series, 1.4 times for the Gottlieb-Comznerce series (Table     3,   line 1

vs. 8) and 1.7 times for the Kuznets series (line 9 vs.           This suggests
                                                        8).

that the high ratio of Gottlieb to Shaw volatility before 1908 is not

inconsistent with the experience based on superior data after 1915.
                                                                          Second,
and more important, the volatility evident in the Gottlieb series before 1908

does not consist of choppy erratic year-to-year jumps, but rather long smooth

waves in which construction rises far above trend for one decade, and then

falls well below trend in the next decade.   In short, the Gottlieb series

amply documents the famous "Kuznets' building cycle", and this aspect of the

Gottlieb data hinges not just on the annual interpolators,     but also on decada

averages that are cross-checked with assessment records and other data.

     Some details are useful:   the detrended and deflated Gottlieb series
                                                    GNP Volatility. Page 36




(linked to Commerce after 1914)    is negative in every non-benchmark year from

1874 to 1881, and from 1911 to 1923.      It is positive in all years but two

between 1882 and 1892, and in every year between 1899 and 1907, as well as

between 1924 and 1929.     During the years of "good" data, construction output

displays an increase of 125 percent between 1920 and 1926.      During the years

covered by the Gottlieb data construction output also more than doubles over

periods of similar duration, e.g., increasing 125 percent between 1878 and

1884, and 154 percent between 1898 and 1905.      Taken together, the spliced

Gottlieb-Commerce series records a story of continuing decade-long swings in

construction activity that in frequency and amplitude equally characterize the

periods 1869-1914 based on the Gottlieb data and 1915-28 based on the Commerce
data.     The regular 20-year Kuznets cycle extends from 1869 (or earlier)

through 1941, but has disappeared in the postwar period.


Implications    for the Choice of Data

        To carry out either the components or indicators method of "backcasting"

real GNP before 1909, we need consistent data extending before and after 1909

on both real GNP and on as many sectoral components as possible.      We choose

the "standard" Kuznets-Kendrick data series for 1869-1908 to establish the

trend level of real GNP in benchmark years.      For 1909-29 we choose Kendrick in

preference to Commerce,    despite the possibility raised in Table S that the

Kendrick data show too little decline in real GNP in 1919-21, in order to tilt

our results towards a finding of lower prewar real GNP volatility.      Not only

is the Kendrick series less volatile than Commerce for 1909-28,     but it yields

smaller regreasion coefficients and hence a smoother path of real GNP before

1909 than does Commerce.     Similarly,   we choose to adopt the Shaw measure of
                                                      GNP Volatility, Page 37



                                                          to the Frickey-
commodity output as an explanatory variable in preference

Fabricant series,    in   view   of the limited coverage of final goods output by

                                                     our results can be compared
Frickey before 1899.       Also, by choosing Shaw,

directly to Romer's (l987b).

     For transportation and communication,       we have the single linked series

                          For construction we use the Gottlieb-Conunerce series,    in
already described.

preference to the Shaw constructionmaterials series (or the Kuznets

construction series based on Shaw before 1915), in view of the evidence from

the "good" construction data for 1915-28 that the Shaw series is

insufficientlyvolatile.          We cannot use the Kuznets construction series,

because it switches methods in 1915 in a way that would lead to a downward

bias in the volatility of the backcast real GNP series.24

     This leaves as unutilized the superior Hoover-Rees data series on prices
                                                             backcast real
paid by consumers. To gain perspective, we begin by creating

GNP series based on the measures chosen in this section that use conventional

deflators. Subsequently we examine evidence that in fact the conventional

data series are inconsistent with the Hoover-Rees evidence, and we provide

alternative backcast real GNP series based on the use of alternative deflator

for real GNP and for commodity output.



       V.   REGRESSION ESTINATES AND TUE VOlATILITY OF BACKCAST REAL GNP


                                                                    series an
     Having now displayed the volatility measures of the basic data

discussed their limitations, we now proceed to the straightforward task of

backcasting real GNP before 1909 with both the components and indicators

methods.    Recall that both methods carry out estimation on variables expresse.
                                                    ON? Volatility, Page 38



 as percentage deviations from trend, hot on the variables expressed as levels.

The components method calculates pre-1909 real GNP as the sum of the actual

values of the three components (commodities, transportation-communication,         and

construction), plus residual GNP calculated as the trend in residual CNP timea

the backcast deviation of residual CNP from trend, where the backcast value is

calculated from the postl908 regression equation of residual GNP on the same

three components.   The indicators method calculates the backcast level of

deviations of total real CNP from trend entirely from estimated coefficients

of a regression in which total real CNP is the dependent variable.           Because

residual GNP in the components method is defined as "standard" GNP minus the

three known components, by definition both the components and indicators

estimates are equal to standard CNP in benchmark years and differ only in

years between benchmarks.


teareasion Estimates with Conventional Deflators

     The regression eatimates    that use conventional   deflators are displayed in
Table 6.   Eight equations   are shown, four each for the indicators and

components methods, respectively.     For each method, estimates are displayed

for versions of the equations with sample periods
                                                  ending in 1928 and 1938, and
with both a single explanatory variable
                                        (commodity output) and with all three

components as explanatoryvariables.25 The bottom three lines of the table

show for each of the eight equations the calculated standard deviations of

deviations from trend of real CNP backcast for 1869-1908.

     Looking first at the regression estimates themselves, we find that the
sets of "straw-man" equations containing
                                         only the single commodity output
variable are severely misapecified.                                          for
                                       Comparing columns   (3) and (4)   ,
                                                       GNP Volatility, Page 39



instance,    inclusion of all three explanatory variables causes the Durbin-

Watson to jump from 0.5 to 1.9, causes the standard error of estimate to drop

by half, and reduces the unexplainedvariance by 75 percent.           The same

improvement,    both in eliminating positive serial correlation of the residuals

and in improving the fit, is evident in the other pairs of equations as

well.26     This finding is not dependent on including the l930s in the sample

period;   in columns (1) and   (2),   where the sample period ends in 1928, the

reduction in unexplained variance       is 73   percent in moving from column (1) to

column (2).27

     The four equations labelled "components" explain residual real GNP (i.e.

total real GNP minus the three components)         rather than total real GNP itself.

8ecause the three components contain more systematic cyclical variance than

the residual,    which consists of the trade, service, and government sectors,         I



is not surprising to find that the fit of the residual equations         in columns

(5) through (8) is worse than for total GNP in columns (1) through (4).           In

fact, in the equations ending in 1928, the adjusted            is actually negative.


Nevertheless,    the components estimates yield roughly the same cyclical

volatility of real GNP before 1909 as do the indicators estimates.          For the


sample periods ending in the l930s, the volatility measures in columns (7) an

(8) are identical to those in columns       (3) and (4).    For sample periods ending

in the 1920s, the components method yields volatility measures about five

percent less than for the indicators method.

     To implement our discussion in Part II of measurement error, we have

taken two steps.     The first, already completed in Part IV, is a detailed

assessment of the quality of individual data series.          There we argued that, o
                                                                GNP Volatility, Page 40



the three explanatory variables included here, transportation-communications

output is the most accurate, and measurement error in the construction output

series is not likely to be appreciably more severe than for commodities output

over most of the period between 1869 and 1899.                  The second is an examination

to determine whether alternative data series are highly correlated with each

other or provide independent         information during the sample period.          It is

clear from Table 6 that addition of the extra explanatory variables for

transportation,    communications,      and construction         output markedly improve the
fit of the equations    and eliminate positive serial correlation in the

residuals.     Almost all of this improvement is contributed by construction

output, and we feel that this strong evidence that construction output adds

extra information,    and is not highly correlated with commodity output during

the sample period, amply justifies including this variable in spite of the

likelihood of measurement error before 1915.

     Leaving aside the misspecified equations ending in 1929 that include only

commodity output, that       is,   columns   (1)   and   (5),   the other results tell a

fairly consistent story about prewar volatility.                 The backcast standard

deviations of deviations from trend of the other equations range from 4.84 to

5.78, compared to 5.03 for the "standard" Kuzneta-Gallman-Kendrickseriea.

The majority of our estimates implies a greater prewar/postwar
                                                               volatility
ratio than the standard sers,           i.e., a range of prewar/postwar ratios

(compcing 1869-1908 with 1954-72, as in Table 3) of 1.65 to 1.97, as

contrasted to the ratio of 1.72 implied by the standard series.

Interestingly,    once transportation-communications             and construction are

included,    the inclusion   of the l930s in the sample period is not neceaaary to
                                                         GNP Volatility,   Page 41



reaffirm the traditional conclusion of greater prewar volatility.             Indeed, th

inclusion of the 1930s leads to lower volatility estimates for 1869-1908 in

column (4) than in column (2), and in column (8) than in column (6).


The Problem of Overly Volatile Deflators

     As noted above, the standard GNP estimates make no use at all of

information on consumer prices.        To examine the differing implications of

alternative    deflators,   we turn to the summary in Table     7   of volatility

measures for price deflators.        The volatility measures are standard deviation

of deviations from trend, just as in Table       3,    and are calculated using the

same benchmarks.     Here, because of World War I inflation,        all price measures

show much greater volatility during 1909-28 than during 1869-1908, and in thi

section we focus on the volatility measures for the period ending in 1908 and

the comparison with the 1954-72 postwar period.

     The "standard" measures of price volatility include on lines 1 and              2   the

"standard"    implicit deflators    for GNP and consumption,    for Shaw's commodity

series on line 4, and for non-commodity output (i.e., standard GNP minus Shaw

commodity output) on line      7.   We notice that all of these volatility measures

have the same rough order of magnitude in both the prewar and postwar

period.28 Of particular interest        is the ratio   on line 9 of the non-commodity

and consumption implicit deflators, which hovers around 1.0 in both the prewa

and postwar periods.

     However, in none of the measures discussed in the previous paragraph is

any information used on prices paid by consumers,         but rather only on Shaw's

selection of wholesale price indexes.        In contrast,   the volatility of the

linked Hoover-Rees CPI series in line 3 is about half that for the standard
                                                      GNP Volatility,    Page 42



consumptiondeflator over 1869-1908.         Because the Hoover-Rees series is

compiled from a large body of annual data on final prices paid by consumers,

it represents one of the moat accurate data series available for the pre-1909

period.    Figure 1 displays the behavior of the standard consumption deflator

and CPI for the period 1869-1928.        Before 1915 the CPI shows the same general

down-and-up movements as the standard consumption deflator yet is

substantially less volatile.      After 1915 the CPI rises even more than the

standard deflator but with different tiaing, and it declines less during 1920-



        It is doubtful that both the Hoover-Rees CPI series and the Shaw-based

commodity output deflators could be accurate.        To show this, we compute the

implicit deflator implied for the non-commodity (i.e.       ,    transportation and
distribution)    sector of the economy on the assumption that both indexes were

true.     We begin by computing a hybrid nominal GNP series which multiplies

standard real consumption by the Hoover-Rees CPI, and standard real

construction by our construction price index (Table        7,    line 6), to which are

added the standard estimates of nominal and real GNP in the residual (non-

consumption non-construction)     sector of the economy.        This hybrid deflator is

likely to be more accurate than the standard GNP deflator, since it uses

information on prices actually paid by consumers       (representing     about 70

percent of GNP).     We then   btract nominal and real Shaw commodity output

(including    construction materials),     to arrive at the implicit residual

deflator shown on line 8 of Table     7.


        The remarkable behavior of this implicit residual deflator speaks for

itself.     For 1869-1908   its volatility is triple that of the CPI, in contrast
                                                   GNP Volatility,     Page 43



to a postwar residual/CPI volatility ratio that is close to unity.        Two

alternative   conclusions could be drawn from this evidence.   First, before      l90
the transportation and distribution sectors could have exhibited value-added

prices that were much more volatile than commodity prices, in contrast to the

postwar period in which both types of prices exhibit roughly the same

volatility.    A second and alternative view would attribute the high volatilit

of the implicit residual noncominodity deflator to measurement error that

significantly exaggerates the volatility of commodity prices.        Shaw's own

misgivings about his underrepresentationof price indexes for finished goods

supports   this second interpretation.   It seems highly implausible    to us that

the first explanation could be valid.     Why would wholesalers and shopkeepers

absorb commodity price movements and maintain sticky consumer prices in the

prewar period but not the postwar period?

     An additional piece of evidence comes from regression equations in which

the annual rate of change of consumer prices is regressed on the current and

one lagged change in commodity prices.     The sum of coefficients indicates the

degree of responsiveness of changes in consumer prices to changes in commodit'

prices.    These sums rise from 0.39 in 1872-1908 to 0.69 in 1909-28 to 1.01 in

1949-86,   which is consistent with our interpretation that measurement error        i'


commodity prices biasses down    the coefficients in the prewar period.29


Alternative Reeression Estimates for Real GNP

     To test the sensitivity of regression estimates and implied backcast rca

GNP to the use of alternative deflators,    in Table 8 we provide another set of

regressions   for real GNP.   These are identical to those of Table 6 that use

the full set of three explanatory variables,   but here we have replaced the
                                                         G?IP Volatility,   Page 44



standard resl GNP and commodity output data by the corresponding variables

based on alternative deflators.          Real GNP consists of nominal "standard"

consumption deflated by the CPI instead of by the standard consumption

deflator,     of Kuznets nominal construction deflated by our linked construction

price index, and of standard non-consumptionnon-constructionoutput.

Commodity output consists of Shaw's nominal commodity output deflated by the

CPI.    Our other explanatory vsriables,        transportation-communicationoutput and

construction output, are entered exactly as before, because they are not

dependent on Shaw's deflators.

       Contrasting   the new estimates     in Table 8 with the basic estimates in

Table   6,   we first examine the coefficients.       The main difference is that the

coefficients on transportation-communication
                                           are larger and, in column (2),

highly significant.          The coefficients on commodity and construction output are

of the same general order of magnitude as in Table 6.              The goodness of fit of

the equations     as measured by R2 is similar but standard errors of estimate are

higher,      reflecting the greater volatility of the dependent variable using the

alternative     deflators.      The Durbin-Watson   statistics   are lower here and lie in

the ambiguous     range.30

       The implied volatility of backcast GNP in the four equations of Table                8



averages 5.34, as compared to 5.10 in the equivalent equations previously

presented in Table      6,    Thua,   the use of the alternative    deflators   implies a

modest increase in volatility during the backcaat period, but not by enough

substantially to change our overall verdict that the volatility of backcaat

GNP is roughly similar that of the standard GNP series.
                                                                 GNP Volatility,    Page 45



         VI.      PREWAR-POSTWAR VOLATILITY AND ITS STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE

The Ranse of Prewar/PostwarVolatility Ratios

        Our methodological investigation compared two alternative methods of

backcasting,      which we called the "components" and "indicators" methods.                     Our

discussion of data identified two sets of data that could be used in

estimation,       corresponding to "standard" and "alternative"            deflators.       In

addition,       one could have differing views regarding            the relevance of Great

Depression data, which calls for a comparison of results with sample periods

ending    in,   respectively,     1928 and 1938.     These different dimensions of the

investigation yields a vector of implied volatility measures,                     and we attempt

in Table    9    to summarize the most important          and relevant of these.

        Comparisons of prewar and postwar volatility are provided in the four
columns of Table 9 along two dimensions.              First, in columns (1) and (2), we

exhibit the straightforwardratios of prewar to postwar standard deviations ot

deviations       from trend, using as always the same set of benchmarks as does

Romer (l987b).        Second,    in columns   (3)   and   (4)   we exhibit the excess of prewat

to postwar volatility,          expressed as a percentage of the "standard"

prewar/postwar volatility ratio displayed on line 1.                   For instance, the Romer

series in column (1), line 2, has a prewar/postwarvolatility ratio of 1.24,

in contrast to the ratio for the standard GNP series of 1.72.                      This means that

the excess volatility registered by the Romer measure (1.24                   -   1.0, or   24

percent),       is one-third of the excess volatility of the standard series (1.72                     -




 1.0,    or 72 percent).

        In subsequent lines of Table 9 we report volatility measures for a

variety of alternative estimated real GNP series.                   Lines 3s through 3d
                                                      GNP Volatility,   Page 46



summarize    the results of Table 6, where the alternative components and

indicators "backcast"    estimates use the standard set of deflators.31 Here we

find in columns (3) and    (4)   that the results cover a range of prewar/postwar

"excess volatility ratios" between 92 and 121 percent.         In this section of the

table, the equations    with ssmple periods ending in 1928 uniformly indicate a

higher volatility of pre-1909 GNP than those ending in 1938.         Thus the

inclusion of data on the Great Depression is not a necessary condition for a

finding of higher prewar volatility.

     Next,    on lines 4a through 4d we summarize the results of Table      8,    in

which the alternative set of CPI-based deflators is used.         In column (3) the

results with the alternative      set of deflators   is little different than with

the standard set of deflators;       the range for prewar/postwar excess volatility

lies between 85 and 99 percent.       Here the volatility ratios with ssmple

periods ending in 1928 are modestly smaller than for sample periods ending in

      but the differences are very small.       In contrast,   the alternative     time

periods reported in column (4) indicate much higher volatility ratios when the

alternative    deflators are used.    This occurs because the alternative deflatora

imply a substantially greater volatility of real GNP during and after World

War I than the standard series.

     Finally,    we report the results of sensitivity tests which carry out the

same empirical backcasting ixercise with alternative sets of explanatory

variables. As shown on line 5a, our results do not depend on the inclusion of

an explanatory variable measuring construction output; when construction is

excluded,    the prewar variance jumps markedly.      This occurs because commodities

and construction output move in opposite directions in the 1875-1885 period,
                                                      CNP Volatility,   Page 47



thus reducing the volatility of backcast real GNP during this interval.           Also,

omission of construction increases markedly the coefficient on commodity

output in the 1909-28 or 1909-38 sample period, directly implying higher pre-

1909 real GNP volatility when this higher coefficient       is multiplied by

existing measures of commodity output.     The next two lines suggest that

inclusion of Shaw's series on the output of construction materials in place of

our construction output series yields somewhat smaller backcast volatility

measures;   however, the regression equations using the alternative Shaw measure

suffer from positive serial correlation of the residuals       (Durbin-Watson

statistics of 0.8 or below).


Statistical Tests

       At least two types of statistical tests can be applied to our results.

First, because we include the Great Depression in the sample period of the

equations used to develop our basic estimates of backcast real GNP, we may be

concerned about the possibility of heteroscedasticityin the error terms of

our regression equations.    Second, we need to measure the statistical

significance of differences between the prewar and postwar volatility of real

GNP.

       We run two tests for heteroscedasticity.   The most common test (Kmenta,

1986, pp. 295-7) is to regress    squared residuals   on a constant and the squared

values of the explanatory variables. Another test for autoregressive-

conditional heteroscedasticity (ARCH), suggested by Engle (1982), is to

regress the same squared residuals on a constant and lagged squared residuals.

When these two tests are applied to the residuals from our indicators equation

estimated to 1938 with conventional deflators (Table 6, column 4), we obtain
                                                     GNP Volatility,   Page 48



test statistics of 0.99 and 2.15,     nich may be compared with the chi-squared

critical values of 7.8 and 3.8, respectively,       for the   coron and Engle-ARCH

tests.    This constitutes strong evidence that the hypothesis of

homoscedasticity cannot be rejected.

     Of more importance is the statistical significance of differences in

volatility between the prewar and postwar real GNP series.         We follow Romer in

using the Newey-West (1987) formula for calculating the standard error of the

variance of deviations from trend.     This formula yields a test statistic,

which has a standard normal distribution in large samples.         We have calculated

a substantial number of these statistics,    for different prewar and postwar

series.    For the prewar 1869-1928 period we include the "standard"       Kuznets-

Kendrick-Gallman series, our components series based on conventional

deflators,   and our components series based on the alternative deflators.           For

the postwar 1947-86 period we include the actual data; but we also supplement

ti   actual postwar data by estimating fitted values for the postwar period.

This is necessary for symmetry, since the 1869-1908 results are based on

fitted values for residual GNP.     We have two choices for the calculation of

these fitted values.     First, we can use the fitted values of a regression

estimated over 1947-86 for our basic specification using the components method

(Table 6, col. 8).     Second, we can extrapolate   the prewar structure    to the

postwar using coefficients from the regression equation for 1909-38 (again,

Table 6, col. 8).

      In evaluating the following test statistics, we note that any value

greater than 1.96 is significant    at the 5 percent level, and any value greater

than 3.1 is significant at the 0.1 percent level:
                                                     GNP Volatility, Page 49



                         Postwar Actual       Postwar Fitted     Postwar Forecast

Prewar Standard              4.42

New version                  4.84                  3.96                     3.70
  conventional deflators

New version,                  3.11                 3.32                     3.02
  alternative deflators


Thus by every measure the difference between prewar and postwar CNP volatilit

is highly significant,    at better than the 1 percent level and in most cases           at

better than the 0.1 percent level.


The Choice of a Final Index for Real and Nominal GNP

       The last stage of our investigation is the choice of one of the

alternative new indexes as our central estimate of pre-1929 real and nominal

GNP.    We prefer the components to the indicators estimates,     since they use

additional information on changes in the share of individual components in

GNP.    Yet the components estimates are no more contaminated with measurement

error than are the indicators estimates,      since each technique uses the same

set of three explanatory variables.       As for the sample period, we prefer the

period ending in 1938, since this yields more precise parameter estimates and

yet, as shown in Table 9, equations estimated through 1938 in most cases impL

a lower pre-1909 volatility than equations estimated through 1928.

       This leaves the choice between the two sets of estimates based on

conventional deflators and on the alternative deflators,       i.e.   ,   the Hoover-Ree
CPI and linked construction cost index.      Rather than choose one or the other

set, we think that there are good reasons to believe that the truth lies in

between these alternative sets of estimates.       The conventional deflators      are
                                                         GNP Volatility, Page 50



                                                                       and
too volatile,    since they are based on an overrepresentationof crude

intermediate goods prices.         Yet the alternative deflators may be too smooth

when applied to the output of finished commodities.           Our final index is an

                                                      the two different
unweighted average of the two component indexes using

deflators, backcast for 1869-1908 from regression equations estimated to 1909-

38.   Our choice represents an example of what Granger and Newbold (1986, pp.

266-7) call "combination forecasting"          using a selection of series, with
                                                      each of two series.
weights in our case selected arbitrarily to be 0.5 on
                                                                        are
     Our final estimate of real GNP deviations from trend for 1869-1928

illustrated in Figure        2.   Here we see that our estimates do not provide a one-

dimensional     increase or decrease in the volatility of the standard GNP series.

Instead,     our estimates    are less volatile than the standard series in some

periods    (1870-71, 1879-92,      1913-14),   and more volatile in others (1876-82,

1900-07,     1916-19).   In this sense our estimates provide a modest revision to

      economic history of the late nineteenth century.          We affirm that there

were prolonged depressions in the l87Os and 1890s, but we suggest that the

boom of the early l880s was less pronounced and that of the early l900s was

more pronounced than in the standard data series.

       Our new estimates are both more and less volatile than the standard

series in particular time intervals, but overall present a similar record of
                                                                         In this
substantially greater volatility before 1929 than after 1946.

respect, we provide support for the traditional view of postwar stabilization

 that has been based on the "standard" prewar data previously developed by

Ku.znets, Kendrick,      and Gailman, while differing with the standard data on the

 detailed record of particular sub-periods.
                                                      GNP Volatility. Page 51



        Our research does not contribute any revision of the standard estimates

of trend growth in real GNP between benchmark years.        As shown in Figure   3,

when our new series for the deviation from trend is multiplied by the standard

trend series, we emerge with only minor differences in the overall pattern of

growth in real GNP.     This aspect of our results is self-imposed to limit the

scope of the study to new results on the deviation of real GNP from this

trend.      Data for the new real GNP series are displayed in Table 10.    Because

we have access to improved price indexes not used in the standard GNP series,

we can use our data to develop an improved estimate of the GNP deflator before

1929.    This is a weighted average of the CPI, our linked construction cost

estimate,    and the standard implicit deflator for nonconsumption

nonconstruction output.32 Table 10 exhibits this deflator and the associated

series for nominal GNP.     Since most of the weight itt the new deflator is on

consumption spending,     the difference between our new deflator and the standard

deflator is a dampened version of the difference between the CPI and standard

consumption deflator illustrated in Figure      1.   The new GNP deflator is less

cyclically volatile,    it declines less from 1869 to 1896, and it increases less

from 1896 to 1914, than the standard deflator.



                                  VII.   CONCLUSION


     We have developed new estimates of real GNP, nominal GNP, and the GNP

deflator for the period 1869-1928.       Our estimates go beyond the previous work

of Kuznets, Kendrick, Gailman, and Romer by using three sets of information

which have not previously been applied to the estimation of aggregate GNP

prior to 1919.     These include the linked Hoover-Rees-BLS   consumer price index,
                                                   GNP Volatility,   Page 52



the linked Frickey-Kendrickindexes of transportation and communication

output, and the Gottlieb index of construction output.      None of the

information in these three sets has been created for this study; instead, each

set was created 20 or more years ago, and our contribution has been to extract

from these sets of existing data new implications for the behavior of GNP,

both real and nominal.

     In applying this new information to the estimation of prewar GNP, our

major contributions    are fourfold.   First, we supplement the previous

discussion of the regression-based "indicators" approach by analyzing the

"components"   approach which uses statistical regression to backcast the

residual component of GNP for which no primary data exist, while using actual

values of components for which data do exist.      We show that the components

approach makes better use of available data when there are secular changes in

the GNP shares of the primary components.     Although we judge the components

method to be superior in theory, in practice the two methods yield almost

.dentical conclusions regarding prewar GNP volatility in our sample period.

     Second, the use of additional data on sectoral output substantially

improves the fit of regression equations     for 1909-28 or 1909-38 and eliminates

the problem of serial correlation of residuals     that is evident when a single

commodity output variable is used.      There is no systematic   tendency of

backcast output to be more volatile when additional explanatory variables are

included in the regression equations, a surprising result that reflects the

negative correlation between commodity and construction output during part of

the backcast period.     Instead, the use of multiple explanatory variables

alters the pattern of estimated business cycles before 1909, dampening output
                                                    GNP Volatility, Page 53



fluctuations during 1869-76 and 1880-92, while amplifying fluctuations during

1877-79 and 1901-06.

     Third, the use of the Hoover-Rees   CPI series leads us to argue that the

implicit deflator for the standard Shaw commodity output series is implausibly

volatile,   and we develop an alternative backcast real GNP   series   in which the

consumption component of real GNP and the commodity output series are

redeflated by the CPI.   To avoid an excessive dependence of our results on

this step, our final real GNP series is based on an average of those developed

with the conventional and alternative deflators.

     Fourth,   our use of the CPI series allows the development of a new

estimate of the GNP deflator, in contrast to the previous Kuznets deflator,

which is entirely based on components of the wholesale price index and, going

back in time, becomes more and more dependent on the prices of crude and

intermediate goods.    Our new GNP deflator is less cyclically volatile than the

standard deflator and, in addition, dampens   the   previously estimated extent of

the late nineteenth century deflation and subsequent recovery of prices

between 1896 and 1914.


Directions for Future Research

     This paper has reaffirmed the standard conclusion that real GNP was more

volatile before 1929 than since 1946.    But it goes beyond reaffirmation to


provide a new history of business cycles between 1869 and 1908, dampening some

cycles while amplifying others.   And it suggests strongly that the GNP

deflator was substantially less volatile before 1914 than the standard

version.    Further research is needed both on substantive and measurement

isSues.
                                                      GNP Volatility, Page 54



     Perhaps the most important implication of our research is that the debate

between Taylor and DeLong-Summers,    cited in the introduction,     is based on a

false premise.     They disagree whether greater price stability in the postwar

economy has aggravated or dampened business cycles.        We show that there has

been no reduction in price flexibility in postwar business cycles, and that

past estimates of the GNP deflator have been based on a fragmentary and overly

volatile data base that ignores the greatly superior and long-available direct

evidence on consumer prices.33 Clearly a top priority in future research will

be a reexamination of the short-run cyclical division of nominal GNP changes

between price and quantity responses, as well as the persistence of price

changes,   since all the recent studies of this topic have used the standard

deflators.

     At the level of measurement,    our study leaves several important    questiona

open for further research.     First, our technique    forces real GNP to be equal

to the standard series in benchmark years and thus contributes nothing to the

itimation of secular economic growth between benchmarks.         Yet our use of the

new information sets on sectoral output and on consumer prices would allow us

to go one step further and examine implications       for trend output.   Second, we

have questioned the validity of the standard CNP series during and after World

War I and their implausible implications for the behavior of labor

productivity during the 1920-21 recession.     Our use of alternative deflatora

shows that real GNP estimates    during this period of highly volatile prices are
sensitive to the choice of price indexes.     Further research on the period

between 1916 and 1923 is likely to yield new insights on this fascinating

episode;     in particular, how could manufacturing employment collapse in 1920-
                                               GNP Volatility,   Page 55



21 even faster than in 1929-31 without tumbling the entire
                                                           economy into a
Great Depression?
                                                       CNP Volatility, Page 56



                                       REFERENCES


Abramovitz,   Moses (1964).      Evidences of Lone Swings    in Aseregate
     Construction Since       the Civil War.   New York:    National Bureau of

     Economic Research.

Burns, Arthur (1960).        "Progress Towards Economic Stability," American

     Economic Review, vol. 50 (March), pp. 1-19.

DeLong,   Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers (1986). "The Changing Cyclical

     Variability of Economic Activity in the U. S.," in Gordon (1986), pp.

     679-733.

Robert Engle (1982).        "AutoregressiveConditional Heteroscedasticity with

     Estimates of the Variance of United Kingdom Inflation",          Econometrica,

     vol.    50 (July), pp. 987-1008.

                                  The Outout of Manufacturing Industries.    1899-1937.
Fabricant, Solomon (1940).

     General Series, no. 39.        New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.

_________ (1942). Enolovment in Manufacturina. 1899-1939. General                Series,

     no. 41.     New York:     National Bureau of     )nomic Research.


Frickey, Edwin (1947).        Production in the United States. 1860-1914.

     Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Friedman, Milton and Anna J. Schwartz (1963).          A Monetary History of the

     United States. 1867-1960. Princeton:           Princeton University Press for

     National Bureau of Economic Research.

__________    (1982).      Monetary Trends in the United States and the United

      Kinadom: Their Relation to Income. Prices, and Interest Rates. 1967-

      flU.      Chicago:    University of Chicago Press for National Bureau of

      Economic Research.
                                                                 GNP   Volatility,   Page 57



Galiman,    Robert E. (1966).           "Gross National Product in the United States,

     1834-1909," in Output.             Emolovment.   and Productivity in the United States

     after 1800.           Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 30, by the Conference

     on Research in Income and Wealth.                New York:     Columbia University Press

     for National Bureau of Economic Research,                  pp. 3-90.

Gordon,    Robert J.        "A Consistent    Characterization      of a Near-Century     of Price

     Behavior," American Economic Review, vol. 70 (May 1980), pp. 243-9.

___________   (1982)   .     "Price    Inertia and Policy Ineffectiveness in the United

     States,    1890-1980," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 90 (December

     1982), pp. 1087-1117.

_________ (1986),           ed.   The American Business Cycle:           Continuity and Change.

     University of Chicago Press for National Bureau of Economic Resea:                        ri.



Gottlieb,   Manuel (1965).            "New Measures of Value of Nonfarm Building for the

     United States, Annually 1850-1939."                 Review of Economic Statistics.         47,

     pp. 412-19.

_________ (1966).            "Building in Ohio Between 1837 and 1914," in Output.

     Employment,       and Productivity in the United States after 1800.                Studies in

     Income and Wealth, Volume 30, by the Conference on Research in Income and

     Wealth.     New York:         Columbia University Press for National Bureau of

     Economic Research, pp. 243-80.

Granger, C. W. J. and Paul Newbold (1986).                  Forecastina Economic Time Series,

     second edition. New York:               Academic Press.

Hoover, Ethel D. (1960).              "Retail Prices After 1850," in Trends in the

     American Economy in the Nineteenth Century. Studies in Income and

     Wealth, Volume 24, by the Conference on Research in Income and Wealth.
                                                       GNP Volatility, Page 58



     Princeton: Princeton University Press for National Bureau of Economic

     Research,    pp 141-90.

Kendrick,    John W. (1960).    "Comment," in Trends in the American Economy in the

     Nineteenth Century.       Studies in Income and Wealth, vol. 24, by the

     Conference on Research in Income and Wealth.         Princeton University Press

     for National Bureau of Economic Research, pp. 186-90.

_________ (1961).       Productivity Trends in the United States.     National Bureau

     of Economic Research, no. 71, General Series.         Princeton University Press

     for National Bureau of Economic Research.

Knenta,   Jan (1986).   Elements of Econometrics,    second edition. New York:

     MacMillan.

Kuznets, Simon S. (1938).       Commodity Flow and Cavital Formation.    New York:

     National Bureau of Economic Research.

_________ (1941).       National Income and Its Coinoositjon. 1919-1938.    National

     Bureau of Economic Research.

_________ (1946).       National Product Since 1869.     General Series, no. 46.     New

     York:     National Bureau of Economic Research.

_________ (1961).       CaDita]. in the American Economy:    Its Formation and


     Financing.     Princeton University Press for National Bureau of Economic

     Research.

Lipsey,   Robert E. and Doris Preston (1966).       Source Book of Statistics

     Relating to Construction. New York: Columbia University Press for

     National Bureau of Economic Research.

Newey, Whitney K. and Kenneth D. West (1987).        "A Simple, Positive,   Semi-

     definite Heteroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance
                                                     GNP Volatility, Page 59



     Matrix," Econometrica, vol. 55 (May), pp. 703-8.

Rees, Albert (1961).      Real Waaes in Manufacturina. 1890-1914. General Series

     no. 70.      Princeton: Princeton University Press for National Bureau of

     Economic Research.

Romer, Christina (1986a).        "Is the Stabilization of the Postwar Economy a

     Figment of the Data?"       American Economic Review, vol. 76 (June), pp. 314

     34.

_________ (l986b).       "Spurious Volatility in Historical Unemployment Data."

     Journal of Political Economy, vol. 94 (February), pp. 1-37.

_________ (1987a). "Gross National Product, 1909-1928: Existing Estimates,
     New Estimates,     and New Interpretations of World War I and its Aftermath,

     NBER Working Paper no. 2187, March.

_________ (1987b). "The Prewar Business Cycle Reconsidered: New Estimates
     of Gross National Product, 1869-1908." Mimeograph, Princeton University

     (revision of NBER working paper 1969.

Schultze,   Charles L. (1986).     Other Times. Other Places:   Macroeconomic

     Lessons from U.     S.   and EuroDean History. Washington:   Brookings.

Shaw, William H. (1947)       The Value of Commodity Output Since 1869.   National

     Bureau of Economic Research.

Taylor,   John,   "Improvements in Macroeconomic Stability: The Role of Wages an

     Prices",     in Gordon (1986), pp. 639-77.

U. S. Bureau of the Census (1975).       Historical Statistics of the United

     States. Colonial Times to 1970.       Washington D.C.: U. S. Bureau of the

     Census.

U. S. Department of Commerce (1986)       The National Income and Product Accounts
                                                      CNP Volatility, Page 60



         f the United States. 1929-82. Statistical Tables.    U.   S.   Department of

        Commerce. This data source was supplemented with data diskettes and

        tapes.

_________ (1983).      Business Statistics:   1982.   Washington D.C.: U. S.

        Department of Commerce.

Weir,    David R. (1986)   "Unemployment Volatility, 1890-1984:     A   Sensitivity

        Analysis." Mimeographed, Yale University.
                                                                    ON? Volatility, Page 61



                                               DATA APPENDiX



General Note. Series with different sources during the sample period are
                       ratio-linked together.         All real series have been recalculated

                        in 1929 dollars and all deflators crc equal to 1.0 in the base

                       year 1929.        "liUA"   refers   to the source listed in the

                        references under U. S. Department of Commerce (1986).               "Hi"


                        refers    to Historicsl Statistics, listed in the references under

                        U. 5.    Bureau of the Census.        'fl"   refers   to Business

                                                                                    of
                        Statistics, listed in the references under U. S. Department

                        Commerce (1983).

lA.    GNP,

       Nominal

       Real   -
                  - jj
              Commerce Department, 1929-1986.



                  jff
                                Table 1.1.

                            Table 1.2.

       Deflator        -
                           1j    Table 7.4.

18.    GNP, Commerce Department, 1909-1928.

                           1ff Table
                  fl
       Nominal     -                   1.25.

       Real   -             Table   1.25.


       Deflator        -   Nominal GNP divided by Real        ON?.


lC.    GNP, Gallman/Kendrick Adjustments of Kuznets, 1869-1908.

       Nominal     -        Net National Product, Column       2,    Table 4.8, Friedman and Schwartz

(1982),   pp.     122-129.       Plus Capital Consumption, unravelled five year moving average,

Kuznets (1961), Table K-B Column 3, pp. 499-501, and Table R-29 Column 2, pp. 572-

575.    The series was also adjusted by adding the Kendrick adjustments of Kuznets.

For 1889-1908, this adjustment is Nominal ON? from Kendrick (1961), Table A-IIb, pp
                                                                     GNP Volatility, Page 62



296-297, minus Nominal CNP from Kuzneta (1961), Column                      1,   Table R-23, pp. 557-553.

For 1869-1888, the adjustment ia the linear interpolation of the difference between

Kendrick decade estimates, Table A-IIb, pp. 296-297,                     and Kuzneta (1961) decade

estimates, Column                9,   Table R-ll, p. 520.

       Real     -    Net National Product, Column 3, Table 4.8, Friedman and Schwartz

(1982),       pp.   122-129.          Plus Capital Consumption, unravelled five year moving average,

Kuzneta (1961), Column 6 Table R-8, pp. 499-501 and Column 5 Table R-29, pp. 572-

575.    The Kendrick adjustmenta of Kuzneta for 1889-1908: Real GNP from Kendrick

(1961),   Table A-ha, pp 294-295, minus Real GNP from Kuzneca (1961),                         Column 1,

Table R-22, pp. 555-556.                   For 1869-1888, the adjustment is the linear interpolation

of the difference between Kendrick decade eatimatea, Table A-ha,                        pp.   294-295,    and

Kuznets (1961) decade estimates, Column 9, Table R-12, p. 521.

       Deflator          -    nominal divided by         real GNP.

2A.    CNP "Standard" Kendrick, 1929-1986.

       Nominal       -       aame aa series       lA.

       Real    -    same as series          l.A.


       Deflator          -    same as series       1A.

28.    GNP "Standard" Kendrick, 1909-1928.

       Nominal       -       Kendrick    (1961),    Table All-b, pp. 296-297.

       Real    -    Kandrick          (1961),   Table All-a, pp. 294-295.

       Deflator          -   nominal divided by          real GNP.

2C.    GNP, "Standard" Kendrick, 1869-1908.

       Nominal       -       same as series       1C.

       Real    -    same as series          1C.

       Deflator          -    same as series       lC.
                                                                             CliP   Volatility, Pegs 63




3.      GNP, Kuznets Components (Variant 3), 1869-1908.

                                                   five year moving average, Kuanets (1961),         Column 6, Table
        Nominal          -        unravelled
                                                557-558.
R-25, pp. 561-562 and Column 1, Table R-23, pp.

        Real    -       unravelled            five year moving average,        Kuznets (1961), Column 6, Table K-

26, pp.    563-564 and Column 1, Table R-22, pp. 555-556.

        Deflator              -       nominal divided by real         GNP.


4.     ON?, with hybrid deflator, 1869-1986.

        Nominal           -
                                  Same as series 2.

        Real    -        Series          2   minus real consumption (Series 12) minus real construction

                                                                                              the CPI based deflator
(Series     10) plus nominal consumption (Series 12) divided                             by
                                                  divided by the construction
(Series 13) plus nominal construction (Series 10)

deflator from Series 11.

         Deflator                 -   nominal divided by real ONP.

5.      ON?, Romer.

         Real    -
                         1929-1986, same as series               1A.

                 -       1869-1928, Romer             (1987b),   Table 2.

 6A.     Commodity Output,                     1947-1986.

         Nominal              -
                                      ON? originating in agriculture, mining,           and manufacturing, I11fl

 Table    6.1.

                                                                                     and manufacturing,   fl,   Table
         Real       -    ON? originating in agriculture, mining,


 6.2.

         Deflator                 -    nominal divided by real output.

 68.     Commodity Output, 1939-1946.

         Nominal              -       ON? Goods,   t1ffA Table 1.3.

         Real        -   ON? Goods,                    Table   1.4.
                                                                     GNP Volatility, Page 64



        Deflator           -    nominal divided by real output.

 6G.    Commodity Output, 1889-1938.

        Nominal    -       Value of Finished Commodities and Construction Materials, Current

 Dollars, Shaw (1947), Table 1.1, pp. 62-65 and Table 1.2.,
                                                            p. 69. Multiplied by the
 ratio of real commodity output in 1929
                                        (source below) to nominal commodity output
 in 1929 from Shaw.

       Real   -   Finished            Commodity Output (based on Shaw), Kuznets (1961), Column 6,
 Table R-2l, pp. 553-554.

       Deflator        -       nominal divided by real     output.

 GD.   Commodity Output,                1869-1888.

       Nominal     -       real      commodity output times Kusnets ON? deflator (series       3   above).
       Real   -
                  Finished            Commodity Output, Kuznets (1961), Column 6, Table R-21, pp.
553-554.

       Deflator        -
                               nominal divided by real output.
7.     Manufacturing Output.

        1947-1986              -   Federal Reserve   Board Index of Industrial Production,

Manufacturing.                 1947-1960, Series P13,    , p.    667.   1961-1986, BS, p. 3 and various
issues of Survey of Current Business.

       1899-1946, Index of Manufacturing, Fabricant (1940), Table 1,
                                                                     p. 44.
       1869-1898, Index of Production for Manufacture, Frickey (1947), Table 6,
                                                                                p.
54.    (This series is scaled so that in 1929 it equals the dollar value of national

income from the manufacturing sector in 1929 times the ratio
                                                             of nominal GNP to
national income in 1929.                  (Sources-tiffA Table 6.1 and Table 6.3))

8.     Output From Transportation and Communications.

       1947-1986, Real GNP from Transportation and
                                                   Communications, flfl, Table 6.2.
                                                                   GNP Volatility, Fag. 65




       1889-1946, a weighted average of the Kendrick (1961) Transportation Output

Index and the Telephone and Telegraph Output Index.                     The Transportation Output

Index is Column 1, Table G-II, pp. 541-542.                      For 1929-1946, the Telephone and

                                                                           For 1889-1928, the
Telegraph Index is Column I, Table H-Ill, pp. 583-584.

Telephone Index is Column              1,   Table H-tV, pp. 585-587.      The weights are the share of

                                                                      sector in
national income from the transportation sector and the communications

1929   (j Table             6.3).   This average is then acaled so that in 1929 it equals the

value of national income from the transportation and construction sectors

                                                   income.
multiplied by the ratio of nominal CNP to national
                                                                              Table
       1869-1888, Index of Transportation and Communications, Frickey (1947),

17, p. 117.

9A.      Construction Materials (Shaw), 1889-1938.

       Nominal     -       Construction Materials,    Current Dollars, Shaw (1947), Table 1-1, pp.

64-65,    and Table 1-2, p. 69.

       Real   -   Construction Materials,          1913 dollars,      Shaw (1947), Table 1-3, pp. 76-

77.

       Deflator        -   nominal divided real construction materials.

98.    Construction Materials, 1869-1888.

       Nominal     -       Nominal Kuznets Construction (Series 108 below).

       Real   -   Real Kuznets Construction           (Series     108 below).

       Deflator        -   nominal divided by real construction materials.

bA.      Kuznets Construction, 1929-1986.

       Nominal     -       Structure   GNP, I1A, Table 1.3.

       Real   -   Structures        GNP,    fl,   Table   1.4.

       Deflator        -
                            nominal divided real construction.
                                                                       GNP Volatility, Page 66



108. Kuznets Construction, 1869-1928.

       Nominal     -
                           Kuznets    (1961),     Column   1,   Table R-4, pp. 490-491,      and unravelled

five year moving average, Column 5, Table R-30, pp. 576-587.

       Real   -   Kuznets       (1961),      Column 1, Table R-5, pp. 492-493, and unravelled five

year moving average,             Column 10, Table R-30, pp. 576-587.

       Deflator        -    Nominal divided by real construction.

11A.    Cottlieb/BLS/Commerce Construction, 1929-1986.

       Nominal     -             Table     1.3.

       Real   -               Table   1.4.

       Deflator        -    nominal divided by real construction.

118.    Cottlieb/BLS/Commerce Construction, 1915-1928.

       Nominal     -       Value of New Construction, series Ni, ki, p.               618.

       Real   -    Total New         Construction, series C22, Lipsey and Preston (1966), p. 30.
       Deflator        -   nominal construction divided by             real construction.

liC.    Cottlieb/BLS/Commerce Construction, 1869-1914.

       Nominal             Value of Building, Cottlieb (1965), Table 3., p. 417.

       Real   -   nominal construction divided by the construction deflator.

       Deflator        -   Construction      Cost Index,        1869-1888, series N138, fl, p. 629.      1889-

1914, series Nl39,            ,      p.   629.

12A.    Consumption, 1929-1986.

       Nominal     -            Table      1.1.

       Real   -   ZIUA, Table         1.2.

       Deflator        -   nominal divided by real consumption.

128.    Consumption, 1889-1928.

       Nominal     -    Kendrick      (1961),     Table A-IIb, Column      4, pp.   296-297.
                                                                  CR VolatLlity,     Page 67




       Real   -   Kendrick        (1961), Table   A-ha, Column 4, pp. 294-295.

       Deflator        -    nominal divided by real consumption.

12C.     Consumption, 1869-1888.

       Nominal     -       Kuznets (l9l),     unravelled five year moving average, Table R25,

Column 4, pp. 561-562.

       Real   -   Kuznets        (1961),    unravelled five year moving average, Table R26, Column

4, pp.    563-564.

       Deflator        -    nominal divided by real consumption.

13.    CPI gased Deflator.
                                                                             Table   7.1.
       1959-1986, Fixed Weight Consumption Deflator,
                                                              series E135,      pp. 210-211.
       1915-1958, Consumer Price Index,               81.5,


                                                     Table 22, p. 74.
       1890-1914, Cost-of-Living Index, Rees (1961),
                                                       Table 1, pp. 142-143.
       1869-1889, Consumer Price Index, Hoover (1960),
                                                  GNP Volatility, Page 68



                                      FOOTNOTES




     1.   This reference to Mendrick's monumental work greatly understates his
contribution of compiling consistent output indexes, input indexes for both
labor and capital, and indexes of labor productivity and total factor
productivity for major industry subdivisions extending over the entire period
between 1869 and 1955. However for the issues of output measurement addressed
in this paper, Kendrick's main contribution was relatively minor, to make the
adjustments needed to convert the Kuznets output series to the concepts
adopted by the Department of Commerce in the NIPA for the period since 1929.
Both Commerce and Kendrick have published estimates of GNP for the
                                                                    period
1909-28; issues involved in choosing between these conflicting series have
been treated in detail by Romer (1987a) and are discussed  further below.


     2. The continuous nature of the deterioration is true not
                                                                 just before
1929, but also since then. For instance, income data became much better after
1940, as a result of the introduction of the social security tax
of income-tax withholding. The quality of both the                system and
                                                    producer and consumer
price indexes, components of which underlie the NIPA deflators, has been
progressive throughout the postwar period. Many other examples could be cited.


     3. A qualification is that Kuznets' estimates of construction
                                                                            shift
in 1915 and subsequent years from s scaled-up version of Shaw's indexoutput
                                                                       of
construction materials to direct measures of construction
                                                          output. See our
subsequent discussion of Table 2, lines 8 and 10.


     4.   Kuznets includes just consumption and
                                                investment, not government
spending, in CNP. But his augmented concept of consumption includes personal
tsx payments (his estimate of the value of
                                            government services to
and his augmented concept of investment includes public investment.consumers),
                                                                      Thus
Kendrick's conversion procedure involves taking Kuznets' GNP,
                                                               subtracting
personal  tax payments and public investment, and adding government purchases
of goods and services, as well as unpaid services of financial  intermediaries.



      5.  The use of the Kendrick series in preference to the Commerce series
is an important difference between this paper and our earlier effort in this
area distributed as NSER working paper 1999. Rower's criticisms of the
Coiweerce series were developed after that
                                           paper was written. Readers should
note also that the Coamerce series is the basis  for the nominal and real GNP
series published in Friedman and Schwartz (1982) and Cordon
                                                             (1986). In
section IV below we note that the cyclical behavior of real CNP in 1919-23
                                                                            is
still open to dispute and that there are
                                          arguments to support the Commerce
                                               GNP Volatility. Page 69



version. But, not knowing how the Commerce version was compiled, we join
Romer in abstaining from any use of the series.


     6.  Henceforth we use the phrase "commodity output" as synonymous with
the sum of value added    the agriculture, mining, and manufacturing sectors.
While Shaw's (1947) data on commodity output include construction materials,
such materials are produced entirely within the agriculture, mining, and
manufacturing sectors. Value added in the construction sector in postwar data
does not correspond to Shaw's estimates of construction materials but rather
consists mainly of labor and profit income earned in the construction sector.
Construction output consists of the output of construction materials plus
construction value added. The readily available postwar counterpart of
construction output is "Structures GNP" in Table 1.4 of the NIPA.


     7. All of these components are measured in real terms except for postage
                                                                  its weight
stamp revenue. We did not bother to deflate this component, since
is less than five percent of the overall index.


     8.  See Kuznets (1961), notes to Table R-30, columns (5) and (10), pp.
585 and 587.


     9.  Gottlieb's only table of annual data provides a listing of his estimates
in current dollars, not constant dollars. We have deflated his current-dollar
series by a standard construction cost series (Historical Statistics, series N139
linked to Nl38 prior to 1889).


     10. This approach is a compromise. Kuznets detrended by a moving
average method over a relatively short five-year time period that implied that
trend output in the late l930s was equal to normal output, and that the Great
Depression (measured by the deviation of actual output from trend) had
disappeared.  Romer's first draft followed Kuznets by adopting a moving average
detrending method, seven years in her case (7MA), and our first draft responded
to this choice by comparing results calculated with the alternative 7MA and
trends-through benchmarks method, using different benchmarks than in the
present paper, i.e., those used in previous research (Cordon, 1986, Appendix A).
Romer then responded by adopting our trends-through-benchmarks method albeit
with a different choice of benchmarks, and we have responded in turn by
adopting her benchmarks, with the exception of 1869 as noted in the text.


     11. All such deviations reported in this paper are presented as
percentages and are calculated from natural logarithms, e.g.,

          qt —   loo*log(Qt/Q*t).
                                                 GNP Volatility, Page 70




     12. Romer (1987b) shows that her prewar-postwar volatility ratios are
robust to the choice of an alternative set of benchmark years, and we assume
that the sac would be true for our results.


     13. Because the language used by Romer differs so drastically in tone
from Shaw's own qualifications, discussed below, it is worth quoting some of
her descriptions of the Shaw commodity output series.  [ed: page numbers are
to 12/87 manuscript]. "The Shaw series appears to be quite accurate" (p. 6);
"While the Shaw series is almost surely accurate" (p. 7); " "The Shaw series
is a particularly good interpolating series because it is very consistent over
time" (p. 36).


     14. Kendrick indicates that the telephone output data are interpolated
on the basis of an index supplied by Fabricsnt, but this should be relatively
complete as it comes from AT&T, and in any case communications output is well
under 10 percent of transportation output during the 1889-1908 period (it rose
to 16 percent in 1929).


     15.  See Kendrick (1961), pp. 509-10. Shaw estimates the coverage of his
interpolators to be less than 25 percent for 1889-98.


     16.   The weights are given in Frickey (1947,   p. 112).



     17.  This statement is based on more than 20,000 price observations
collected from mail-order catalogues and matched to individual producer-price
index (PPI) observations for 8-digit detailed commodities.  Quality-corrected
catalogue prices tend to drift down relative to the PPI observations on a secular
basis with no evident cyclical characteristics.


     18.  In a companion volume (1942) Fabricant provides companion data
series on employment, hours, and productivity.


     19. Another difference is that Shaw's coverage includes only finished
goods, while Fabricant included also intermediate manufactured goods. This
partly accounts for the higher volatility of Fabricant's index. To control
for this difference, we compare Fabricant's prewar index only with the FRBIIP
for the postwar, and Shaw's index only with value added in the commodity-
producing sectors (agriculture, mining, and manufacturing).


     20.   See Shaw (1947, table at top of p. 94, text at bottom of p. 97).
                                                    GNP Volatility, Page 11



     21. The prewar Shaw and Fabricant indexes are compared here to different
postwar indexes. See footnote 19.


     22.   Kendrick (1961), Tables 0-Il and C-Il.


     23.  For detaila on the Long and Riggleman-Isard building permit series,
see Historical Statistics of the United States, series NIll and N114.


     24.  The particular way Kuznets switches methods in 1915 would lead us
substantially to understate prewar volatility if we were to use the Kurnets
construction series in our regressions. Because the Kurnets series is volatile
after 1915, estimated regression coefficients on that construction series are
relatively small and yield relatively low measures of volatility before 1909 when
applied to the overly smooth Shaw-based Kurnets series. Below we provide
alternative volatility measures for versions of our equations which replace the
Gottlieb-Commerce construction series with Shaw construction materials.


     25.  Unlike Romer, we do not include the postwar years in the sample
period of our regression. The question under discussion, after all, is
whether the prewar and postwar are different. The last thing we would want to
do is to answer the question in advance by assuming that the prewar and the
postwar exhibit the same structure.


     26. The apparent paradox in columns (7) and (8) of the R2 and SEE moving
in opposite directions is explained by the fact that the dependent variables
in these two equations are different. In column (7) the dependent variable is
real GNP minus commodity output, whereas in column (8) the dependent variable
is real GNP minus all three components.


     27.   These results contradict Romer's claim (l987b, p. 35) that extra
explanatory variables "should not alter the prewar GNP estimates significantly.
The reason for this is that commodity output is an excellent
                                                             predictor of GNP."
Commodity output by itself yields equations plagued y serial correlation and
standard errors double those which include transporation-communications and
construction as additional explanatory variables.


     28.  The Shaw commodity series (which includes construction materials on
line 4) has a higher volatility than GNP, consumption, or non-commodity output
mainly because of its construction materials component (shown separately on
line 5).
                                                GNP Volatility, Page 72




     29. These regression equations are not shown in tabular format to save
                                                       one percent level or
space. All sums of coefficients are significant at the
better.


     30. At the five percent level of significance, the upper and lower
hounds for the regression equations in Tahle 8 are 1.21 and 1.65.


     31.  All results in sections 3 and 4 of Table 9 use the regression
results using the full set of three explanatory variables, in light of the
high standard errors and low Durbin-Watson statistics for the restricted
                                                               that include
regressions (e.g., in Table 6, columns (1), (3), (5), and (7))
only commodity output.


     32. Since we have not developed new estimates of consumption spending.
we use the standard Kendrick-Kuznets series on real consumption, construction
                                           three price indexes in the
apending, and the residual to weight these
calculation of nominal GNP. The implicit deflator is then the ratio of the
                                                        new nominal ON? series
resulting nominal GNP series to standard real OMP. Our
is then the product of this implicit deflator and our new real ON? series.


     33. We recognize the distinction between the short-run responsiveness of
the aggregate price level to nominal demand changes and the "persistence"
issue, that is, the dependence of price changes on their own lagged values.
The volatility data on price indexes presented in Table 7 bears directly only
on the short-run responsiveness issue. Whether our new deflator exhibits as
much persistence as postwar indexes is a question we defer for future research.
                                         Table   1


                        Sources of Annual Real GNP Estimates,
                        Extending Backwards frog 1929 to 1869,
                         by Author. Time Interval, and Method


      Author             Time Interval            Method and Nature of Contribution




Ia.   Kuznets (1961)     1919-1928                Income-PaymentsMethod

lb. Kuznets    (1961)    1869-191.3               Components Method: blows up major
                                                  subdivisions of Shaw's commodity output
                                                 by assumed   ratios
2.    Kendrick (1961)    1889-1928               Adjusts Kuznets (la and ib) for different
                                                 treatment of government

3.    Galiman (1966)     1869-1909               Adjusts Kuznets (lb) for coverage in
                                                 Census years; no change in annual
                                                 behavior between Census years

4.    Commerce (1986)    1909-1929               Estimation method not documented

5.    Kuznets (1961)     1869-1918               Indicator Method, relationship
                                                 established informally without
                                                 statistical regression; uses single Shaw
                                                 commodity output variable
6a.   Romer (1987a)      1909-1918               Revises Kendrick (2)by switching to
                                                 income-paymentsmethod from components
                                                 method

6b.   Romer (1987b)      1869-1908               Indicator   Method,   relationship estimated
                                                 by statistical regression; uses single
                                                 Shaw commodity output variable
                                        Table 2

                            Annual Sources Available on
                Behavior of Major Compooents of Real GNP before 1929,
                        By Sector, Time Interval, and Source




      Sector                Time Interval         Source [series number in data apx.[



Commodity Output and Manufacturing Production

1.    Commodity Output      1869-1938             1889-1938, Shaw (1947), extended
                                                  hack to 1869 by Kuznets (1961).
                                                  [6C-O[

2.    Manufacturing         1860-1914             Frickey (1947).     [7[

3.    Manufacturing         1899-1939             Fabricant (1942).     [7)

4.    Industrial Production 1919-to date          Federal Reserve Board.       [7[



Transportation and Communication

4.    Transportation and    1860-1914             Frickey (1947).     [8[
      Communication

5.    Transportation        1889-1953             Kendrick (1961).     [83

6.    Telephone & Telegraph 1889-1953             Kendrick (1961); telephone only
                                                  before 1929. [8[

 Construction

 7.   Construction          1869-1938             1889-1938, Shaw (1947), extended
      materials                                   back to 1869 by Kurnets (1961).
                                                  [9A-B]

 8.   Construction Output   1869-1938             Kuznets (1961).     [1033

 9.   Nonfarm Building      1850-1939             Cottlieb (1965).     [llC]

10.   Construction          1915-to date          Labor/Commerce.     [1133
      Value and Volume
                                                Table 3

                         Standard Deviation of Deviations from Trend
             of Alternative Aggregate and Sectorel Real Output Series, 1869-1986,
                      Detrended by Log-Linear Trends through Benchmarks




 Series end                  1869-   1889-   1908-   1869-   1869-   1954-   1947-   (4)/   (5)/
 Years Covered               1888    1908    1928    1908    1928    1972    1986    (6)    (7)

                              (,      (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)    (8)    (9)

 Attentive Real ON? Series

 1.     "Standard"            5.24    4.82    6.26    4.97    5.40    2.93   2.92    1.70   1.85
      (Commerce   1909-28)

 2.     "Standard"            5.24    4.95    4.57    5.03    4.89    2.93   2.92    1.72   1.67
      (Kendrick 1909-28)

 3.    Rower                  4.06    3.22    3.69    3.63    3.68   2.93    2.92    1.24   1.26

 4.    Line 2, with       5.39        7.13    5.94    6.45    6.25   3.17    2.89    2.03   2.16
       Alternative Deflators

 Sectoral Comoonents and Indicators

 S.    Shaw Commodities       6.62    6.00    4.50    6.24    5.71   4.96    4.76    1.26   1.20

 6.    Manufacturing          9.48    9.18   10.44    9.25    9.65   5.94    5.65    1.56   1.71
       Production Index

 7.    Transportation &       7.27    7.71    6.36   7.50     7.65   3.56    4.77    1.62   1.60
       Communication

 8.    Shaw Construction 10.31       10.24   14.46   12.36   13.11
       Materials

 9.    Kuznets               10.35    9.62   24.15   12.03   18.05   3.92    7.41    3.07   2.44
       Construction

10.    Cottlieb-Commerce 17.85       16.74   20.18   19.28   20.69   3.92    7.41    4.92   2.80
       Construction


 Sources:         The following list cross-references the series used on each line to the
                  series documented in the data appendix.  Line 1 (lA-C) indicates that the
                  source of the series computed on line 1 in this table is given in the
                  notes to series 1A through 1C in the data appendix.   1 (lA-C), 2 (2A-C),
                  3 (5), 4 (4), 5 (6A-D), 6 (7), 7 (8), 8 (9A-B), 9 (bA-B), 10 (llA-C).
                                       Table 4

                 Shares of tajor Sectors in Selected Benchmark Years,
                                  Constant 1.929 Prices



                                Transportation-
Year              Commodities    Communication     Construction         P.esidual




1.873                35.7              4.3             15.8              44.1

1.891                38.8              5.4             18.5              37.3

1.910                38.4              8.3             14.6              38.7

1924                 35.8              8.5             1.2.3             43.3

1947                 39.4             12.0              8.8              40.0

1962                 35.7              7.9             11.7              44.8

1981                 33.5             9.1               3.3              51.9



        Prewar and postwar series are linked as described in the notes to Table 3,
        lines 5, 7, and 10, respectively.
                                                     Table   5

                    Alternative      Measures of Economic Activity,                 1919-23
                                            (1919 — 100)




                                 1919           1920              1921       1922         1923



Real GNP

1.   Commerce                    100.0              92.2           85.7          98.3     109.1

2.   Kendrick                    100.0              98.9           96,6      102.2        115.8

3.   Kuznets Variant A           100.0          100.7              94.9      101.5        115.7

4.   Kuznets Variant B           100,0              96.0           87.9          94.7     107.3


Labor Hours

5.   Kendrick                    100.0              99.3           89.8          96.1    103.5


Real CNP Per Hour

6,   Kuanets Variant A           100.0          101.4             105,7     105.6        111.8

7.   Ku.znets Variant B          100.0              96.7           97.9          98.5    103.6




Sources by line   1,2     Same as Table     1


                  3       Kuznets (1946), Table 1-15, col. (7).

                  4       Line 3 plus the difference between alternative measurea of flow
                          of aervices, Kuznets (1946), Table I-4B, col. (5), minus Table
                          I-4A, col. (5).

                  S       Kendrick (1961)       ,   Table    A-X.

                  6       Line   3   divided by line         5,    in percent.

                  7       Line 4 divided by line             5,    in percent.
                                               Table 6

                 Regression Equations and Backcast Volatility Statistics,
         Standard Oeflstors, Alternative Sample Periods and Explanatory Variables

             (Standard Errors in Parenthesis; ** indicates coefficient
   is significant at 1 percent level; * indicates signficance at 5 percent level)

                           Indicators Method                           Comoonents Method
                        1909-28         1909-38                    1909-28          1909-38

                      (1)       (2)      (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)

Resrespion Estimates

Commodity Output     0.545* 0.289        0.868** 0.374**     0.249  -0.187        0.79l** 0.031
                    (0.224)   (0.190)   (0.041) (0.131)     (0.365) (0.463)       (0.067)   (0.316)

Transportation                0.219               0.112                 0.255               0.074
  and Communication           (0.132)             (0.084)              (0.323)              (0.204)

Construction                  0.178**             0.161**               0.159*              0.142**
                              (0.028)             (0.018)              (0.068)              (0.044)


                     0.111    0.737     0.911     0.976     -0.363     -0.096     0. 720    0.580

SEE.                 4.364    2.374     3.966     2.062      7.102      5.790     6.440     4.978

Ourbin-Watson        0.493    1.926     0.475     1.900      0.501      1.869     0.467     1.836


Backcast Standard Deviation
,f           frnn, tr,,,1


1869- 1888           3.92     4.75      6.25      4.10       3.60       4.30      6.20      3.85

1889- 1908           3.3o     5.80      5.36      5.28       3.   33    5.65      5.39      5.53

1869-   1908         3.63     5.48      5.78      4.84       3.45       5.   18   5.78      4.87
                                                Table   7


                         Standard Deviation of Deviations from Trend
                 of Alternative Aggregate and Sectoral Deflators, 1869-1986,
                      Detrended by Log-Linear Trends through Benchmarks


 Series and                1869-     1889-   1908-   1869-     1869-   1954-   1947-   (4)/   (5)!
 Years Covered             1888      1908    1928    1908      1928    1972    1986    (6)    (7)

                              (1)     (2)     (3)       (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)    (8)    (9)

 Alternative Defistors     for the Amareaste     Economy

 1.   "Standard"              6.21   3.96    14.12      4.08    9.35   3.03    4.53    1.34   2.06
       (Kendrick   1909-28)

 2.   Standard                4.07   4.26    12.16      4.49    8.52   2.29    4.73    1.96   1.80
       Consumption

 3.   Linked CPI              2.53   1.93    11.48      2.27    7.06   2.86    4.63    0.79   1.52


 Sectoral   Deflators

 4.   Shaw Commodities        4.22   4.86    17.58      4.65   11.48   2.83    9.14    1.64   1.26

 5.   Shaw Construction 11.73        8.06    18.62      9,97   13.95
       Materials

 6.   Construction            8.97   5.33    14.33      7,28   10.33   6.47    8.18    1.13   1.26
       Price Index


 Imolicit   Deflatprs   for non-Commodity Outout

 7.   Standard                4.36   3.98    13.29      4.12   8.66    2.40    4.37    1.72   1.98

 8.   Alternative             6.84   6.02    14.28      6.77   9.77    3.01    4.31    2.24   2.31


 Ratio.   non-Cooditv Outout to Consumotion
 9.   Standard                1.07   0.93    1.09       0.92   1.02    1.05    0.92    0.88   1.11

10.   Alternative             2.70   3.11    1.24       2.98   1.41    1.05    0.93    2.84   1.52

 Sources:     The following list cross-references the series used on each line to the
              series documented in the data appendix.  Line 1 (lA-C) indicates that the
              source of the series computed on line 1 in this table is given in the
              notes to series IA through lC in the data appendix.   I (lA-C), 2 (l2A-C),
              3 (13), 4 (6A-D), 5 (9A-B), 6 (llA-C), 7
                                                       Implicit deflator for Standard
              CNP series (2A-C) minus commodity output (6A-0) , 8 Implicit  deflator for
              hybrid CNP (4) minus commodity output (6A-D). 9 line 7 divided by line
              2. 10 line 8 divided by line 3.
                                        Table 8

              Regression Equations and Backca,t Volatility Statistics,
     Alternative Deflators Alternative Sample Periods and Explanatory Variables

             (Standard Errors in Parenthesis; ** indicates coefficient
   is significant at 1 percent level; * indicates signficance at 5 percent level)

                          Indicators Method                Comnonents Method
                       1909-28         1909-38          1909-28         1909-38

                         (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)

PearessIon Estimates

Commodity Output        0.385*          O.344**         -0.064          -0.119
                       (0.162)         (0.074)          (0.400)         (0.183)

Transportation          0.178           O.219**         0.238            0.363
  and Communication    (0.262)         (0.083)          (0.648)         (0.206)

Construction            O.178**         O.149**         0.106            O.133**
                       (0.032)         (0.021)          (0.080)         (0.052)




                        0.737           0.975           -0.060           0.705

SEE.                    3.015           2.491            7.465           6.145

Durbin-%Jatson          1.388           1.469            1.329           1.438




Beckcast Standard Deviation
of Deviation from Trend

1869-188d               4.56            4.69            4.21             4,75

1889-1908               6.09            6.11             5.95            6.34

1869-1908               5.35            5.43             5.13            5.43
                                            Table 9

                                  Sunary of Evidence on
                              Prewar/Postwar Volatility Ratios

                                  Volatility Ratios
                                                                 Excess Prewar Volatility
                                1869-1908      1869-1928            as Partant of That
                                 1954-72        1947-86        indicated by Standard Series


                                   (1)            (2)               (3)          (4)


1.   Standard                     1.72            1.67             100.0        100.0
2.   Romer                        1.24            1.26              33 . 3       38.8
3.   New Estimates,   Conventional Deflators

      a.   Components to 1928     1.77            1.70             106 . 9      104.5

      b.   Indicators to 1928     1.87            1.77             120. 8       114.9

      c.   Components to 1938     1.66            1.63              91.7         94.0

      d.   Indicators to 1938     1.66            1.63              91. 7        94.0

4.   New Estimates,   Alternative Deflators

      a.   Components to 1928     1.61            1.87              84.7        129.9
      b.   Indicators to 1928     1.69            1.92              95.8        137.3

      c.   Components to 1938     1.71            1.94              98.6        140.0

      d.   Indicators to 1938     1.71            1.94              98.6        140.0

5.   Components Method, Conventional Deflators,       Estimated through 1938

      a.   Exclude                2.39            2.13            193.0         168.6
            Construction

      b.   Substitute Shaw       1.53             1.54              73.6         80.6
            Construction Materials

      c.   Same as Sb, Alt.       1.57           1.83               79.2        123.9
            Deflator
                               Table 10

   New Estimates of Nominal GNP, Real GNP in Constant 1982 Dollars,
                and Implicit CNP Deflator (1982 — 100),
                              1869-1928




                  Nominal             Real GNP           Implicit CNP
Year                ON?            (1982 Dollars)     Deflator (1982—100)


1869                8.21                  78.2             10.49
1870                8.41                  84.2              9.98
1871                8.69                  88.1              9.86
1872                8.81                  91.7              9.60
1873                9.17                  96.3              9.51
1874                8.85                  95.7              9.25
1875                8.92                  100.7             8.85
1876                8.68                  101.9             8.51
1877                8.82                  105.2             8.38
1878                8.63                  109.6             7.87
1879                9.41                  123.1             7.64
1880               11.06                  137.6             8.03
1881               11.39                  142.5             7.99
1882               12.37                  151.6             8.16
1883               12.24                  155.3             7.88
1884               11.92                  158.1             7.53

1885               11.71                  159,3             7.35
1886                12.06                 164.1             7.35
1887               12.61                  171.5             7.35
1888                12.75                 170.7             7.47
1889                13.57                 181.3             7.48

1890                13,44                 183.9             7.30
1891                13.86                 189.9             7.30
1892                14.33                 198.8             7.21
1893                14.37                 198.7             7.23
1894                13.21                 192.9             6.85

1895                14.53                 215.5             6.74
1896                14.25                 210.6             6.76
1897                15.18                 227.8             6.66
1898                15.74                 233.2             6.75
1899                17.85                 260.3             6.86
1900                18.58                 265.4             7.00
1901                20.97                 297.9             7.04
1902                21.65                 303.0             7.14
1903                22.85                 311.7             7.33
1904                23.93                 323.5             7.39
                   (continued on next page)
                                      Table 10 (continued)



                             Nominal               teal ON?               Implicit ON?
       Year                    ON?              (1982 Dollars)         Deflator (1982—100)


       1905                   26.12                 353.2                     7.40
       1906                   28.10                 367.7                     7.64
       1907                   28.88                 362.0                     7.98
       1908                   26.72                 342.2                     7.81
       1909                   29.88                 382.1                     7.82
       1910                   31.24                 383.8                     8.14
       1911                   32.16                 396.0                     8.12
       1912                   34.85                 418.9                     8.32
       1913                   36.56                 435.4                     8.40
       1914                   34.25                 402.4                     8.51
       1915                   36.36                 417.3                     8.71
       1916                   46.02                 485.0                     9.49
       1917                   55.10                 484.9                    11.36
       1918                   69.70                 522.2                    13.35
       1919                   77.22                 507.1                    15.23

       1920                   87.24                 496.3                    17.58
       1921                   73.27                 478.8                    15.30
       1922                   72,99                 513.2                    14.22
       1923                   85.62                 585.0                    14.63
       1924                   87.91                 600.5                    14.64
       1925                   91.49                 614.1                    14.90
       1926                   97.52                 651.0                    14.98
       1927                   96.34                 654.6                    14.72
       1928                   97.32                 666.7                    14.60
       1929                  103.90                 709.6                    14.64



Sources:      Real GN?, taken as antilog of the log of the trend value of standard ON?
              plus the log deviation from trend, where the deviation from trend is the
              average of the series listed in Table 9, lines 3c and 4c. This is
              converted from 1929 to 1982 prices by multiplying by the ratio of NIPA
              1929 real to nominal ON?.

              The ON? deflator is the hybrid deflator,       series   [4] in the data appendix.

              Nominal ON? is the product of real ON? in this table times the ON?
              deflator, divided by 100,
                                                FIGURE 1
                         ALTERNATiVE CONSUMPTION DEFLATORS, 1869—1928
                                          1914 = 1.0
           2-
        1.9-




R
                                                                                  f
C
E       1.4-                                                                      I
I       1.3-
N
        3.2-
x

    -

          .9
        0 .0 -                                              "STANDARD' DEFLATOR

        0.7- I I I ++-H--H±f-H-+-H-f-+-++H±H-fff+-ft-I—FH±H-I-J-j-HJ-f-H-+4--I-J--H—H--f
           1869   1874   1879   1884   1889   1894   1899   1904   1909   1914    1919   1924
1924    1919    1914   1909   1904   1899   1894   1889    1884      1879   1874   1869
                                                                                      -33
                                                                                      —13
                                                                                      -9
                                                                                      -.7
                                                                                      -5
                                                                                            T
                                                                                            N
                                                                                      —1    E
                                                                                            C
                                                                                            R
                                                                                            E
                                                                                     3      P
                                                                                     5
SERIES NEW
                                                                                     7
                                                                                     a
                                                   SERIES STANDARD                    11
                                                                                     13
               ESTIMATES COMPONENTS NEW AND STANDARD
                  1869—1928 TREND, FROM DEVIATIONS
                                 2 FIGURE
                                     FIGURE 3
                      STANDARD AND NEW ESTIMATES OF REAL GNP
                              CONSTANT 1982 DOLLARS
    6.55

    6.35

    6.15

    5.95
L                                                NEW SERIES

    5.75                                                      STANDARD SERIES

R
E
A
L   5.35


P
    4.95


                     4
    4.55

    4.35                       I I I 11-1-f I I 1±Hf+-f+44±f-H-±H+-f±F±+±H±H+1-H1-f
       1869   1874   1879   1884   1889   1894    1899   1994      2914
                                                                 1989   1919 2924
