NBER WORKINC PAPER SERIES

BUYBACKS, EXIT BONDS, AND THE
OPTIMALITY OF DEBT AND LIQUIDITY RELIEF

Kenneth

Working

A. Froot

Paper No. 267S

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1988

This paper is part of a more ambitious project on forgiveness, joint with
Jeff Sachs. I thank Rudi Dornbusch, Paul Krugjnan, and Jeffs Sachs, for
sharing many of their insights on these issues, Kick Dooley and Jonathan
Eaton for comments, and the Alfred P. Sloan and Ford Foundations for
financial support. This research is part of NEER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2675
August 1988

BUTBACKS, EXIT BONDS, AND THE
OPTIMALITY OF DEBT AND LIQUIDITY RELIEF
ABSTRACT

We compare various forms of market-based debt relief with coordinated

debt forgiveness on the part of creditors. These schemes lead to different
alLocations of resources and levels of debtor and creditor welfare, but all
attempt to stimulate debtor investment through reductions in the level of

debt. If investment-incentive effects are present, then investment in
liquidity-constrained debtors will respond by enough to make a reduction
in debt profitable, but not by enough to make the reduction in debt optimal.
For these countries the optimal debt-relief package (from the creditors
perspective) will include an infusion of new lending.

Kenneth A. Froot
Sloan School of Management
£52- 436

Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139

Buybacks, Exit Bonds, and the
Optiinality of Debt atid Liquidity Relief
Kenneth A. hoot
Sloan School of Management,

Massachusetts Institute of Technology

and
NBER

Most observers agree that the muddling-through strategy of dealing with problem debtors is
at a crossroads. The debtor economies have suffered through reform and severe contraction, yet

their prospects are little improved. For their part, creditors have been unable to provide the new
lending needed to sustain investment and growth. Exposure has even been reduced slightly, but at

a cost of a steady deterioration in the quality of outstanding loans.

This has prompted calls by some observers for muddling-out: partially writing down creditor
claims to make way for business as usual. Their argument is that high debt levels act like a tax on
investment incentives. Partial forgiveness would provide more stimulus to growth and adjustment,

and to the return of capital flight, and therefore could increase debt service. To use Krugrnan's

(1987) terminology, the debt is so high that countries are on the wrong side of the "debt-relief
Laffer curve."' Few debts, however, have thus far been forgiven. One reason may be that it is not

in creditors' interest to give up their chance for full repayment. But it is hard to be sure because
the same free-rider problem that has crippled new lending will also block a coordinated write down.
A different group of observers has sought instead to fill the debt-reduction void through marketbased schemes, such as buybacks, buyouts, and exit bonds. This unlikely group includes advocates

of the debtors, who are frustrated by the free-rider problem and are attracted by the voluntary
nature of these schemes, creditors, who believe they would be better off under these schemes than

under a write down, and investment bankers, for whom a market made is a penny earned.

Yet these market-based schemes are not well understood. Important papers by Helpman

'Thie view ii originally deecribed in Sech. (1988a, b)
1

(1987), Dooley (1988) and Krugman (1988) have clarified the analytics of some of the marketbased proposals. Nevertheless, general conclusions about the similarities and differences between

buybacks, buyouts, exit bonds and pure forgiveness have not yet emerged.2 The first part of this
paper, which is similar in spirit to Krugman (1988), seeks to compare systematically the equilibria

implied by these market-based schemes and pure debt relief (i.e., a coordinated write down by
creditors). We also compare the pricing of buy backs, buyouts, and exit bonds.

To summarize broadly, our findings in this part are that there is a great deal of similarity
between these market-based schemes and pure debt relief. The common rationale for these plans

is that investment may be powerfully stimulated through a reduction in the debt overhang. But
we also identify important differences across plans. The differences come from two sources. First,
the incentive effects of debt forgiveness, the distribution of welfare gains and losses, and the price

of old debt all depend critically on the source of the resources used for debt repurchase. Like
the homeowner who sells his windows to pay for the furnace, a country that relinquishes current
resources to achieve debt reduction may make itself (and possibly its creditors) worse off, and can

even reduce investment. Second, the agent making the take-it-or-leave-it offer differs across these

plans. The country basically chooses the amount of buyback or exit bonds it will offer (within
limits), and the creditors' collective chooses the amount of pure debt relief. This has an important
effect on the equilibria these plans imply.

Despite their differences, unilateral debt forgiveness and market-based debt relief schemes
rely heavily on one common feature: the negative impact of a large debt overhang on investment

incentives. How important is this "incentive constraint" likely to be in practice? Since 1982,
investment has fallen on average by over 5 percent of GNP, exactly equal to the increase in the
noninterest external surplus (which roughly measures the reduction in liquidity).3 In the meantime,

the debt itself has grown only slowly. Liquidity constraints, not incentive constraints, are probably

most responsible for the low levels of investment in the problem debtors. It would therefore be
surprising if debt reduction alone would be the optimal stimulus to investment.
The second part of this paper studies the role of liquidity in the design of an optimal relief plan.
'H.Ipnnn (1987) provides a vey general analysi. of debt/equity swap. and debt forliveneu. Dooley (1988) discuss, the
pricing of buybacb and simulates their welar. effect.. lCn.gmsn (1988) incorporates incertive effec and shows that rnarg,nai
buyb.cks and exit bond offerings at. equivalent to unilatal debt relid. See .1w wiui.,nson (1988), which analyses how
differences in preferences across creditan may strengthen the aumeM in favor of market-based debt reUef schemes.

'S the dlscusion in Dornbu,d, (1988), partiaslarly table 3.10.

2

We find that countries that are severely liquidity constrained are the best candidates for a debt
reduction that will benefit all. That is, these countries are more likely to be on the wrong side of
the debt-relief LaKer curve. But they are also the countries that can benefit least from a write down
(since current resources are already so dear). We then show that by offering some current liquidity,

creditors can induce a greater investment response and yet forgive less. In liquidity-constrained
countries, pure debt relief ala 'will raise, but not maximize, the value of creditors' claims. Thus,
relative to pure debt relief, creditors' optimal arrangement will supply less forgiveness, but more
liquidity, and in doing so will also make the debtor better off.

Taken together, the two parts of the paper suggest that in many cases market-based debt
relief schemes are in no one's interest. Debtors stand to lose to the extent that debt relief depletes

currently available resources. In dealing with a liquidity-constrained debtor, creditors stand to
lose by providing too much forgiveness on any relief package that reduces the level of outstanding

debt without providing new lending. This is not to say that market-based schemes will never be
desirable from at least one agent's point of view. But in order to evaluate their benefits, proponents
will have to pay more attention to the source of debt-relief resources and to the severity of liquidity

constraints. Even if potent investment-incentive effects are present in LDCs, they are not enough
to make any manner of debt reduction best.

The paper is structured as follows. For readers who are unfamiliar with market-based debt
relief schemes, the first appendix contains a primer on how buybacks and exit bonds work. Section

I in the text presents a formal model which incorporates the investment incentive effects we wish
to study. The equilibria associated with several debt-relief schemes are then derived in section 2.

Section 3 considers the impact of liquidity relief on creditors' optimal choice of debt reduction.
Section 4 concludes.

1. A model with Investment Incentive effects
Several authors, most notably Sachs (1988a, b) and Krugman (1987, 1988), have argued that

the disincentive effects of an inherited debt may make partial forgiveness beneficial to both the

debtor and its creditors. In this section, we build a more formal model that can trace out the
incentive effects which are the critical element behind these debt relief schemes. The approach is
deliberately simple, but our basic conclusions are far more general.
3

We consider a two-period model similar to that in Froot, Scharfstein and Stein (1988). The
debtor country derives welfare from the discounted sum of the utility of consumption in periods 1
and 2:
(1)

where U1 satisfies the Inada conditions, and (4 > 0 and U 0. The world discount factor is 1,

and 8 c 1. We choose this special formulation for welfare in order to separate clearly the effects
of risk aversion and intertemporal substitutability. Welfare is linear in period-two consumption in
order to abstract from the risk-sharing issues considered by Helpman (1987). Naturally, these issues

are important, but they complicate the algebra without adding to the intuitions below.4 A major

disadvantage of linear welfare, however, is that it implies an infinite elasticity of intertemporal
substitution. By allowing for concavity in period-one utility, we can explore the implications of
finite intertemporal substitutability without forcing preferences to be risk-averse.

The country enters the model with an endowment E, and an inherited debt, D. In period
zero, the country announces its plans for a buyback. In period one, there is a competitive auction

among creditors in which they exchange old debt for the new securities. Also in period one the

= 1(l) + c, where
f also satisfies the Inada conditions, f' > 0, f" c 0, and E is a random variable with support
[j.5 In period two, the country must make a payment on its outstanding obligations, D —
country chooses a level of investment, I, which yields period-two output of

where

r is the amount of old debt retired less any

. securities

issued, that is, x is the amount

of effective debt relief. The investment incentives we wish to study are sharpest if we make the
'1gunboat technology" assumption that the entire output, , can be confiscated by creditors in the
event of default.6 Period-two payments are then:

R=min(D—r,).

(2)

Under these assumptions, the country chooses investment to maximize its objective function,
taking x as given:

= max U1(E — I) +,SE(max(O,u— D ÷ x)),

(3)

flnd.ed, some ol the proposition, below go through with trivial modification for concave period-two subutilily.
1f the pnc. ol output ii uncertaIn, then the randomness would enter multiplicativaly, tithe thin add.itiv.iy. The analyu.
below goes through in either east.

'Qualitatively, our analysi, relies on the anumption that the country sacrifice. an amount that incrazes with the value ol
output 'when dejeinJt occun The result. would also hold if we were to assum. that creditor, cannot actually confiscate output,

but can impoe. penaltie, on the debt in proportion to the value of output.

4

where E is the expectations operator.7 The last term in equation (3) follows directly from the
repayment assumption in (2). In good states, the country pays off its debt and gets to consume
whatever is left. In all other states, the country cannot fully meet its debt service requirements, so

that the investment project's output is confiscated.
The country's first-order condition for investment is given by:

f'(I•) = ,

(4)

where C = G(1, x) = ft'. g(c)dE is the probability that the country will reap some surplus from the

project, and c = D — z — f(I) defines the level of output that exactly pays off the outstanding
obligations. In some states a marginal increase in output is confiscated, which is a disincentive to

invest. The factor i/G > 1 measures the investment distortion, the extent to which the marginal
product of investment is greater than at the country's first-best level.

Equation (4) defines implicitly the optimal level of investment as an increasing function of

z,

I' = f(x).8 As the overall debt payment is reduced, additional investment raises period-two

consumption in more states of the world. The debtor perceives this as a higher return on investment,

and it therefore invests more.

2. A menu of debt-relief schemes
Where do the initial resources needed to generate the effective relief, x, come from? We
consider four sources: 1) partial forgiveness from creditors, 2) aid from foreign governments, 3)

output from the debtor's investment project, and 4) the debtor's endowment.

2.1. Pure debt relief
Suppose that creditors agree to write down their collective claims on the country, an action
we call pure debt relief. We take their choice of z

as

exogenous, and assume that the debtor sets

investment optimally (I = I'(x)). We return to how r is determined under pure debt relief after
discussing the following Proposition:
the world interest rate if it were
Twe assume the endowment El. small enough so that the country would be a borrowe at
See the discussion in
not credit rationed. This assumption is critical for the incentive effects to have an impact on investment.
section 2-4 and footnote 25 below.

We assume that f(1) is sufficiently concave so that this statement is true. Applying the implicit function theorem to (4),

and using (3) yields

d1 —

>0

dx —

where the denominator is the second-order condition for the problem in (3).

5

Proposition 1. Under pure debt relief, the welfare of the debtor, the welfare of creditors
(taken together), and the price of a dollar's worth of the remaining debt, can be completely described

by the amount of effective debt relief, x:
(1) Debtor welfare is given by

W(x) = U1(E — 1(x)) + U3(I'(x),x),
where U2(I(r), r) = E(max(O, f(JC) + c — D +

z))

and ¶

(5)

> 0;

(ii) Creditors' collective welfare is the market value of their claims:

V(x) = E(min(f(t'(x)) + r, D — x)),

(6)

where

dv' =
(1dx
(iii)

,dJ'

—

dx

dv'

G,

dx

E [ -ij.

(7)

The price of a marginal unit of debt after the debt relief takes effect, given by , is the

average market value of the debt:

1V'(x)

8

D

9(x)

Part (1) of the proposition shows that debtor welfare is an increasing function of the amount
forgiven: pure debt relief always makes debtors better off. Part (ii) shows that creditors are better

off only when an increase in forgiveness increases expected payments, that is, when

>

(Notice that we have assumed that creditors are risk neutral and that they know the optimal

investment schedule of the country.) V' is increasing when (7) is dominated by the first term,
which represents the increase in expected payments due to a higher level of investment. The
second term in (7), which is negative, measures the loss in states with full repayment as the face

value of the debt is reduced. When the probability of full repayment is small, (7) is positive.
Creditors gain from a reduction in contracted payments, with the size of the gain proportional to
the impact on investment of the change in incentives. On the other hand, when the probability of

complete repayment is high, (7) is negative. V(x) is therefore hump-shaped, as drawn in figure
The debt Sell. at . däcount in the secondary mrk.t — Long a. th. probability of full npaym.nt I. l.a. than one, C C
In the neighborhood of fr. 0, 0 ii necessarily leg, than one.

6

1.

1. This, of course, is Krugman's (1987) debt-relief Laffer curve. The value of creditors' claims is

maximized at the top of the curve, where

= 0. Pure debt relief is in the interest of both the

debtor and its creditors when the country is on the wrong side of the Laffer curve.
As Long as the country is on the right side of the Lafer curve, pure debt relief is not in creditors'

collective interest. But, even worse, it is never in an individual's interest. A given creditor's claims

can have only a small impa on V.. Thus, conditional on other creditors ripping up their claims,
an individual creditor would prefer to hold on to his. Pure debt relief will therefore be hindered
by the free rider problem. Even a country on the wrong side of the Laffer curve should not expect

individual creditors of their own volition to set x such that

= 0.

The difficulty of getting creditors to act as a collective entity has spawned the market-based

proposals we consider next. There are two important features that distinguish the equilibria envisaged in these proposals from that in pure debt relief. First, the country, and not the creditors'
collective, acts by making a take-it-or-leave it buyback offer. Second, individual creditors must
voluntarily participate in a market-based scheme. To be successful such schemes must therefore
circumvent the free rider problem.

2.2. Buybacks out of aid from foreign governments
Suppose that resources for buying back debt are donated specifically for that purpose by an-

other country!° In period zero, the country informs creditors that in period one it will auction
off these resources in return for old debt. We assume that the debtor and its creditors rationally
anticipate the optimal period-one investment response, I = P(z), and that the auction is compet-

itive. Let b represent the donated funds, given exogenously, and let x = z(b) =

96(6)b

denote the

face amount of old debt repurchased in the auction, i.e., the effective amount of relief generated by

the buyback. The buyback equilibrium is summarized iii the following proposition (and proven in
the second appendix):

PropositIon 2. When resources for a competitive buyback are donated, the equilibrium is
'°A country's ability to buy back debt on the secondary market isa matter of some controveray, although Bolivia recently
completed a buyback in which about 1/2 of it. debt was retir.d. Syndication agreements in commercial bank toans make
boybacks probtanatic. The.. agreements contain a mandatory prepayment cla.sse, which stipulate, that any prepayment must
be distnbuted among creditors according to expo.ure, sad a •hszing claus. which requirn that .a,y payment received by a
creditor in excess of its expoeure must be shared among all bsah according to exposure. See the discussion In settion 2.5
below.
7

characterized by:'1

(i) Debtor welfare is the same as under pure debt relief:

w(x) =

(9)

and is strictly increasing in amount of effective relief,

> 0.

(ii) Creditors' collective welfare is greater than under pure debt relief by the amount of aid:

Vb(x,b) =V'(r)+b,

(10)

which is increasing in the amount of the buyback, ç
(iii) The buyback takes place at a price where a marginal unit of debt after the buyback, !t,
is equal to the average market value of the debt remaining:

V'(z)

1

(11)

96(x) D—r
The effective amount of relief is strictly increasing in 6:

=

> 0.

Notice the similarity between parts (i) and (ii) of propositions 1 and 2. Buybacks funded
by a third party reduce future debt payments, and therefore have an effect on future payments
equivalent to that of pure debt relief. Up to the value of the transfer, 6, buybacksout of aid are
equivalent to pure debt relief, for any given level of effective relief. It is as if the aid is given directly

to creditors in return for a write down of size x. The auction merely serves to translate a fixed
amount of buybaclc resources, 6, into effective debt relief, z. The larger the transfer, the more
creditors gain. From an efficiency point of view, nothing is different from proposition 1: once the
transfer is netted out, Pareto improvements are possible only if the country is on the wrong side
of the debt-relief Laffer curve. Figure 1 graphs expected creditor payments under pure debt relief

and a buyback out of aid, V and Vb, respectively. While V is hump-shaped, V6 is concave and
increasing everywhere, which reflects the added value of the transfer, 6.

Part (iii) of the proposition says that the buyback price is the inverse of the expected value

of the last unit of old debt repurchased. If the auction is competitive, the price, ji, must be such
tisom. of that rault. at. di.cuaai by Dooky (1988).

8

that individual creditors are indifferent between holding onto their old debt, and trading in their
old debt for cash. Thus in equilibrium, the expected payoff from holding 0 units of old debt must
be one: v 'k D—z j = 1, which is just equation (11).

The price of a unit of the remaining debt, 1/O(z), is graphed in figure 2. Before the buyback

is announced, the price is as in proposition 1, 1/0(0) = 1/9(0). The price of the remaining debt
rises with the size of the bu> tck for two reasons. First, as debt is bought back, the quality of the
remaining obligations improves. Second, as the country gains surplus in the better states of nature,

it invests more, further improving the quality of the remaining debt. The concavity (or convexity)
of the curve is determined by the interaction of these two factors. The frequency distribution, gfr),
determines how much more likely complete repayment becomes for a marginal increase in 6. When

g(c) is increasing, the price curve tends to be convex. On the other hand, the country's investment

response, f'4jj, is decreasing (due to the concavity of 1) which tends to make the price curve
concave, If c is uniformly distributed and f is concave, then the path of the price will resemble the
concave curve shown in figure 2.12 Finally, when the buyback is large enough to retire completely

the outstanding debt, lim..D eb(x) = 1, provided the last unit of debt is riskless: the entire debt
can be repurchased only at its full face value.'3
Finally, part (iii) shows that the amount of effective relief increases with the size of the buyback,

even though the rate at which old debt is exchanged, gb, falls. An increase in the size of the buyback,

6, therefore raises the welfare of both the debtor and its creditors.

2.3. Buybacks out of future cash flows, or exit bonds
Next we consider the case in which old debt is repurchased by issuing senior claims to future

cash flows. We call these claims exit bonds. If these bonds are to be senior to the existing debt,
every creditor must agree to honor their seniority before the auction takes place.14 For the moment

we assume the seniority of these bonds, but we return to whether creditors would in fact grant it.
We do not require, however, that the exit bonds are riskless.

In period zero, the country announces the face amount of exit bonds it plans to issue, given
'2See Dooley (1988), who diacuu in detail the impact of alternative frequency distributions on buyback pncing.

'3Thi. will be the case a. long a. output is po.itive in all states, 1(1') +.> 0.

"New securities can be treated a. senior only if the sharing clause, mentioned in footnote 10, is waived. It the .haring clause
is not waived, any creditor is entitled to sue for its share of payments made by the country. Thu. a single 'holdout' creditor
undcmine. the assurance of othe creditor, that they will be able to keep their exit.bond repayments.

9

by k, and asks creditors to make the bonds senior. As in the previous section, we assume that the
debtor and its creditors rationally anticipate the optimal period-one investment response, f = I' (r),

and that the auction is competitive. The period-one auction retires 9*/c in face value of the old
debt. The amount of effective debt relief — the reduction in the total face value of old debt less the

value of the exit bonds —

is

then z = r(k) =

(91(k)

—

1)/c.

For the same face value, exit bonds

are strictly preferred to old debt because they are senior. Thus 0(k) > 1, and exit bonds generate
effective relief, z(k) > 0, V/c > 0.
The exit-bond equilibrium is summarized in the following proposition, with proofs in the second
appendix:

ProposItion 3. When resources for a competitive buyback come from future cash flows, the
equilibrium must satisfy:

(i) Debtor welfare is the same as under pure debt relief:

Wt(x) = W'(z) ,Vx.

(12)

(ii) Creditors' collective welfare is the same as under pure debt relief:

V"(z)=V'(z) ,Vz.

(13)

(iii) If the buyback is small enough to be riskiess —that is, if 1(P)

+>

k—

then the buyback

price, gk, is equal to the price under pure debt relief:

9*(x)=o*(z) Vx.

(14)

The greater the exit bond offering, the greater the level of effective relief,

> 0.

(iv) If the buyback is not SkIess, then the equilibrium price solves:

0(k) = (

D — 9*/c

\E(rnin(f(P) + c, D — 91/c))/

(E(nun(f(r) + ck))\1'

'

k

(15)

where 0(k) < E(z(k)), V/c.
Note that in parts (i) and (ii) of the proposition debtor and creditor welfare can be written
exclusively as functions of z — regardless of the size of the exit bond offering. By distinguishing
10

between senior and subordinate claims, the auction generates effective debt relief, with no other
effects on the debtor or its creditors. Thus, for any given amount of effective relief, an issue of exit

bonds is equivalent to pure debt relief.15
Part (iii) of the proposition — which applies to rislcless exit bonds — shows that the price at

which the old debt is retired, 1/91, is purely a function of the level of effective relief. Indeed, the
ce that would prevail after an equivalent amount of pure debt relief

price is exactly equal to the

is granted. The price of bond issues that are large enough to be risky cannot be written simply as

a function as the level of effective relief, as in part (iv). Once the bond issue is risky, the relative
riskiness of the original debt improves, so that the price must rise above what it would have been if
and

curves separate

evolves,

Consider the impact

the bonds were riskless (s(r'(k))) The price is drawn if figure 2. The
at the point when the bond offering becomes risky.

It is worth dwelling for a moment on how the swap rate, 9t(k)

on the value of creditors' claims of an increase in the size of the bond offering. Using (7) and (13):
dO1

=

—D

()@'

d1

dx

_G)f'H) -G).

(16)

Suppose for a moment that investment is fixed, q = o, so that the first term in (16) is

zero. Then larger exit bond offerings lower total expected payments. How is it that a strictly
positive exit bond offering reduces expected payments without any change in the total resources
available for debt service? Because creditors are competitive, the seniority of the exit bonds creates

an externality: as some creditors swap in their old debt for senior exit bonds, they degrade the

value of the old debt remaining. At the price of the first increment of the buyback, jrjj =
each creditor would strictly prefer to swap in his old debt rather than to hold on: conditional on
no other creditors swapping, each creditor is indifferent between swapping and not swapping, and
conditional on other creditors swapping, each creditor is strictly better off by swapping in old debt-

The resulting excess supply of old debt drives up the price of the exit bond in terms of old debt
(9* rises).

Now if we allow investment to respond to the amount of effective relief, the first term in
(16) becomes positive. The excess supply of old debt at 01(0) is smaller. When the country is
"Krugman (1958) di.cuua thu equivaience and pre.e.t. results for small buyback..

ii

on the wrong side of the Laffer curve, the investment response is strong enough to overcome the
subordination effect, and

gk

actually falls with k.

2.3.1. Exit bond equilibria
While it is clear from proposition 3 that exit bonds and pure debt relief have many similarities,

it is their differences that explain exit bonds' popularity. First, there are differences between the

free-rider and seniority problems. Consider an individual creditor's decision about whether to
grant seniority when a country is at a point like 0 in figure 3. Suppose that the country announces

a small issue of exit bonds, and that other creditors agree to treat the bonds as senior. If the
individual creditor refuses to grant seniority, then the exit bonds are perfect substitutes for the old

debt. In that case, the equilibrium is $ = 1 and z = 0: no relief is generated, and the individual
creditor's claims do not change in value, If, on the other hand, this individual creditor agrees to the
subordination of old debt, the value of its claims rise marginally as the country moves up the Laffer

curve. Since an individual creditor faces no penalty in granting seniority when others do not, each

creditor will find that granting seniority is a dominant strategy when the country is on the wrong

side of the Lafter curve. (When the country is on the right side of the Laffer curve —point A in
figure 3 — the

argument runs in reverse; refusing seniority becomes the dominant strategy.) Because

individual creditors are not "small" with respect to seniority, exit bonds break the free-rider barrier
to debt relief.
A second difference between pure debt relief and an exit bond offering is the amount of effective

relief generated in equilibrium. Consider again a country at point 0 in figure 3. If creditors were

to coordinate and write down their claims, then they would choose r so that Jj' = 0, moving to
point L — the top of the Laffer curve. Under exit bonds, however, it is the country that chooses

the amount of effective relief. Naturally, the country would like to set r as high as possible, and
will choose k accordingly.'6 But if the country announces an offering so large as to lower the value

of creditors' claims, moving, say, from point L to tin figure 3, individual creditors will not grant
seniority, and the exit bond offering will generate no effective relief. The country will therefore
respect the individual creditor's rationality constraint, setting itsuch that Vk(z(k))

V(O). At a

point like 0, the country wiU optimally choose x such that Vk(x0) = Vk(O) — across the Laffer curve
SeTh. upper bound on the amount of effective reIjd a country can obtain by offering riAln. exit bond, I. given by the point

*thicbtlloftbeoldd.btj.retjyal. s,(91 —i)k_._. .ndL., i.uthth.e*k...a=D
12

at point A. Assuming the exit bond offering is small enough to be risIcles8, equation (14) implies

that the price of the remaining debt will be given by jrfy =

= 5, the pre-existing price

of a unit of old debt. The face value of the optimal offering follows directly: k' =

— 1).

Thus in equilibrium exit bonds can generate more effective relief than pure debt relief

It would appear that an exit bond equilibrium provides at least as much effective relief as
pure debt relief, and sometimes strictly more. Do exit bonds dominate pure debt relief from the
country's point of view? In general the answer is no. While the exit bond equilibrium yields greater

effective relief than a pure debt relief equilibrium in the neighborhood to the left of point L, the

neighborhood may be small. A country that starts out at point R will not be able to generate
enough relief to reach point D using exit bonds. There are two important criteria that determine
how far along the Laffer curve a country can move.

The first criterion is that the exit bond issue can, at most, retire the entire outstanding debt.'1

The precise level of k that exhausts the old debt has no closed form solution, and is a complex
function of the frequency distribution g(c), the probability distribution f g(c)dc and the production

function 1(1'). But the important point is that the further to the left of the Laffer-curve peak
the country starts out, the more likely it is to run out of old debt before reaching the other side.
Indeed, the country may run out of old debt before reaching the top.18

The second criterion that determines how far along the Laffer curve an exit bond issue can
move a country is the behavior of the auction price, j4g-. The marginal utility to the debtor of an
increase in the exit bond offering is

We

know from proposition 1(i) that welfare is always

increasing in the level of effective relief, ¶ > 0. As proposition 3 (iii) shows, when the bond
offering is small enough to be riskless, the level of effective relief is monotonically increasing in

the size of the bond offering,

>

0.

Small exit bond issues therefore always improve country

welfare. However, this need not be true if the exit bond issue is large enough to be risky. A
bigger, risky exit bond issue may drive gk down so rapidly that the level of effective relief falls, i.e.

=

—1

+

c 0. Thus, even when there is plenty of old debt outstanding, more exit bonds

may not generate more effective relief.'9
'7See footnote 16 above.

"Note that in figure 2, the 1/8k curys stop. when ll of the otd debt it retired, before reaching z = D.
"A loose intuition for this result is a, fottows. When the exit bond. are risky, • me.rginal increase in the offenng may inCre5e
the riskines, of the exit bond. substantially, without ch.ning much the riskines, of the old debt. (In terms of the model, this
depends on the density function evaluated at the point where there is just enough output to service the outstanding exit bonds,

13

2.4. Buybacks out of the country's endowment
Propositions 1 through 3 have stressed the similarities between buybacks and pure debt relief.
The schemes we have considered — pure debt relief, buybacks out of aid, and exit bonds — are all

ways of releasing resources to the country in the second period. Their common feature is that the

relief funds become available in the same period in which they are used. In this section we turn
to a different source of funds for buybacks: the country's current resources. We will see that these

buybacks have intertemporal implications, which are the reason they fail to be equivalent to pure
debt relief.

We now assume that the country must finance the debt repurchase using its period-one endowment, 11 This pertains to a country that purchases the debt with reserves (savings), or raises
taxes on current consumption. Of course, in a maximizing model, such a distinction is irrelevant.

Regardless of where it comes from initially, a reduction in period-one resources will be spread
optimally across consumption, saving, and investment.20

In period zero the country announces its buyback, e, out of the initial endowment, E. Let the

buyback price be given by 9' and effective relief by r = z(e) = Oe. Once the resources for the
buyback are fixed at e, the country's investment problem is given by

max Ui(E—e—I)+BE(max(o,y—D+x)),

(17)

with the first-order condition again given by equation (4). Inspection of (17) and (4) shows that
the optimal level of investment is no longer completely summarized by the level of effective relief.

We now denote optimal investment by 1" = r(x(e),e). The following proposition is proven in
the second appendix:

Propoeltlon 4. For any given level of effective relief, x, the investment incentives associated
with a buyback out of current resources are smaller than under pure debt relief:

(c'), where

'= k

f(o,o) = J(o),

(18)

1(P).) The relnive riskiness of the old debt would then improve rapidly, so that 0 would fall sharply.
Bigg.r buyb.cks would then lower the amouS of effective retid.
—

it the

period-one consumpUon d.cisjon is made bekr. reserves a,. used br the buybsck, then the boybask will have no
effect on period-on. consurnpdon. But this timing would .1. imply that the buybsck cannot have an effect on investment
either.

14

I"(x(e),e) c I'(z), Vz,e >0,

(19)

8T'(z, e) <0, Vs.

(20)

The intuition for proposition 4 is straightforward. A buyback out of current resources must
lower the available endowment (by e) in order to generate a positive amount of effective relief.
When E — e falls, the marginal utility of period-one consumption must rise. The marginal return

on investment then rises above what it otherwise would have been. Investment is therefore lower
than if the buyback resources came from elsewhere. Indeed, these intertemporai considerations can

dominate the investment-incentive effects, so that investment falls with an increase in the size of
the buyback.2'
The buyback is characterized in the following proposition:

Proposition 5. For a given level of effective relief, a buyback out of the period-one endowment
implies:

(I) Debtor welfare is lower than under pure debt relief:

W(x,e) = U1(E — e — I"(r,e)) + U2(I°(x,e),r) < W(r), Vs >0,
where

(21)

cO.

(ii) Creditors' collective welfare is lower than under an equivalent buyback out of aid:

Vt(ri(e),e) = E(min(f(1(ri(c)1e)) + E, D — zi(efl) + e < V6(z2(b), 6), ¼ = b,
where

(22)

c 0.

(iii) The rate at which old debt is exchanged, ge, is greater than the corresponding rate for a
buyback out of aid:

D

z

V (x,e)

>8(z), Vz>0,

(23)

21 The resutts in propoeition 4 an lairty generaL Even though it is doubtful that a coUntry would ftnance the entire buyback
the buyback resource. come. from the period-one
out of period-one resource., the proposition hotd. a. long as a portion of
fall, a. the site
endowment and the remainde come, from one of the source. di.cuned in section. 2.1 throu&i 2.5. Investment
of the buyback men.... if the subutitity, U1, is sufficiently concave. For email buybacki (ie., = 0) the condition for this is:

a
which can be thought of as a condition on the coefficient of eb.olute risk avernon.
15

The equivalence in propositions I through 3 between pure debt relief, buybacks out of aid,
and buybaclcs out of future cash flows does not carry over to buybadcs out of current resources.

A smaller investment response to a given amount of effective relief is responsible for the failure
of equivalence. Ceteris paribus, lower investment implies a lower price of the remaining old debt,

(1/r). Because investment may actually fall with e, there is no guarantee the price will still be
increasing in the amount of the buyback. Figure 2 includes j/9t

alongside the prices discussed

earlier. Larger buybacks may lower the value of the old debt left outstanding. Even in the presence
of potent investment-incentive constraints, the "Laffer curve" for a buyback out of current resources

may be flat, or may actually be declining everywhere.22
From the debtor's point of view, buyba.cks out of current resources are dominated by buybacks

either out of ai•. nr out of future cash flows. In fact, we cannot even be sure that debtor welfare
rises with e. These buybacks provide effective debt relief, but they may come at too high a cost:

the country's optimal buyback may be zero!3 In sum, both creditors and debtors may be worse
off under a buyback out of current resources, even if the country is initially on the wrong side of
the debt-relief Laffer curve.

2.5. AssessIng buybacks vs. pure debt relief
Our analysis indicates that market-based schemes and pure debt relief are similar in many
respects, but may lead to very different outcomes. These differences are not only a result of the
mechanics of each scheme, but also of the conditions needed to make the scheme workable.

Clearly, the free-rider problem wilt be a substantial barrier to pure debt relief, even when the
country is on the wrong side of the debt-relief Laffer curve. The three buyback proposals we looked

at could be an alternative when creditors fail to coordinate. Nevertheless, each of these proposals

may be practically unworkable. Buybacks out of aid will make both creditors and debtors better

off, but at the expense of the donor. This makes large scale buybacks for the major debtors a
remote possibility.24 While none of the buyback proposals is subject to the free-rider problem, all
"This requires & condion .tronger thai, that ginn ii. lootnot. 21. lntuitinly, periocl.one subutility mud be even more
conc.: investment must not only 1.11 with e, it must fall rapidly enough for the value of the remaining debt to decline. See
the secoid appendix for technical detail..
The condifion for a email buyback out of current resource to tower country welfare is given by U > øGr(o). which from

the flr.t-order condition (4) is equivalent to f' > r(o). If f satisfies the mad, conditions, then the above condition will be
met for sufficiently lowE. Even if investment laura, the debt wifi han value.., claim to the random variablee. Tin, while
iun1=0f' = 00, the pric. remains bounded, U,n,01(O) = M < .
3Not, from figure 1 that creditor, do best under a buyck out of aid. Bulow and Rogoff (1988) point out that as long as
there is. chance of cud. a buyout, crtdita, have an incentive to block oth types of debt.r.ducticn scheme..

16

nevertheless require a measure of coordination among creditors. A wavier of the sharing clause and
mandatory prepayment clause would have to be designed and then agreed to unanimously. This

.would necessitate negotiation among creditors and the input of legal resources. Since there are so
many syndicates with banks from all over the world participating, it is not clear who would enforce

the waiver, or how it could be made enforceable at all.
Assuming buybacks CoL. 1 be made workable, market-based schemes may be best for some

countries, even in the absence of a large donor. We saw that a successful exit bond offering could
conceivably take a country beyond the top of its debt-relief Laffer curve, where it is better off than
under pure debt relief. Under other circumstances, however, exit bonds would not allow the country

to reach the top. The informational requirements in determining the optimal size of a bond offering

and how far along the Laffer curve it would take the country are formidable. As Krugman (1988)
has stressed, the investment incentive effects that are responsible for the Laffer curve's upward slope

are inherently bard to measure. Essentially, creditors' entire subjective probability distribution of
future output, and the responsiveness of future output to relief would have to be known.
In practice, the chance is small that market-based schemes would be superior from the countries
point of view. Almost inevitably, an exit bond offering would use some current reserves as collateral
—

as

in the recent Mexican case. Then the results of section 2.4 apply, so that the buyback may hurt

the debtor. It is important to note that reserves should be thought of as current, and not future
resources, even if they are unavailable for current consumption. (In other words, a buyback out of
reserves is not equivalent to a buyback out of future cash flows.) When a credit-constrained country
holds reserves, the shadow return on foreign exchange is likely to be higher than the marginal return

on physical investment. Given that an increase in effective debt relief implies a lower probability
that the reserves will be needed for future debt service, a marginal increase in debt relief does not
generate more investment, it merely increases desired holdings of reserves. Buybacks out of reserves

will have smaller incentive effects on investment, just as buybacks out of other current resources.25
31This point can easily be made in the model above. Consider a case in whici the endowment is large enough to allow

reserve to be held at the world interest rate. Then the choice of reserves and investment is given jointly by equsilon
(4) and the first-order condition that reserves earn the world rate of interest:
positive

As long as reserve are strictly positive, then the &nt-order conditions together imply f' = 1. The optimal level of investment
is constant and, therefore, debt relid has no impact on invetment.
17

3. Iiicentive venus liquidity efl'ectB on Investment
We have discussed two problems with relying on debt relief to increase investment and growth

in problem debtors. First, relief cannot be Pareto improving unless the country is on the wrong
side of the debt-relief Laffer curve. Second, if current resources are sacrificed for forgiveness, Pareto

improvements may not be possible regardless of where on the Laffer curve the country is.

But it is also clear that future incentives are not the only factor determining investment. In
section 2.4, the usual investment response to debt relief is distorted by the use of current resources.

Countries may be liquidity constrained in addition to being incentive constrained. This suggests
that if creditors maximize the value of their claims, future payments will not be adjusted in isolation.

Instead, there will be an optimal adjustment in both the level of debt and of current liquidity.
It is not new to argue that creditors have an interest in providing sufficient liquidity to problem

debtors. Sachs (1984) and Krugman (1985) study the role of liquidity in averting default. If an

indebted country is prepared to declare default, it makes sense to lend at a loss today in order to
retain the chance of collecting the entire debt tomorrow. The incentive-constraint argument for
promoting sufficient liquidity is, however, different: by taking advantage of high-return projects that

otherwise would have been foregone, additional lending stimulates investment and allows countries

to pay more in the future. In this case, there is no choice between either financing or forgiving;
there is an optimal combination of the two.

3.1. OptImal liquidity and debt relief
In this section we study a simple optimal liquidity-and-debt contract from creditors' point of
view. We then compare the results of this optimal contract with creditors welfare under pure debt
relief.

We employ a variant of the model in section 2, with only two changes. First, we leave out the

uncertainty in production since it is no longer essential. Output is simply p = f(1). Second, the
creditors will make a take-it-or-leave-it offer which consists of a period-two repayment, D, and an

injection of liquidity, L, in period one. The initial contractual debt is given by D0 D. In this
simple framework, the country must first decide whether to invest. If it invests, the optimal level
18

of investment, I' = r(L), is given by the first-order condition:

= U(E+L— F)

(24)

where, as before, we assume that the country is credit constrained, 7 > 1. By the implicit function
theorem, only a portion of any additional liquidity is invested, the rest is consumed:

dl'

U"

dL

flf"+Uf

<1.

(25)

Notice that creditors have no control over how the country divides the new liquidity between
investment and consumption, 11 "conditionality" were applied, forcing the country to invest a
large-than-desired share of L, then the argument for liquidity relief would be even stronger.

The fact that (25) is positive implies that the most severely liquidity-constrained debtors will

have the lowest chosen levels of investment. Debt relief increases investment from 0 to
liquidity-constrained countries will therefore gain less from pure debt relief than countries with
more liquidity.

The country will invest only if it gains from doing so- Its rationality constraint requires that
welfare with investment is greater than welfare with no investment:

U1(E+L—r)+$(f(fl—D) >U1(E+L),

(26)

where we again assume that the period-two repayment is min(y, D). Equation (26) implies that
for any given amount of liquidity, creditors will maximize the value of their claims by lowering the

debt payment to:

D(L) = U1(E+L—I')

—

U1(E+L)

+1(1').

(27)

Equation (27) says that if creditors write down the debt, they will do so to be at the top of the
debt-relief Laffer curve. Given L, lower values of D imply a one-for-one reduction in expected
payments, while higher values imply expected payments fall to zero. The function D(L) defines a
family of debt-relief Laffer curves, one for each L.

It is easy to show that the debt payment is an increasing function of liquidity, D'(L) >
0.26 Greater liquidity raises the optimal level of investment and, therefore, increases the payment
"The envelope thea'em implie, that dD(I'(L),L)
high

= ancr.&l = U(stL_I)

when Inweetnent crowd, out current con.umpdon

19

—

U(E+L) >0, becaun m.gin,I utility ii

creditors can extract. It follows that countries that are more liquidity constrained are more likely
to be on the wrong side of the debt-relief Laffer curve. Figure 3 demonstrates, showing three Laffer

curves with different underlying levels of liquidity, L3 > L1 > L0. As the country is more illiquid,

> 0), and the peak shifts toward the left (since

the Laffer curve shifts down (since from (25),

LV > 0)? Suppose the debt is initially at D0. Then it is clear that if the country has liquidity
equal to L2, pure debt relief will not be in creditors' interest. On the other hand, if the country
is severely liquidity constrained, at £ =

L,

then there is scope for pure debt relief. The irony

is that countries with weak investment-incentive effects are also the most likely recipient.s of pure

debt relief.

Fortunately for all, creditors may gain by adjusting the level of liquidity. They will not,
however, choose the L that gives the highest Laffer curve. They will instead set the pair {D, L}
to maximize the discounted value of cash flows, D — L. Since creditors can collectively choose to

set L = 0 and still receive a period-two repayment (by setting D = D(0)), any new lending must
be profitable in itself. Notice, however, that as long as the initial debt, D0, is high enough, the
free-rider problem remains: an individual creditor would prefer not to write down his portion of
the debt in the first place, even when others do.28 We then have the following proposition, proven
in the second appendix:

Proposition 6. The optimal contract, {D,L'}, solves:29

f'V) = 1 +
D'(L) =

U1(E+ C —

U(E; L)

I')

—

(28)

Uj(E+ C)

p

+ 1(r)

(29)

where P is given by equation (24).

The intuition for this contract can be seen in figure 4. Suppose the country has an initial

Not, that the horizontal axis in figure IS V.

Some debt relief, required before profitable Lending can be undctaken. If debt rel,M were not needed, then there would
be no fre, rider problem; individual creditors would find it in their interest to lend, regardless of th. behavior of others.

We auum, that the country is sutciently liquidity constrained to satisfy the ,econd-ord condition for thi, problem,

<0.
TItle condition hoIth, for example, for isoelastic utility and production functions at sufficiently low levets of the endowment, E.

20

obligation D0 and liquidity L0 = 0. The expected value of the debt payment is shown by point A.

Pure debt relief (or one of the buyback scenarios discussed in section 2) can move the country to

the top of the L0 Laffer curve, point B. The improvement in incentives raises debtor welfare and
investment and

reduces

current consumption. But since marginal utility rises (see equation (4)),

the return on investment will not fall as much as the improved incentives merit. The country will
therefore be unwilling to undertake all of the investment projects that become profitable at world

interest rates. For the liquidity constrained country, we would have such a high marginal return

on investment that f(J*) > 1 + U'(E + Lo).° Creditors can capture a surplus above the world
interest rate on additional investment by providing liquidity while reducing (by more) the amount

of debt relief. This shifts the value of the claims from point B to C. Note that creditors would be
strictly worse oil if debt relief and new lending were negotiated separately, because then the new
lending would be competitive. Creditors obtain the surplus by offering to provide simultaneously
new lending and debt relief. Provided the second-order conditions above hold we have:

Proposition 7. The more liquidity-constrained the country is, the more creditors sacrifice
with simple debt-reduction schemes in comparison with the optimal liquidity and debt relief given

in proposition 6.

30Thu. condition is equiv.lent to:

U1(E+L—1')

—

$

U(E+V) >1
p

which wili be satisfied for low cnou#l E and, for example, i.oeh.tic production sad utility function..

21

4. ConclusIons
Our four main conclusions can be stated as follows:
1) Market-based debt relief schemes are similar to pure debt relief in the sense that they reduce

the debt overhang. These plans can therefore be Pareto improving only if investment-incentive
effects are sufficiently important.

2) Market-based plans differ from pure debt relief, and from one another, according to the

source of resources used to retire old debt. In particular, debtors that finance buybacks with
current resources can substantially worsen the investment-incentive effects on which these plans
critically rely.

3) If investment-incentive effects are important enough to make debt reduction profitable for

creditors, then debt reduction alone wilt not generally be optimal from the creditor's perspective.
Thus neither market-based schemes nor pure debt relief will generally maximize the value of creditor
claims.

4) In general, countries that are liquidity-constrained are the best candidates for an optimal
relief package which includes new lending as well as partial debt forgivenessThese conclusions are relatively general, and are likely to come out of more realistic, and more

omplicated models of the investment process. We have abstracted from such issues as capital
flight, the debtor's internal financing constraints, and how creditors impose penalties in instances
of default- Nevertheless, we believe that our general conclusions will remain when these issues are
considered explicitly. We have also ignored the moral hazard and adverse selection problems which

naturally arise once debt relief is on the table (Froot, Scharfstein and Stein (1988) study these
problems).

Finally, our analysis takes as given the presence of investment-incentive effects. For these
effects to give the L,affer curve its bowed shape, there must be sufficiently many marginal investment

projects with sufficiently high returns. We have assumed the existence of these effects because in
their absence there is no scope for Pareto improvements under any debt-reduction plan (given risk

neutrality). We have therefore given the benefit of the doubt to the advocates of one or more of
22

these schemes. Nevertheless, there is thus far no empirical evidence that suggests incentive effects

are important, or present at all.

23

5. AppendIx 1: A primer on buybacks and exit bonds
In this appendix, we present simple examples to show how market-based debt-reduction
schemes work.

By "buyback" we mean a cash repurchase of existing debt on a competitive secondary market.

The resources for the repurchase may come Irom a variety of sources: exogenous aid from outside

the country, the country's current resources, or its future cash flows. An "exit bond" is actually a
buyback using resources from future cash flows. Exit bonds can be used for debt relief if they are
treated as senior claims to the future cash flows.
In our simple examples we assume that cash flows are fixed and out of the country's control.
(In the text we add the incentive effects which are crucial to the togic of these plans.) Consider a
two-period economy with two equiprobable states in period two, and corresponding cash flows of

1 and 2 dollars. We denote the cash flow by . Also in period two, the country's inherited debt of

D = 2 dollars comes due. To keep things simple, we let the interest rate be zero, and we assume
that first-period consumption is positive.
if creditors are to induce the country to service its debt, they must have access to some credible

punishment mechanism. We make the "gunboat-technology" assumption that the creditors can
seize the entire output if the country cannot pay in full. Thus repayments will be given by

R min(Q,2) =

(Al)

The expected payment is therefore E() = 1.5.
Now suppose that in period one an outside source agrees to donate funds to be used in buying

back some of the outstanding debt. Table 1 shows the cash flows associated with a buyback of 1
dollar. Let ph be the dollar amount of original debt retired in the buyback. Then the country will
have a second-period liability of 2 — 94 dollars. The payments on the remaining original debt are
now given by min(2 — p6

How much original debt will be retired? If the buyback is competitive and preannounced (so

that the resources available for the buyback are known by the creditors), then ph must be such
that individual creditors are indifferent between holding onto their old debt and trading in their

old debt for cash. Then with risk neutral creditors, in equilibrium 9 units of the old debt must
24

yield one dollar in expectation:

(

E(min(2

-;• .9))) —

(A2)

Equation (A2) is highly nonlinear, but in this caseit is easy to verify chat ? = 1 is the equilibrium.
Notice that just enough of the old debt is retired to make the remaining amount, 2_9b* = 1, riskless.
Anytime the buyback is big enough to make the remaining old debt pay its face value with certainty,

the last increment of old debt retired must be exchanged one-for-one for cash, t = 1.

Expected creditor receipts are now I + E(min(2 — gb., )) = 2, higher than the expected
payment of 1.5 before the buyback. The intuition is that the buyback makes new resources — a
dollar's worth of debtor consumption — available for debt service. The creditors now get the full

face value of their original claims. The debtor is also better off. It must pay only 1 dollar in each

state, keeping the second dollar in state 2. In this example, there is no particular reason that the
buyback resources must come from outside the country (as they did in the Bolivian buyback). As
long as the resources are fully additional — previously unavailable for debt service — total creditor

receipts are the same. The country could, for example, reduce period 1 consumption in order to
obtain the buyback resources. It would lose a dollar's worth of first-period consumption, and gain

an equivalent amount of consumption in state 2. As long as the country prefers a certain dollar
today to a less-than-certain dollar tomorrow, it is worse off by going ahead with the buyback.
To see why the source of the resources used in the buyback is critical, consider a variation on

our example. Suppose that I dollar of the future cash flow is already available in period one. We

can think of this 1 dollar as resources that are earmarked for current savings, such as a debtor's

central bank reserves. All that is important is that the debtor will not consume these resources
in period one, and that they are available for consumption or debt service — or confiscation in the
case of default — in period 2. if the debtor auctions off these resources in return for some old debt,

we refer to it as a buyback out of saving.
Notice that the buyback out of saving is hnanced directly out of tbe period-two cash flow. By

assumption, there is no effect on current consumption, and no no new resources become available
for debt service. Thble 2 shows the payments. The country, must service in period two the 1 dollar

exit bond obligation as well as 2 — gk of remaining old debt. Payments on the old debt are now
min(2 —

— 1).

25

The equilibrium price of the buy back is determined competitively, as in (A2):
—

gk.,u —1))) = 1.

(A3)

2 — gk.

It is easy to veri& that O

= 2 solves equation (A3). The last increment of old debt exchanged

pays zero in state 1 and its face value in state 2, an expected return of l/9 =

.5.

Notice that

a 1 dollar buyback out of saving retires the entire stock of old debt. Thus the country's expected
payments are 1 -f- E(min(2 — 9k,Q — 1)) =

1,

less than the original expected value of the debt. The

country clearly benefits at the expense of the creditors: through the buyback the country is entitled

to 1 additional dollar of period-two consumption in state 2, without any reduction in period-one
consumption.
How is it that a buyback out of saving reduces the expected payments to the creditors, without

any change in the resources available for debt service? Such a buyback allows the country to take

advantage of the lack of coordination among creditors. Each creditor is concerned only with the
marginal value of the old debt. Thus an externality arises: as some creditors swap in their old debt

for cash, they degrade the value of the old debt remaining. At the price of the first increment of
buyback, 8o = 2/E(Q) = 1.33, each creditor would strictly prefer to swap in his old debt than o
hold on: conditional on no other creditors swapping, each creditor is indifferent between swapping

and not swapping, and conditional on other creditors swapping, each creditor is strictly better off
by swapping in old debt. The resulting excess supply of old debt drives up the price of the cash in
ins of old debt from 1.33 to 2.

Finally, we consider an issue of exit bonds which is treated by both creditors and the debtor

as senior to the old debt. Here an exit bond is exactly equivalent to a buyback out of saving:
holders of old debt now own claims to the same, residual future cash flows. (In the text, where
investment incentives are included in the analysis, this equivalence breaks down.) Thus either type

of swap leads to the equilibrium given by equation (A3). The country benefits at the expense of
the creditors as the expected value of payments falls from 1.5 to 1.

Our examples therefore demonstrate that when the new security is not backed by additional
funds, creditors lose from a market-based debt relief plan.

26

6. AppendIx 2: Proofs of the propositions In the text
Proof of proposition 2. (i) Recall that effective relief is equal to the amount of old debt
retired in the buyback, x =

ebb.

The debtor welfare is given by:

U1(E —

1(x)) + U2(I'(x),r) = W(r).

By the envelope theorem,

dW(I(r),x) = aw(r(x)x) = c9U2(I'(x),x)
ax

dx

[I

>0.

ax

Thus debtor welfare increases with the amount of effective relief.

Next we show that the amount of effective relief increases with the size of the buyback, 4J > 0

debdx

dx

—

________

+7b_ 1—b(dø/dx)
From proposition I (ii) and proposition 2 (iii):

dx

Since for all x, 0 = E(Ün(D—

1,

and - E [oo, —1) then

c 0, and it follows that

(ii). To see that creditor welfare increases in the size of the buyback, note that:
dVb

Since

> 1 and

C

[,

—1],

dV

dx

it follows that ç >

o.

Proof of proposition 3.
(i). Debtor welfare under an exit bond offering is given by:

Wk(x) = U1 + E(max(0, 1(r) + — k) + max(0,f(1) + c — D + 0k))

= Uj + E(max(O,f (1') + —D + (0

— 1)k)

= W'(x).

(ii). The value of creditors' claims under an exit bond offering is given by:

V1 = E(max(0,rnin(f(1) + c — K, V — Ok)) + k) = E(rnin(f(1) + e, D — x)) =
27

where the first equality follows from the definitions of exit bonds and limited liability, and the
second equality is by algebra.

(iii) and (iv). The competitive auction requires:
+ e,D —

9(E(rmn(f(I')
D—9k

I

—

E(rnin(f(I') + c,k))
k

where the right-hand side is the expected return on a one-dollar exit bond, If the exit bond is
riskiess, then this expected return is one, and proposition 3 (iii) follows after a little algebra.

Proof of proposItion 4. Follows from the debtor's first-order condition, and application of
the implicit function theorem.

Proof of proposition 5. Follows directly from proposition 4.
Proof of proposItion 6. The creditors' collective maximizes D(L) — L. Taking the first-order
condition and using equation (24) yields (28). Equation (29) follows from (27) directty

28

7. References
Bulow, J. and K. Rogoff, "Sovereign Debt Restructuring: Panacea or Pangloss?," University
of Wisconsin, June 1988.
Dooley M., "Buybacks and the Market Valuation of External Debt," IMF, forthcoming, International Monetary .Fjnd Staff Papers, 1988.

Dornbusch, R., "Our LDC Debts1" in M. Feldstein ed., The United States in the World Economy, University of Chicago Press, 1988.

Froot, K., Scharfstein, D. and J. Stein, "LDC Debt: Forgiveness, Indexation and Investment
incentives," NBER Working Paper no. 2541, March 1988.

Flelpman, E., "The Simple Analytics of Debt-Equity Swaps and Debt Forgiveness," MIT,
September 1987.

Krugman, P., "International Debt Strategies in an Uncertain World," in G. Smith and J.
Cuddington, eds., International Debt and the Developing Countries, Washington D.C.,
World Bank, 1985.

Krugman, P., "Financing vs. Forgiving a Debt: Some Analytical Notes," NBER Working
Paper no. , forthcoming Journal of Development Economics 1988.
Krugman, P., "Market-based Debt-Reduction Schemes," NBER Working Paper no. , forthcoming International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, 1988.
Sachs, 3., "Theoretical Issues in International Borrowing," Princeton Papers in International
Finance, no. 53, 1984.

Sachs, J., "Conditionality, Debt Relief, and the Developing Country Debt Crisis," Harvard
University, 1988.

Sachs, J., "The Debt Overhang of Developing Countries," in De Macedo and Findlay eds.,
Diaz Memorial Volume, Wider Institute, Helsinki, 1988.
Williamson, J., Voluntary Approaches to Debt Relief, Policy Analysis in International Economics, Institute for International Economics, forthcoming 1988.

29

TABLE 1:

Baybank out of Aid

Total

State

—
Cash flow

Expected payments
before buyback. D—2

1

1,5

1.

2

2

Expected payments
w/buvback:
Donated
buyback repurchase

1

Old debt remaining

2-9

In

equil.

Total

payments

including pavback

2

1

1

min(2-B,,l)

min(2-@,2)

2

2

TABLE 2 - Suyback out of Reserves

Total

State

Cash flow

1

2

1

2

Expected pvaents
before

buvback. &—2

2

Expected payments
w/pe yb a Ck

Reserves used for
buyback purchase
Remaining

Old debt
In

cash

flows

remaining

1

1

0.5

0

2-6

min(2-6.O)

equilibrium.

Total

payment
including buyback

1

1

k

I

t

min(2-Ol)

Figure 1
Total Value of Creditor Claims
b

V (x,b)

V*(x)
e

V (x,e)
D

X

Figure 2
Price of Remaining Debt
I

I

x

D

Figure 3
Exit bond offerings

V

L

V*(x)
A
I

D

x
Figure 4
Liquidity and

the Debt-Relief Laffer curve
V

D

