                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE KUTUAL AMPLIFICATION EFFECT
    OF EXCHANGE RATE VOLATILITY AND UNRESPONSIVE TRADE PRICES




                        Richard Baldwin
                         Richard Lyona




                     Working Paper No. 2677




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                   1050 Massachusetta Avenue
                      Cambridge, MA 02138
                           Auguat 1988




We gratefully acknowledge the helpful commenta and auggestions of
Lars Svensaon, Maury Obatfeld, Torsten Persason, Mike Gavin,
Alberto Giovannini and workshop participants at Kobe University
and NYU. This research is part of NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Reaearch.
                                                       NBER Working Paper #2677
                                                       August 1988

                       THE MUTUAL AMPLIFICATION EFFECT
      OF EXCHANGE RATE VOLATILITY AND UNRESPONSIVE TRADE PRICES


                                       ABSTRACT


        Thevolatility of flexible exchange rates greatly exceeds what most analysts
anticipatedat the advent of generalized floating. The Dornbusch overshooting
model accounts for the factthat exchange rates fluctuate more than the underlying
fundamentals. This paper presents a model which may help account for why

exchange rates have been even more volatile than the overshooting model would

suggest, and why trade prices have been so unresponsive in recent years. The paper
employs an extended version of the sticky—price monetary model of exchange rates
and   a simple industrialorganization model of import pricing. The combined
macro—JO. model shows that exchange rate volatility and unresponsive trade prices
can be mutually amplifying.




Richard Baldwin                                         Richard Lyons
611 Uris Hall                                           504 Uris Hall
Columbia University                                     Columbia University
New York, NY 10027                                      New York, NY 10027
           THE MUTUAL AMPLIFICATION EFFECT
OF EXCHANGERATE VOLATILITYAND UNRESPONSIVETRADE PRICES



       International economics in the 1980s has been heavily influenced by negative

empirical results. On the monetary side, we have the puzzle of "excess" exchange
rate volatility. Exchange rate volatility has increased in the 1980s and it is unclear
that standard theory can account for the increase (Frankel and Meese 1987, Froot
and Ito 1988). Moreover, standard theory is unable to explain exchange rate
movements better than    a simple random walk (Meese and Rogoff 1983). On the
trade side, we have the pass—through puzzle. The sharp rise and fall of the dollar in
the 1980s has not been passed through to trade prices in the manner predicted by
the historical pass—through relationship(Mann      1986, Baldwin 1988a, 1988b).      This

unresponsiveness of import prices is in part responsible for the unexpected
persistence of the US trade deficit (Hooperand Mann 1987).
        This paper argues that a two—way amplification effect of sluggish trade
prices and exchange rate fluctuations may help account for both the excess exchange
rate volatility puzzle and the pass—through puzzle. To wit, the increased instability
of exchange rates may   be   due, in part, to firm—level changes   in   the pass—through
elasticities rather than commonly—considered macroeconomic changes. Similarly,
an important source of the dampened pass—through elasticitiesobserved in the U.S.
in the 1980s may be found in the macroeconomic instability, rather than industry

level changes. Additionally,we argue that this mutual amplification effect has

strong implicationsfor macroeconomic policy and for empiricalwork on both the
monetary and trade sides of international economics.
       The work of a number of economists suggests the excess volatility and

pass—through puzzles may be inter—related. Mann (1986) conjecturesthat foreign
firms have been reluctant to pass through currency movements to import prices


                                           1
because the exchangerate is so volatile. Froot and Klemperer (1987) show that in      a
two—period model (where second—perioddemand dependson first—period market

share) increased uncertainty about the second—periodexchange rate lowers the level
of the current import price. They do not consider the effect of uncertainty on the

pass—through elasticity. Thus, although the economics of the connection is not

formally or informally described, Mann's, and Froot and Kiemperer's work suggests
that the exchange rate has so little effect on trade prices precisely because it
fluctuates so much.                                                             -




       In hisclassic article Dornbusch (1976) shows that when the domestic

aggregateprice level is sticky, the impact of nominalmoney changes on the
exchange rate is amplified by overshooting. Although Dornbusch does not

emphasize the point in his discussion, his analytics demonstrate that the less

responsive is domesticaggregatedemand to the relative price of traded goods, the
greater is the overshooting In other words, Dornbusch's work suggeststhat
exchange rate may be so volatile at least in part because the trade flows are so
unresponsive to trade prices. However, Dornbusch (1976, 1980) does not consider
the effect of the pass—through elasticity on exchange rate volatility; in fact 100

percent instantaneous pass—through is implicitly imposed.
      Krugrnan (1988) presents an important idea. He suggests that not only are
the puzzles related, but there is in fact a "vicious circle" between currency
instability and the unresponsiveness of trade. The first half of the vicious circle
argument — the contentionthat exchange rates fluctuations are large because the
trade balance is unresponsive to exchange rates — is not modelled. Krugman's
informal exposition of this contention is based on the income—elasticity approach to

the balance of payments. If trade were highly responsive, Krugman argues, large
swings in the dollar would produce trade balance changes    that would themselves
limit the size of the currency swings. For instance, in the polar case of perfectly


                                         2
 responsive trade, the instantaneous international arbitrage oi goods removes the
 possibility of any real appreciation or depreciation (i.e., the law of one price holds).
        The second half of the circle is the contentionthat exchange rate volatility
 increases the unresponsiveness of trade. This argument is based on the sunk entry

 cost model (Baldwin 1986, lQ8Sa) of hysteresis in trade. The existence of sunk

 entry costs creates a range of exchange rates within which foreign firms neither
 enter nor exit the domestic market. In the version of this model that Krugman
 refers to (Dixit 1987) the no—exit—no—-entryrange widens with increased exchange

rate volatility. Thus, in some sense, trade becomes less responsive to the exchange
rate as the exchange rate becomes more volatile.
       The use of the income—elasticity approach      as   an exchange rate theory is
problematic. The exchange rates of major industrialcountries are generally thought
to be determined by asset market conditions. Krugman's applicationof the Dixit

analysis is similarly troublesome. Dixit's analysis requires that firms expect the
exchange   rate to evolve over time as a continuous—time random walk. This
assumption is inconsistentwith standard asset market equilibrium conditions such
as uncovered interest parity. For instance, suppose the dollar interest rate is lower
than the deutschemark rate; if risk neutral investors are to be willing to hold dollars
they must expect the dollar to appreciate vis—a—visthe mark. This is not
consistent with the random—walk—with—trend assumption, since the interest gap is
expected to change over time.
       This paper shows that there can    be   a mutual amplification effect between
exchange   rate volatility and unresponsive trade prices. The mechanisms we focus
on are entirely distinct from those in Krugman (1988), Dornbusch (1976, 1980), and

Dixit (1987). First, we extend the standard sticky—price monetary model of

exchange rates to include a non—initary pass—through elasticity, and show       that the
exchange rate volatility caused by   a given money supply process is amplified    by    a


                                         3
reduction in the pass—through elasticity, in section I.

       Second, we formally model the impact of exchange rate fluctuationson the

pass—through elasticity (in section II).   If there is persistencein consumers'
purchase patterns, changes in current prices affect future profits. In this case, we
show that greater exchange rate variance reduces the pass—through of exchange

rates to import prices. Finally we combine the exchange rate macro model with the
industrial organizationpass—through model to show that exchange rate volatility
                                                                               -
and unresponsive trade prices are mutually amplifying.
       The modelsin this paper are not intended to be complete, general

descriptionsof the world economy. Rather, they are highly simplified to focus on
the basic economic logic of our theoreticalargument.


I. Unresponsive Trade Prices Amplify Exchanige Rate Volatility


       This section employs a sticky—pricemonetary model of exchange rate
determination to investigate the effect of a change in pass—through elasticity on

exchange rate volatility. Two important points deserve mention at this juncture.
First, in the standard model, the link between exchange rate movements and
changes in the domesticprice level is parameterized only by the import and export
demand elasticities, and 100 percent instantaneous pass—through is assumed.

However, import and export demand elasticitieshave been stable in the U.S. since
the 1960's (Hooper and Mann 1987). Pass—through elasticities,     on   the other hand,
have shifted in the 1980's in both the U.S. (Mann    1986, Baldwin 1988a,   Feinberg

1987) and in Japan (Yamawaki 1988). Clearly then, any model of the circularity
between volatility and unresponsive trade should be based on changes in the

pass—through elasticity, not the demand elasticities.
       The second of the two points concerns the specification of the underlying


                                           4
monetary uncertainty. Below we consider a simple random walk money supply
process. This choice both simplifies the analytics and generates a result that is
robust to far more complicated and realistic specifications. This robustness is
important in light of recent work by Lyons (1988). He demonstratesthat when
money growth rates ar. unknown and agents update their beliefs using the
observablestock then stock innovations are likely to have a much more powerful
effect on the exchange rate than simple specifications would predict. Additionally,
the Lyons (1988) results breathe new life into the potential empirical relevance of
the sticky_price monetary model in that past tests, by neglecting the role of growth
rate expectations, involve serious mis—specifications.
       The structure of the model, described by the following equations, is quite

simple so as to focus on the role of the pass—through elasticity in the adjustment

process;


(1.1)      tet+1
                   —
                       et
                            =
                                i i
                                 —                                        Uncovered Parity

           mt w =
             —              —                                             LM Curve
(1.2)

(1.3)      w1 — w = p_w)                    —
                                                (et—wt)                   Price Adjustment

(1.4)      t=   4et
                                                  2
                                                                          Import Pricing
(1.5)      mt = mt_i +                     (O,   o)                       Money Process



where e is the log nominal exchange rate, i is the nominal interest rate, m is the log

nominalmoney stock,             w is   the log price of domestically—produced goods, p is the log
domesticprice of foreign goods, and              t is the import price pass—throughelasticity.
Relevant information sets correspond to the timing of the variables except where

specified.
        If one assumes rational expectationsand saddle—path stability, then
equations (1.1) through (1.5) imply a saddle path of the form:


                                                      5
(1.6)                               et = Aw + Cmt


where

                                  Ai              1




                             CEll             f         1

                                                   'i—i)
                                                                                         1/2

and   i<   1.

        Since w is predeterminedthe saddle—path coefficient on           m, C, determines
the impact effect of innovationsin the nominal money stock on the nominal

exchange rate. Accordingly) we can write:


                                      e               C($)



where dC/d      < 0. The conditional variance     of the     nominalexchange rate is thus a

simple function of the underlying monetary uncertainty and is decreasing in          :
(1.7)                     Var[et_E(et I2t                    = C($)2u


where       is the set of informationavailableat time t.

        The result that the pass—through elasticity and the conditionalvariance are

inversely related is not an artifact of the very simple structure of the model. This

simplicity manifests itself primarily in four ways: (1) output is constant (and
normalized to zero); (2) aggregate demand depends only upon import and export



                                          6
demands; (3) pass—through elasticity on the export side is constant; and (4) money
follows a simple random walk, The model could be richer along each of these four
lines without altering the basic result. For example, while allowingoutput

adjustment might reduce the saddle—path coefficient on mt (C) below one, as
Dornbusch (1976) points out, the derivativeof this coefficient with respect to        will

remain negative since other things equal the lower pass through still slows the
domestic price level adjustment. Similar reasoning holds for standard, more

complete specifications of aggregate demand.                               -




II. Exchange Rate Volatility Amplifies the Unresponsiveness     of Trade Prices



         The mechanism   by which currency    volatility reduces the pass—through
elasticity cannot be a simple extension of the elementary theory of the firm. The
crux of the problem is that foreign firms' cost functions, measured in dollars, are by
definition linear in current and future exchange rates. Consequently in elementary

models, the dollar—pricing decision of a risk neutral firm incorporates only the

expectation of exchange rates — not the varianceof the exchange rate (or higher
moments). This argues that we must look beyond the basic theory       of the firm    to
understand how currency fluctuation dampens pass—through.


                    A. Persistence in Peoples'   Purchases.Patterns
         For many types of goods, consumers tend to buy this period from the same

firms that they bought from last period. The theoretical literature explaining and

analyzing this phenomenon is quite extensive (Phelps and Winter 1970; Nelson

1970;   Okun 1975; Katz and Shapiro   1985;   Gottfries 1985; Klemperer   1987;   Froot
and Klemperer 1988).   In models marked by such persistence, a firm's current price
reflects the impact that the current price has on expected future profits. Since a


                                         7
foreign firm's profit function is convex in the exchange rate (profit functionsare
convex in prices), persistence in purchase patterns opens up the possibility that the

exchange rate volatility affects the import pricing behavior.
        Persistencein purchase patterns could stem from a wide variety           of sources.

Phelps and Winter (1970) emphasize search costs faced by consumers. Nelson
(1970) focuses on consumers' uncertainty about the quality of alternative products.
Okun (1975) discusses the role of firm—customer relationships. Katz and Shapiro

(1985) stress network externalities. Klemperer (1987) and Froot and Kiemperer

(1988) stress the importance of switching costs.


                                      B. The Model

        The basic point of such persistence is that current sales depend upon
previous period variablesover which firms have some control. There is no general
agreement on which previous period variable to focus upon. Market share, sales,
customer stock, contracts and price could all conceivably         be   important in
quantifyingpersistencein purchase patterns. In fact it is easy to think of situations
where current sales would depend upon expected future sales, market shares or price
as well (e.g., products with significant network externalities).
        In this paper we assume that current sales depend upon previous period

price, in addition to the price charged in the current period. We fully recognize that
this assumption is not the only possible choice, nor is it the most general.

Nevertheless,   it captures the basic effect of persistence in purchase patterns and
greatly simplifies the analysis. Specifically, we assume that sales in period         t+1,

x1, depend upon the price both in period H-i and in period t:
(2.1)                         xH-1
                                     = x[pt+i,pt],   for all t.




                                          8
          We use an indefinite horizon setup in order to integrate the demand

persistence effect into our macro model. Given equation (2.1) the problem of a

foreign monopolist choosing the home—currency price of its sales to the home
market is:



(2.2)                               E{
                                         tO                   b
where,                                                                              -

                                             =
                          1t   nt_i' t]            —
                                                 (r sc) '1t'Pt_i]

Here    s is the level of the nominal exchange rate, c is the constant marginal cost in
foreign—currency terms. Assuming the firm takes as given the prices of all other
goods as well           and observes   s before choosing Pt, the typical Euler equation
for this problem is:



(2.3)                                    +                         }   =0
                    _.![Pt'Pt_i't]

The expectationin (2.3) is conditioned on all information available at time t. The

full solution to (2.2) would define a function which gives          (i=0,.   ,.) as a
function of 5t+i and            Consequently, in (2.3)          is a function of        and

Pt.
               C. Exchange Rate Volatility and Pass—Through Behavior
         The principal goal of this section is to determine the effect of a change in

exchange rate volatility on the pass—through of exchange       rates to import prices.
Totally differentiating(2.3) with respect to Pt and     s allows us to define the
pass—through derivative, dpt/dst, as a function of      t' 5t and the density function   of




                                             9
the one period ahead exchange rate,               At time t, we assume that     is already

known. The period     t+1 exchange rate, however, is a random variable. A
convenient way to represent an increase in exchange rate volatility is to consider        a
family of densities of 5t+1'   st+irb where increases in the index r represent
mean—preserving spreads (MPS). Rothschildand Stiglitz (1970) show that an MPS
of the distribution of a random variable is equivalent to adding white noise to the
random variable. Operationally, we differentiatethe function which defines         dp/ds
                                                                              d(dp /ds)
with respect to the index r. The object then is to sign the derivative,          dr
         Since the first order condition involves first derivatives, the total derivative

involves first and second derivatives. Consequentially, the derivativeof the

pass—through relationship with respect to r involves first, second and third
derivativesof the period t demand function and period t+1 profit function.
Unfortunately, there exists little economic reasoning that allows us to sign third
derivatives. One way of dealing with this problem is to proceed with the formal

analysis, simply assuming that the third derivatives have the signs necessary to

produce the desired overall sign.
         In this paper we take what we think is a more straightforward approach. We
make assumptionson the functional form of the demand equation (2.1) that insures

that all third derivatives are zero. Specifically we assume that the function is
separable in        and     and that the contemporaneous price enters linearly:


(2.4)                   Xt+l      x(pt+i]h[pjl, for all
where,
                                  = a—        and
                        x[pt+l]        bpt+i,


                        h[ptj > 0, h'[pj   <0, h"[pt) <0, and h"[p) = 0.


                                             10
         With these assumptions the pass—through derivative is:




(2.5)
                 dp =         cbh[pti] +         6h'
                                                       [nt]   & (EW[ t+i1
                                   2bh[p1 I
                                                 —
                                                        ''[pt]E 5t+i I
where,
                     = TEpt+i,pt,st+i]/h[ptI=          t+i _ct+ist+i)x[pt+iJ
It is important to note that the             function is convex in
                                                                       s1 since the profit
function
           ifst+jj is convex in   sl the
         For convenience we refer to
                                       and hipt] is positive.
                                           numerator and denominator of (2.5) as N
and D. It is easy to show that both N and D are positive since we show below that

           is negative. Diflerentiating(2.5) with respect to r, we have:



(2.6)
         ()      = D2( D                                      +N
                                                                   M+bhhuptlEwst+1IP


The sign of (2.6) depends on the signs of the two terms                                    and



         We turn first to the second term,                               To evaluate this
                                              [6h1I[pt]Eit[st+i]].
term we must investigatethe distribution of                   Given our macro model, the

ratio of the 8t+1 and   5t   a random variable,        t+iIt = u.     Uncovered interest

parity requires that the conditional expectation of u equals the ratio of the (gross)
nominal rates of return on home and foreign currencies. Since             is pre—determined
we can write        =
                        su. Recalling that h"[p] is zero, the second term can be
written as:




                                            11
(2.7)
                                  bhH[ptjj 4'['1      ôf(u,r)du.



The variable    u cannot   be negative since the exchange rate cannot be negative. To
determine the sign of this term we apply standard Rothschildand Stiglitz (1970)

techniques. Integrating (2.7) by parts twice, and using the facts that
                                                                           -x
T[0] = T[a] = 0, and T[x]          0, for 0   x < a, where T(x)        =   J af(z,r)dz, we get:




(2.8)                                  =                               JUf[zr]dz ] du),
             bh''J'P[su]f(u,r)du                                   [



Given   that T(x)     0, this   term is negative since 'I' is convex in            and h"[.l is

negative.
          Next we address the first term in (2.6). The optimal             t   depends upon   r as
well as   s so the first term in (2.6) can be written as:
                                               dp                                32
(2.9)                              =                        +
        {h'EpJ&EWEs÷1J]                5[h'tpt]a.&(Ewfst+i]) h'[pt]._EW[st+i)J

By totally differentiating(2.3) with respect to          and r, we can define dpt/dr.

Noting that profits in period t+1 are convex in              standard Rothschild—Stiglitz

(1970) techniques can be uses to show..tha*dpt/dr is negative.
          Since hhh[p] is negative, the sign of the first term on the right hand side of

(2.9) dependson the sign of &EI'[s÷i}. The expectation here is conditionedon

so   this partial is equal to dE([st+i] Ist)/ds. Intuitively this is negativesince

according to our macro model if 5t increases, the             that is expected to occur is



                                               12
also higher. Since a higher exchange rate is detrimental to importer's profits, the

expected profits should be revised downward when a higher             s is observed.
Formally,



(2.10)                  dE([5+i]Ist)/ds               41'[stuju   f(u) du.



It is clear that (2.10) is negativesince 41'[su] is negative and u and f(u) are
non—negative

         The second term in (2.9) is negative,   if                     is positive. This

expression can be written as:



(211)                                J 'I"[su]u êf(u,r) du.

By standard Rothschild and Stiglitz (1970) techniques, this integral is positive if the
function   '"[su]u is convex in u. This in turn is true if (t'[stu] + usIt'"[stu]) is
positive. Applying our approach of assuming third derivativesare zero, this sum is
positive since   W[-] is convex in   s1.
         This finishes our demonstration that (2.6) is negative. In other words, the

pass—through derivative is decreasing in the conditional variance of the exchange
rate.
         Most empiricalstudies of pass—through behavior assume that the

pass—through elasticity is constant. To facilitate the integration of the above 1.0.
model into the macro model, we assume that the pass—through elasticity does not

vary with price. With this assumption the fact that d(dp/ds)/dr is negstive
implies that the pass—through elasticity is decreasing in r. Assuming that



                                            13
distribution can   be   characterizedby two parameters, there is a one—to--one

correspondence between        a mean—preserving spread and the conditional variance of
the exchange rate,      o.   Thus we write the pass—through elasticity>   ,   as   a function
of


                                          dp s
(2.12)



where                                    g'[r] < 0.

III. Mutual Amplification


         Section I demonstratesthat the conditional varianceof the exchange rate is

inversely related to the pass—through elasticity. The model which generates this
result is a simplified version of the standard sticky price monetary model. Despite
its wide acceptance, this model can be criticized for the fact that it is not couched
wholly in maximizingbehavior. This fact, apart from detracting from its
intellectualelegance, implies that the modePs parameters are not necessarily
structural parameters.
         The most satisfactory solution would be to derive a general equilibrium

exchange rate model from first principles. However, such efforts (Lucas 1982, Stulz
1984, Svensson 1985) have been unable to produce models capable           of accounting for
short and medium run behaviorof exchange rates. Essentially, exchange rate
determination in these models results from the law of one price togetherwith
market determination of traded goods prices. While these models help clarify our

thinking about some long—run issues, they are not very useful in thinking about
problems such   as   the excess volatility puzzle. In a sense, these efforts to clean up



                                            14
exchange rate theory end up throwing the baby out with the bath water. In this

paper we take an intermediateapproach.


                               A.   PuttinE the Models Together
       As mentioned in the introduction, there is widespread empirical evidence
that one of the key parameters in the sticky—price monetary model (the
responsiveness of trade via the pass—through elasticity) has shifted significantly in
the 1980s. This empirical fact implies that the ad—hoc nature of the sticky-price

monetary model is particularly inappropriate in regard to import pricing behavior.
The section    II model is an attempt to clean up the ad hoc nature of the model with
respect to import pricing. The industrial organizationmodel allows us to explicitly
recognize that one important parameter of the exchange rate model is in fact

endogenously determined.

        Equation (1,7) summarizesthe connection between the conditional variance
of the exchange rate and the varianceof unforecastable changes in nominal money.

Equation (2.12) details the dependence of pass—through behavior on the volatility of
the exchange rate. Together (1.7) and (2.12) constitute a simultaneoussystem         of

                           .
equations in   c, o- and
Here we plot (1.7) as EE and (2.12) as PT in
                                                  ,
                               Analysis of the equilibrium is facilitated by Figure 1.

                                                 4 space. Stability of the
equilibrium requires that the PT curve is steeper than the EE curve in the

neighborhood    -th.qisiibriumpoint, A°.

                 B. An Increase in Volatility of Money Stock Changes
       If there is an increase in the varianceof unforecastablemoney changes, the
EE schedule shifts up. The impact effect is governed by equation (1.7), which

implies that the shift is C2 times the change in the variance. The shifted schedule is

depicted as the EE' in figure 1.


                                            15
       To fix ideas, consider the standard model where the increased volatility

engenders no endogenous change in the pass—through elasticity. In this case the
new equilibrium would be at point        The new exchange rate variancewould be
     However if there is persistence in purchase patterns, the increased uncertainty
leads firms to reduce the degree to which they pass—through contemporaneous

exchange rate changes to import prices. Thus the increased exchange rate volatility
lowers exchange rate pass—through. As a result the initial increase in money stock

uncertainty is subject to a multiplier process.                              -

        In otherwords, increased monetaryvolatility increases exchange rate

volatility according the overshooting—model dynamics. The amplified exchange rate
swings, however, dampens   the pass—through elasticity. This reduced pass—through,
in turn, boosts the volatility—amplifying effects of the overshooting—model. A new

equilibriumis reestablished at point A".
       This is the main result of the paper. Any increase in the volatility of

underlying shocks is amplified in the usual manner by the dynamics of the

sticky—pricemonetary model, We have shown that the magnitudeof this

overshooting—amplification depends inversely on magnitude of the pass-through
elasticity. The magnitude of pass-through elasticity, however, dependsinversely on
the exchange rate volatility. Clearly then exchange rate volatility and unresponsive
trade prices are mutually amplifying.
       The consequences of this mutual amplification are clear. The standard

sticky—price model (which takes the responsiveness of trade as constant) would
predict that aone percent increase in monetary shocks would lead to a C2 percent
increase in the conditional varianceof the exchange rate. Our model suggests that

an increase in underlying uncertainty can lead to a greater, possibly much greater,
increasein exchange rate volatility, togetherwith a dampenedpass—through

elasticity.


                                        16
IV. Discussion and Conclusions


       The mutual amplification result was derived in the context of a highly
simplified exchange   rate model and a highly simplified 1.0. model of import pricing.
We conjecture, though, that the result could be obtained in a broad class of models.
We first discuss the exchange rate side. Exchange rates are relevant to trade in

both goods and assets. Exchange rate models place varying degrees of importance
on the two types of trade. Nonetheless the balance of trade in goods is implicitly or

explicitly the ultimate anchor in any model of exchange rates.      If the responsiveness
of merchandise   trade flows to exchange rates is dampened, it seems likely that
increased exchange rate volatility will be the result.

       On the pass—through side, our result that increased exchange rate volatility
leads to lower pass—through is likely to go through in     a broad class of models.
Models allowing for persistence in purchase patterns is only one class of models in
which volatility might reduce the responsiveness of trade prices. For instance, any

model in which firms solved a signal extraction problem would probably give such       a
result. Suppose firms face a one period delivery lag so that current imports are

determined before the current exchange rate is known,       lithe firms knew the
exchange rate model but were faced with an unobservable parameter in the money

supply process, an optimal forecast of the exchange      rate would involve a signal
extraction problem. In such problems the informationcontent of the exchange rate
varies inversely w  ä'thevoItility of the underlyinguncertainty. Clearly then the
more volatility the exchange rate is, the less responsive import prices would be to

the current exchange rate.

                                      Conclusions
       Flexibleexchange rates have been much more volatile than anticipated at
the advent of generalized floating. The Dornbusch (1976) overshooting model


                                         17
provides an explanationfor why flexible exchange rates fluctuate more than the

underlyingfundamentals(such as monetaryand fiscal policy). The mutual
amplification effect provides one possible explanationfor the fact that exchange
rates have been     even more volatile   than the overshooting model suggests. This
paper explains how even small increases in the unpredictabilityof monetary and
fiscal policy can have potentially very large costs in terms of increased exchange

rate instability.
       The mutual amplification result has several strong implicationsfor empirical
work in international economics. First, it argues that the separate estimation of

exchange rate models and pass—through equations is inappropriate. On the

monetary side, empirical tests of exchange rate models typically assume that     the
regression parameters are stable. The section      II model demonstratesthat one of the
"structural" parameters (the pass—through elasticity) can vary systematically with
changes in monetary uncertainty. Moreover, the nature of structural shift cannot he

captured by a simple dummy variable,since the pass—through elasticity varies
smoothlywith the conditional varianceof the exchange rate. On the trade side, the
estimation of pass—through equations based on partial equilibrium models can lead
to serious mis—specification. Section IV points out     that the pass—through elasticity
and the exchange rate process are jointly determined.
       One policy implication of the mutual amplification result is that attempts to
manage exchange rates via monetary policy coordination would be facilitated by         a
reduction of monetarysurprises. In other words, monetary coordination should pay
attention to the conditional variancesas well as the conditional means of monetary
aggregates.
       On the trade policy side, the mutual amplification effect implies that

dumping can be a perfectly rational, non—predatory, response to increased exchange
rate instability. Indeed the model predicts that we should observe a correlation


                                             18
between violations of anti—dumping laws and exchange rate instability.




                                      19
                                   REFERENCES




      Economic Review, September 1988a,

__________• "Some
                                            .
Baldwin, Richard. 'Hysteresis in Import Prices: The Beachhead Effect." American


                     Empirical Evidence on Hysteresis in Aggregate U.S. Import
       Prices," NBER Working Paper No. 2483, January 1988b.
                      in Trade." M.I.T. mimeo, prepared for the 1986 NBER
__________• "Hysteresis
       SummerInstitute, April 1986.

Dixit, Avana.sh. "Hysteresis, Import Penetration, and Exchange Rate         -
       Pass—Through." Mimeo, Princeton University, November 1987.

Dornbusch, Rudiger.
       Political Economy, December 1976,

               jp
                                            ,
                     "Expectationsand Exchange Rate Dynamics." Journal of
                                            357—,371.

                    Economy Macroeconomics. New York: Basic Books, Inc.,
       1980.

Feinberg, Robert M. "The Effects of Foreign Exchange Movements on U.S.
       Domestic Prices." ITC mimeo, December 1986.

__________ "Recent Foreign ExchangeMovements,Prices, and U.S.       Trade
       Flows." I.T.C. mimeo, March 1987.

Frankel, J. and Richard Meese. "Are Exchange Rates Excessively Variable?"In
      Stan Fischer (ed) NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1987.
Froot, Kenneth A. and Takatoshi Ito. "On The Consistency of Short—Run and
       Long—Run Exchange Rate Expectations." NBER Working Paper No. 2577,
       May 1988.
Froot, Kenneth A. and Paul C. Kiemperer. "ExchangeRate Pass—Through When
       Market Share Matters.t' Mimeo, Sloan School of Management, M.I.T.,
       December 1987.

Gottfries, Nils. Essays on Price Determination and Expectations.Doctoral
       Dissertati,QL.Stockholm University, 1985.

Hooper, Peter and CatherineMann. "The U.S. External Deficit: Causes and
      Persistence." International Finance Discussion Paper no. 316, November
       1987.

Katz, Michael, and Carl Shapiro. "Network Externalities, Competition,and
      Compatibility." American Economic Review. 75 (June 1985): 424—440.
Kiemperer, Paul. "Markets with Consumer Switching Costs." Quarterly Journal of
     Economics. CII (May 1987): 375—394.

Krugman, Paul. "ExchangeRate Instability." Mimeo, M.I.T., March 1988.


                                       20
Krugman, Paul and Richard Baldwin. 'The Persistenceof the U.S. Trade Deficit."
     Brookins Pacers on Economic Activity. 1987:1, 1—43.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 'Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two—Country
       World.' Journal of Monetary Economics. 10 (November 1982): 335—359.
Lyons, Richard K. "Whence Overshooting: Money Stock or Flow?" Mimeo,
       Columbia Graduate School of Business, February 1988.

Mann, Catherine. "Prices, Profit Margins, arid Exchange Rates." Federal Reserve
      Bulletin, June 1986.
__________ "Prices, Profit Margins,and Exchange Rates: After the Fall." DIP
      Discussion Paper, Federal Reserve Board, July 1987a.

__________ "The PuzzlingBehavior of Non—oil    Import Prices." Mimeo,    -
       November 1987b.

Meese, Richard and Kenneth Rigoff. "Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the
       Seventies: Do They Fit Out—of—Sample?" Journal of International
       Economics. February 1983, U 3—24.

Nelson, Phillip. "Informationand Consumer Behavior." Journal of Political
       Economy. 78 (March/April 1970): 311—329.

Okun, Arthur M. "Inflation: Its Mechanics and Welfare Costs." Brookings Papers
      on Economic Activity. 1975:2, 351—390.

Phelps, Edmund and Sidney Winter. "Optimal Price Policy Under Atomistic
       Competition."In Phelps et a!., Microeconomic Foundationsof Employment
       and Inflation Theory, Norton, 1970, pp. 309—337.

Rothschild, Michael and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "IncreasingRisk: A Definition." Journal
      of Economic Theory. 1970, 2, 2'25—243.

Stulz, Rene M. "Currency Preferences, Purchasing Power Risks, and the
       Determination of Exchange Rates in an Optimizing Model." Journal of
       Money. Credit and Banking. 16 (August 1984): 302—316.

Svensson, Lars E. 0. "Currency Prices, Terms of Trade, and Interest Rates: A
      General EquilibriumAsset—pricing Cash—in—Advance Approach." Journal of
      International Economics. 18 (February 1985): 17—41.

Yamawaki, Hideki. "Export Pricing Behavior and Market Structure." WZB
     mimeo, February 1988,




                                      21
          Figure 1: The Mutual Amplification Effect




     e
         PT


 2"
0•            A''
 e


o'                    A'

a2e




                                                 EE'
                                          EE




                           22
