                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           TERMS OF TRADE AND THE TRANSMISSION OF OUTPUT SHOCKS
                     IN A RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS MODEL




                              Carol L. Osler




                          Working Paper No. 2681




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                August 1988




Thia reaearch ia part of NEER's research program in International Studies.
                                                    those of the National
Any opinions expressed are those of the author not
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper e2681
                                                                   August 1988


                       TERMS OF TRADE AND THE TRANSMISSION OF OUTPUT SHOCKS
                                 IN A RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS MODEL


                                                           ABSTRACT




                                                                                           terms of tradeand on output in a two-
        This   paper analyses the effects of productivity shocks on the current and future
                                                              which individualsallocate their savings between domestic
country framework. An overlapping-generadons model is used in

and foreign capital assetsaccording totheirpreferences for risk andremrs Since production in both counthes is specialized,
                                                                                                              such changes are
changes its the terms of tradeaffect investment returns in bach countres; rational expectations regarding

assumed and a new approach to analyzing the comparative statics of rational expectations equilibria is developed.       It is




concluded   that a temporary, positive productivityshock to the home country will cause the domestic terms of trade to

depreciate initially and then to appreciate slowly back towards its trend level. The depreciation causes foreign output to fall

below trend, and causes a symmetric rise in domestic output, via its effects on capital stocks. The impact of a permanent

productivity shock differs, however.   In this   caseinvestors will reallocate their portfolios and increase their holdings of

domestic assets, which are expected to earn higher returns.      If the portfolio shifts are strong enough, they cause the terms of
trade to appreciate initially. Foreign output falls and domestic output rises in this case as well, this time because of the

portfolio shifts towards domestic capital.




                                                                    Carol L. Dsler
                                                                    Tuck School of Business
                                                                       Administration
                                                                    and NBER
                                                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                 TERMS OF TRADE AND THE TRANSMISSION OF OUTPUT SHOCKS

                                    IN A RATIONAL EXPECTATIONS MODEL



                                                          CarolL. Osler




        The real exchange rate of the United Kingdom has been appreciating over the last few years. Most observers

associate this with strong output growth associated, in wirn, with the legislative and regulatory overhaul engineered by Prime

Minister Thatcher. This paper proposes one explanation for the recent real appreciation of the pound that does connect     a
                                                                                               the interdependencebetween
positive supply shock with an appreciating terms of trade; more generally, the paper discusses

the level of output and the terms of trade.

         The correspondence of rising output and an appreciating terms of trade strikes observers outside of academia as

entirely consistent: intuitively they agree that a stronger economy should be associated with a stronger currency.

Economists, on the other hand, have differing opinions regarding whether and when the association is to be expected. There

                                                                                                                     a
is general agreement that an appreciation of the terms of trade should be expected when output rises as a result of fiscal

stimulus, other things equal. Butthe U.K. has been holding goveutment spending in check during the last few years, rather

than the opposite. Looking at the rise in output as a 'supply shock' does not typically lead to the conclusion that such a

conjunction is to be expected. Laursen and Metzler (1950) consider the effects of a positive supply
                                                                                                    shock (in the U.K., no

less) on the terms of trade, and conclude that the risein output would increase imports and thus drive down the terms of trade,

rather than appreciate it. While their analysis applied   toss economy without capital flows, a supply-side augmented
                                                                                            of trade in response to a positive
Mundell.Flemming model of a large.country would also imply a depreciation of the terms
                                                                    of a flosting exchange rate (Dornbusch 1976)
supply shock (Flemming 1962; Mundell 1968). A simple monetary model

would imply an appreciation of the nominal exchange rate upon an expansion of long run supply, but no change in the terms

of trade because these models impose puichasing power parity. More recent toanalyses of the effects of supply shocks.
                                                                                                   but not a real one.
including Flood and Marion (1982) and Aizenman andFrenkel (1985),also imply a nominal appreciation
          We find here that the effects of a currentproductivity shock on the terms of trade depends on whether and how

strongly the shock is expected to persist. More specifically, we find that if the shock is not expected to persist, then the

relative price of domestic output must initially fall — the terms of trademust depreciate -- to induceconsumersto purchase the

excess supply. On the other hand, if the shock is expected to persist, portfolios will shift towards domestic equities in

anticipation of higher domestic equity returns; if the rise in future expected productivity, and portfolio demand, is strong

enough, then this shift in asset demand will cause the terms of trade to appreciate.

         In addition to considering the effect of output shocks on the tennsof trade, we consider a reverse association: the

effect of changes in the terms of trade on the level of output, via their effects on capital stocks. To illustrate this connection

concretely, if simplistically, note that with the dollar at its recent level of 125 {/$, 5 trillion   buys twiceas many assembly

plantsas it did just a few years ago. This has numerous implications, the most important of which is that a temporary
mcrease in domestic output, by depreciating the terms of trade, will decrease the foreign capital stock and reduce expected

foreign ouut, with the opposite effect on expected domestic output, for a period extending beyond the duration of the shock

itself. Thus, viathe terms of tradeand international equitiesmaskess, apositive output disturbance at home can be

transformed into a future decline in foreign outputand a rise in domestic output.

         Laursen and Meizler also analyze the effects of an output shock in one country on the output of another country,

givenflexible exchange rates. While their paper and this one both conclude that a positive output shock in one country

will.tend to causes contraction in output in the other country, the driving factors behind the results in these two works could

hardly be more dissimilar. ForLaursen and Mender the crucial factor was their assertion that adepreciation of a counsy's

terms of tradewould, by raising the real income of foreigners, cause them to save more Out of a given money income.

Through the multiplier, this decline in foreign consumption would be reflected in a decline in their output. In the present

paper a change in the terms of trade has no immediate effecton foreign savings or output, but instead affects future capital

stocks and output in the manner described above.

         While the focus of this paper is on the interaction between output and the level of the terms of trade, we undertake

thul tnalysis in a framework in which the affects of current and prospective changes in the terms of trade on portfolios,

consumption, and the balance of payments is incorporated scrupulously. We modify Diamond's (1965) OLO model to include

two countries who produce specialized goods under conditions of stochastic technology. The shocks to productivity, which

are imperfectly correlated across countries, cause domesticandforeign capital returns to be randomlydisthbuted and
                                                                3



                                                                                                        across counthes.
imperfectlycorrelated,as well. The claims on these returns, referred to as equities," are freely traded

Consumers allocate their current expenditures across domestic and foreign goods and also allocate their savings among

domestic and foreign equities, as well. Anticipated changes in the terms of trade, which impinge on expected total returns to

                                                                                                        that these
portfolio investments, are important determinants of investor choices. To operationalize our assumption
                                                                                                          of rational
expectations are formed rationally we develop a new approach to approximating the comparative statics

expectations equilibria. This approach is tested via simulations of the model and is found to work, in the sense that for small

disturbances the equilibria, including the implied time path of the terms of trade, are consistent with consumers' first-order

conditions.

         Our model is one in which individuals live for two 'penods.' While the intespretation of a "period' is left

intentionally vague, it is certainly long enough for money neutrality to be a reasonable assumption. In consequence, the

model has no monetary elements, and instead our analysis highlights the importance of equities markets, which we show have

effects distinct from those of bonds and money markets.

         The paper is divided into fourparts. The next section, Part II, describes the model. This is followed by an analysis

of the effects of output disturbances; we consider first a temporary rise in domestic output, and then rise in output which is

expected topersist indefinitely, thirdly an anticipated change in the disthbution of output, and finally an unanticipated shock

 to output that changes the anticipated disthbution   of output in the future. In Part IV we conclude.
                                                              4


                                                 PART II:      THE MODEL



Production

         There are two countries, a home" country and a "foreign" country, which produce distinct goods and freely trade both

output and equities. Taking the domestic goodas nuineraire, the relative price of the foreign good in terms of the domestic

good, which we will refer to as the "terms of trade" or the 'real exchange rate" 1, will be denoted p0. (Unless otherwise

specified, the word "domestic' will refer to the home country, and foreign variables will be denoted by a superscript A.)

         Outputof each domestic firm, where firms are indexed by i, is generated from inputs of labor and capital according to

the stochastic production function




where   a Is an i.i.d. random variable distributed over the interval [-d,d], 0 < d < 1, with mean zero and variance a-.23
Under the assumption that F(KL) is linear-homogeneouswe can re-express production in terms of per-worker output, q

Q/L, and the capital-labor ratio, k = K/L:


                                                     q=f(k+ak
We will also assume that     urn -kf'(k) =0.

          The exogenously determined labor force is fully employed in each period, as is the endogenouslydetermined stock of

capital. Factor markets are assumed to be perfectly competitive,4 in consequence of which we can express aggregate output

in terms of total capital and labor

                                      Q = F(K,L) +         aX = Lq = LLf(k) + ak].
Mother implication of perfect competition in the factor markets is that labor and capital will always be paidtheir marginal

product wages will be w =flk) - ((k), andthe actual return to capital will be =f(k) + a, with expectationr          f(k).

    Foreign production technology will also be determined according to a stochastic technology:
                                                       =   F(U)      +
                                                                 5


The random productivity shocks,     a at home and     abroad, have mean zern, variances o2 and   2 respecuvely, and correlation
coefficient p. which we assume is unequal to unity. We will assume throughout that the two countries are symmetric, which

imp1ies=&2

Consumption


         During any period t a new generation of individuals is born in each country which is n percent larger than the

previous generation. Each member of the new generation of the home country, who will live for Iwo periods, works during

period earning the prevailing wage,    w1,   consumes some(proper) fraction of his income,   and invests the rest. Savings mist

be allocated between home country investments and investments abroad.       it is convenient to imagine that savings is used to

purchase equities from finn managers, who in turn employ the income derived from equity sales as capital. Domestic equities

are denominatedin remiss of the domestic goodwhile foreign equities are denominatedin terms of the foreign good their

stochastic return is identical to the own-good return per unit of capital employed. The members of the older generation do not

work and consume their savings, which will have secruedinterest as well as capital gains -- due to changes in the terms of

trade -- on the foreign investments.

         All domestic individuals have the sante utility function: U(c1) + ,8U(c2),where 0 < $       I.   We assume that U(') is

twice continuously differentiable, with U'> 0, U" <0. To simplify the mathematics of uncertainty, we specify the following

functional form for U(-):



where
                                                          c=cc

This form is convenientin part because expenditure on the domestic good will always be the fraction       i of total Current

expenditure, with share 1 - /4 for the foreign good. This allows imperfect substitutability between the two outputs but is also

analytically tractable under uncertainty.

         Foreign utility will be:            + J3fJ(E2), where

                                                                 and
                                                                       C=CC1
                                                                    6


         It is convenient to express retirement utility as an indirect funcuon of a consumers savings and its return. To

evaluate this, we must first discuss the appropriate units of account. With the price of the domestic goodat unity, the perfect

price index for domestic consumers is     Po' that is, a correct gauge of the consumption-value of any amount of income
received in domestic goods, such as w, is    w/p0        For foreigners,the equivalentexpressionfor income receivedin terms of

the foreign good is         In essence we have provided a measure of consumption in a composite currency. Thus the "real

value", as we will refer to it. of savings in the first period of adomestic resident's life is

                                      (w - ch _poCf)/pou/ =                                           (3)

Real retirement consumption will be:

                                                             +                        '               (4)
                               wR=(][u+r+cs
The gross return to savings is then(4) divided by (3), or

                                                                 1-ti
                                      R =     21+r+2
Using this expression we can consonartthe indirect utility function:


                                          U(c2) =
                                                     u{H1p)11}
                                                         =   V(4)
         It is possible to simplify the expression for real returns further. Denote the rate of change of the terms of trade as
= (°l - °o)/o   with expected value   i   and variance   2, Assuming x0 is sufficiently small, we can re-express the return to
domesic savings as folows:

                                       R = 1 + ,r(r+a) + (1-,r)(7*) +(iL-,r)x0
with expected value

                                      1+    lfll+l1+(1        1++(p-itx0                              (5)

and variance
                      Var(R)   =   22    + (l-,r)2o2 +
                               +   2[r(l-r)a&p+ u-Jr)11 + (1-x)(jz-v)]                -               (6)
                                                                        7


          The derivationof this approximation forR is spelled Out in AppendixA.                 It comprises a weighted    average real return

to domestic and foreign equities,      measured in their own goods, and a termwhichmeasures the changes in portfolio purchasing

                                                                                                                       - -
powerassociatedwith changesin the terms of trade. This latter term,(p - tv)x0, can be understood by rewriting it as [(1 iv)

(1 -   ji)].   (1 - /1)   will bethe share of second-period      income spent on the foreign good, while (1 - iv) will be, roughly, the


proportionof incomederived from equities denominated in that good.                 If the relative price of the foreign good increases
between this period and next, and the share of equity income fromabroad, (1-tv), equals the share of expenditure that will be

devoted to foreign goods,       (I-it), the consumer will experience no toss of purchasing power. If (1 - iv)> (1 - is), there is an
increase in the amount       of the domestic   good which can be purchased,       if purchases of the foreign good are kept constant.    This

increase in real purchasing power can be approximated              as [(1 - iv) -(1 - i)lxij or (,u.

           Domestic residents will be paid in domestic output, they choose consumptionof the home good. ch. savings


measured in terms         of the home good,   S. and the   share of domestic equities   in their porifollo. 'v to

                                                Maximize U(ch,c + J3EV(sRR)}

subjectto the following budgetconstraint

                                                              Cf=(WSCJp0
           Foreigners are paid in terms of foreign output and choose cp sand ivsubject to the constraint that

                                                              Ch=(W-S-C)Po

otice that we have attached a time subscript          to the terms of trade, but not to other variables. Subscripts forthe other

variables have been eliminatedwhenever possible to reduce notational clutter. The subscripts for p and forx are maintained

because both today's terms of trade and tomorrowsare important to current decisions.                   "p will denote the current terms of
trade, the one that determines current consumption            of domestic andforeign goods; x1" refers to toe change in terms of trade

relevant to today's portfolio decisions, x0            -
                                                    (Pt Po)/Po•

           Domestic consumers' three first-orderconditions are:



                                               Uh=L                                                                 (7a)
                                                                   8


                                             = E{VR}                                                             (7b)
                                        p0
                                        EIV'(r- ?-    1=       -
                                                                   E{V'[cz
                                                                             -   - (x -10)] }                    (7c)

         The first of these is the standard expenditure allocation condition equating the marginal rate of substitution between

domestic and foreign goods with the price ratio. Equation (7b), which describes consumers optimal savings level, requires

that the gain in first period utility from a decline in savings equals the loss in expected retirement utility. Equation (7c)

describes equilibrium portfolio shares. A change in 1tr will affect expected retirement utility through the expected return to

savings, R÷i and through the rest of the disthbution of returns. Equilibrium condition (7c) states that as the margin, the

change in expectedutility from these factors should be equal and opposite.

         Portfolio shares will be independent of individual wages and savings, another convenient property of the utility

function we have chosen. They depend on the distributions of expected returns, including the disthbution of the terms of

trade, on risk preference, and on consumption preference. The importance of consumption preference is best illustrated with

an example: ifall expected returns axe the same, as is the variability of returns, then a consumer with a preference for

domestic goods (jt> 112) will hold a portfolio with

                                                         >   it >      112

The benefits of diversification would always give individualsa preference for it= 1/2. In this case, these benefits compete

with the fact that by tailoring asset portfolios exclusively to goods preferences, individuals can minimize their exposure to

terms of traderisk, which would lead individuals to prefer    r= p.    Though this is an important issue, it is not one with which

this paper is concerned, so we will assume throughout thatp =      =   1/2, Since we are also assuming identical risk preference

across countries, we can conclude that domestic and foreign portfolios will always be identically diauibuted among the two

types of assets, or   it=

Equilibrium: An Overview


         An importantpropertyof each equilibrium is that claims to the ownership of capital will be disbursed around the

world, except under unusual eireumstances. For example, the domestic capital stockwill comprise investments by beth

domestic and foreign consumers, as will its foreign counterpart:


                  k     =
                               l+n            '
                                                             /cl=                l+n
                                                                   9


Note that the composition of these capital stocks is significantly affected by the terms of trade. For example, foreign

purchases ofdomestic equities,          are chosen in terms of the foreign good, but when the domestic assets are pin-chased,the

number of units of domestic capital represented by           is p/(l+n). This implies that adepreciation (rise) todaysterms of

trade will raise tomorrows domestic capital stock, other things equal; likewise it will reducetomorrows foreign capital

stock. Other things won't be equal, since the terms of trade is endogenous and it won't change unless other things are also

                                                                                                                  for economic
changing, but this connection between capital stocks and the terms of trade will have numerous implications

equilibria

         Balance-of-paymentsequilibrium requires

                               +                       +
                 (W0-S o-Chd       11p)(j!1)[r 1(1+ro+d (l-1r)(1+o+cj

                                                            + (1-ir)s-


                 =                      +                                 + (1.
                     Po{(o                              i(1+ro+a)                   (1+o+I I
                                                                                  .?1x
                                                                   +   pir0 -
This conditionsaysthat net domesticdemandfor foreign output (the left-hand-side), including consumption demand as well as

set domestic demand for foreign assets, must equal net foreign demand for domestic goods (the right-hand-side),when both

sides are measured in a common unit of account (in this case, domestic output). More explicitly, the first line on each side of

the equals sign refers to goods demand while the second line refers to capital purchases, capital repaOiation,and serivce

income from capital. Together with the two budget constraints this balance of payments equilibrium condition suffices to

ensure that demand equals supply in each goods market.

             The equations for the capital account and the trade balance in period 0 are:

                                    =
                                        (ip       -
                                                      (1-iro)so)
                                                                   —                        -
                                                                                                (1_2r_l)s   1),



                                                  a0)I1P -l            - (F+                           -
                            rb0 =
                                    (i-i_)((rQ+                                   1Jri)s4)
                                                               10


           The world enters eachpetiodwith predetermined capital stocks. Via competitive equilibrium, these will determine

the wages of the young and, in conjunction with realizations of a and      ,   they alsodeterminethe actualreturn to equities.
Individual consumption, savings, and portfolio choices, as well as the terms of trade, will be
                                                                                               simultaneously determined each

period. These willjointlydetermine the capital stocks for the succeedingperiod.

           There will be no steady-state equilibrium in the true sense, since output, the returns to capital, and the terms of trade

are all random. We can characterize the long-run by looking at the values of k and Ic to which these random variables would

tend were the output shocks,   aand l, to happen to be realized at their expected values ofzerofor a long period of time. This
is   a measure of central tendency, though not the expected value.

                                             k(w      = ir(.)s'(.) +         (,)(.)p*
                                                                       1+n
                                                                         +
                                       (w,iP) = [1,r'(.)Js(.)/p*1       +n
where
                                      w*     = f1k(ws__s
                                                     ,w )] -         5_S       *•!.S
                                                                  k(w ,w )flk(w ,w          )
                                             =     w7)] - k(w,w)f["k(w,wi)]
anti the arguments in.s5(.) and   ir w, s
                                       are          .*   * 2 2 p, r, and        ,s. Since k and k are bounded,6 this system has a

nonernpty set of fixed points (LaSalle 1976). For the case of symmetric countries, we will assume that the solution k5 =

is one of these fixed points, and in fact is the unique fixed point.


Equilibrium: An In-Depth Vie-v


           Having sketched out briefly the nature of equilibria in this world, we will now analyse more closely the

determinationof equilibrium in each period. Specifically, we will consider the equilibrium conditions which characterize each

period and we analyse how a change in the equilibrium today affects the equilibrium tomorrow.

           Thecapital stockdefinitions and the balance of payments conditionsrepresent threeequilibrium conditions for the

temporary equilibrium in our international system. The consumers first-order conditions corresponding to cho,

o. and%, represent six more. The factor-market clearing conditions, corresponding to             zo   o, o
                                                                                                         and
                                                                                                                      s s,   ,
                                                                                                                 are another four:
                                                               11


                                      wo=Jkd       -kçfk                                - kcf1kt

                                                   + a0                     ?0=frj +
It is also important that expected returns to capital in the nextperiod be consistent with the actual supplies of that capital:

                                                                           ri=flkti
         This brings to fifteen the number of equilibrium conditions. Unfortunately, there are sixrteen endogenous variables:

                                                                       So far we have no equation corresponding             In
c,so, rj, Fo,1o,         ,ko,ko,ro,Fcj,ri,i,wo,øo,po,andio.

fact, potentially thereis an infinite sequence of relations needed to characterizethis equilibrium: we must know Z3 in order to

characterize po but to characterizei. we need to know pj. and to characterize       p we need to know1 and thereforep
         The fifteen relations do provide quite a bit of information, despite their limitations. Specifically, theytell us the
effects on the equilibrium of a change in a state variable, or in a system parameter, if expectations   of. were exogenous.7
We will refer to these with       unchangeif' effects as 'direct effects', and theywill be of central importance as our analysis

progresses. Completely ignoring the induced changes in          cannot be justified, however. For example, suppose the direct

effect of some shock to the system were to depreciate the current terms of trade, increasing pa.. This in itselfwill tend to

reduce     a lower      will change current portfolio allocations which in turn will put additional pressures on po. Further,

changes in todays terms of trade and in portfolio shares will certainly have effects on tomorrows equilibrium, including

tomorrows terms of trade, which also affect x0.

         Since we must deal explicitly with the formation of expectations about a0, and we have already assumed implicitly

that expectations about   q and     are formed rationally, it is nanaal to assume that expectations about x0 are formed rationally

as well. However, none of the available approhes to solving for rational expectations equilibria seem suitable. Lag

operators were inappropriate since the system isnt linear, and it has too many dimensions, even in its most compact form,

for phase diagrams. The model cannot be solved using dynamic stochastic programming since some of the functional

specifications have been left fairly general; even if they were further specified the system would be too complex to be solved

explicitly. In consequence, a new    approh to analyzing rational expectationsequilibria was tried here, which focuses on
characterizing their comparative statics. This approach is outlined in the following subsection, with some of the details

reserved for Appendix B. That the approach is correct forsmall changes was demonstrated by simulations which are

discussed in Part IlL
                                                                  12


Anproxirnatinethe ComnarativeStaticsof a Rational Exoectations Eaulibritim


           We need to find the matrix representing the effects of changes in today's state variables,

                        on tomorrows state variables,                           If expectations were not a problem we could simply
take the total differential of our equilibrium conditions and solve for these elements via Cramer's Rule. Under rational

expectations, however, such results represent only the 'direct' effects of a change in a state variable, in the sense defined

above. We will consider the direct and indirect effects to be additive and approximate the total effects linearly. Thus each

entry of the transition matrix will comprise two terms, for example:

                                                         +
                                                                                                  (8)
                                       ds.1
           The first termon the right-hand-aide, as0/as1,represents the direct effect of a change in 54 on       s. The second term,
(as1Jai)*(dz/dsi), gives us the indirect effects of &i on so:         .1 affects po andE(p1), changing         and, in turn, changing

s0. We will use the notation 'a'    to refer   to direct effects and 'd' to refer to the composite effects throughout the rest of the

paper.

           To carry out the Cramer's Rule part of the exercise we must totallydifferentiate the first-order conditions evaluated at

some initial equilibrium. Since thereis no true steady-state equilibrium to this system, we will use as our starting point the

slate of the system if the random variables' realizations foran extended period of time had been their expected values.

Together with the assumption of symmetry seross countries, we can infer that portfolios in the initial equilibrium will be

evenly divided between domestic and foteign equities, and that the terms of trade will be unity.8

           The signs of the direct effects are given in the table below. In the rest of the paper, we denote two of these as

follows:


                                                  0= air0
                                                       - <0,w= ap0 >0
                                                     dX0
                                                                    13


                                                                   Table I

                               Anincreasein:                Li        ii ii ii L                           o
                               implies:      ic0               +         +     +        +          +       0
                                                               +         +    -         -         -        0

                                          dir0=i?0          0         0       -         -         -


                                            Po              0         0       +         +         +        -

            In considering the effects of arise in     we p-alle*closely Peessne and avenssuns(985) analysis of the effects of
 an anticipated terms of tradedeterioration on a small
                                                          country. in our model such a change in EIpi} would be interpretted as
 an increase in   .   In both models,this anticipated change causes investors to shifttowards

 Domestic savings rises in the small country, because the
                                                                                              foreign assets (dir0 < 0).

                                                          expected capital gains on     foreign assets, combined with their fixed
own-good returns, require an increase in domestic returns, as well. In the two-country
                                                                                          setting, own-good returns to foreign
capital are endogenous, and portfolio shifts towards foreign assets cause them to decline while
                                                                                                   own-good returns to domestic
assets rise. Since portfolios are initially divided        across
                                                    evenly        domestic and foreign equities, these changes and those
associated with capital gains offset each other and overall
                                                               portfolio expectedreturns remain unchanged.
           In both models a rise in P1 causes an immediate current account
                                                                              deficit, but the proximate cause of the deficit are

completely different, In the small country this cause is the rise in savings, while when two
                                                                                             largecounthes interact it is the
associated increase the current terms of trade, a
                                                     response which Peessonand Svensson rule outby assumption. This increase
in   p is dueto the portfolio shifts, andis less thanone-for-one. Its affect on thecurrent account can best be understood by
considering instead how it impinges onthe capital account, which goes into
                                                                           surplus: the domestic-good value of foreign
investment,   po,      rises, and does so by more than the ncrease in capital outilows,
                                                                                            (l-inj)s.

           Having dealt with the direct effects of changes in the state variables on the temporary
                                                                                                   equilibrium we can move on to
consider the "indirecteffects." Since savings levels are
                                                         independentof expected changes in the terms of trade, there are no
"indirect effects' of changes in the state variables on current
                                                                savings in both counthes. In consequence, we can fill in the 10

                                               responses ofcurrent savings levels to the state variables:
ransition matrix elements corresponding to the

                                      d,r0s0             and       ds0s0
                                                                                                                 (9)
                                                                 14

                                                                                                                 to down.
      z                                                 This leaves us with 15 of the original 25 elements still pin
for   representing any one of the five state variables.

        Current portfolio shares and the current terms of trade will both respond                   ,
                                                                                    to a rise in so we must proceed with
                                                                                                which requiies resolving the
                               do this we consider the effects of each state variable on E[p1),
endogenizing this variable. To

                                           above.
problems of infinite recursion discussed
          We begin by approximating these effects linearly. Consider the effects of a change
                                                                                             in            on E   PI}. a change in P-i
                                                                       terms of trade,    all of which will, in turn,affect P1
will affect current savings, current portfolio shares, and the current

                                          [P1} d.0            dEp1} djr0 + dEp,j          d0 + dE(P1}        dp0
          d.E(P1   - dE(P1}
                   —
                      ds
                            d.s0
                                                                djr0 tip1       d0                   'o                 (10)
            dp                  dp1

Our linear    implies:
        approach


                                          --=-, P1}
                                                ---=-,
                                          dE{P1} dp1                           tip1       etc.



 which permitsus to re-express equation (10) as follows:

                          tiP1 _dP1 ds0 ÷dp1               d0 dp1 dv0                 d0         dp1dp0
                          tip1     d.c0   dp1 d.0 dp1 dr0 tip1                        clp             dp1

            There is one important observation that allows us to collapse
                                                                              a potentially infinite series of unknowns into a finite
                                                                                           and all random variables at their
 one: in the neighborhood of the initial equilibrium, with all slate variables unchanging
                                                                                                                             --
                                                                      state variables, say p.., on tomorrows state variables
 expected  values, the composite effectsof changes in oneof todays
                                                                                                                   two periods hence,
                    -- most be the same as the effects of changes in the latter on the state variables for the
  [s0,'0,ir,0)
  (s1,'j,1r1,1,p1. Thus,
                                                    = tip0       dp1p0  —          etc.                                (ii)




  As will become apparent as weprocede, it is       this   observation thatpowers the approximation algorithm.

             Usingequations (ii) we re-express (10)
                                                           onceagain:


                          dp1    _1p0 ds            dp0     d0      1P0 dir0      Po      dir0     tip0 dp0
                                                                   15

             Combining this expression with the definition     of, andusing the fact that the initial value ofp is unity,
     generates the followingrelationship   betweenj and thestatevariablep1:

                          P0               dp d0 +             d0 ÷             d0 +                         dp
                                                         ddp1                                 dp1 dp1 dp1                 (I)
                                                                                                                           2


             There are five versions of equation (12): the one above
                                                                     and those corresponding to            djds, d/&i, dsJd,ri and
 d/da1. Substituting these into the versions of equations (8) corresponding to
                                                                                                          d/dz1, and dp/d, would
 give us fifteen equations in these fifteen unknowns
                                                         (once again,   'z" refers to any and all of the state variables.)
            The symmetry of the system allows us so
                                                    conclude that &diri               ddt.     Furthermtxe. at is shown in
 Appendix B, dnJds4=        cik-t    = 0. This tells us that there are no indirect

 P0 Since thereare alto no 'direct'effects of such
                                                                                   effects of changes in& and1 on

                                                   changes on portfolio shares and the terms of trade
                                                                                                                                i,
                                                                                                                 (see Table 1), we
                                                                                                                                     ,   and



 conclude thaO



                                                                                                      •                  (13)
                             ds4       ds4         ds1       ds1        d&1        dx4
 Intuitively,changes in S. and      affect both country'scurrent
                                                                wagesandalsothe incomesof the elderly of each country
exactly symmetrically since at our initial
                                             equilibrium portfolios are divided evenly among the two types of
                                                                                                                       equities. This



                                                                                                              ,
leaves no cause for the terms of trade or
                                            portfolio shares to change in the present or the future.
       We are left with 9 elements of the transition
                                                     matrix yet to pin down: the effects of
                                                                                            ,r4,                  andp5 on it0, %, and


of   ,
Pg The symmetry of our system allows us to infer that the effectsof

         leavingus with four unknowns: d,r0/dse1,

           Our earlier steps have given us the
                                                                         on  it4
                                                  dp0/dx 1' diç>/dp4, and dp0/dp1.

                                                 followingrelations:
                                                                                   andtr43.   %.     Po will be identical to the effects




               dir0   —   dir,     r0 d                            dir0        dir0           dire   dg

               dp0    —   dp0    dp0   d                           dP          "o dP cl0                                             (14)
                                                           16

                                                                                      of drs-,Jdp1. Modifying (1) to take
These allow us to solve for   dpj/d,r in termsof dçIdir1,and for dp0hlp in terms
account of relations (9), (13). and (14), we get two equations
                                                               in the two unknowns drsJdir1 and dssj/dp      .   The exact


                                              of themis quadratic inone of the variables more specifically, each equation
equations are presented in Appendix B. Eath
                                       which correspond to one set of system parameters (J3       .35.   o = .8, p = 0) are
represents a hyperbola. The hyperbolae

presentedbelow:




                                                                             the solutions, only 'A' is stable, in the sense that
           There are only threepossible solutions, all of which are real. Of
                                                                  all below 1 in absolute value. (The stability condition for the
  the eigenvalues ofthe transition matrix associated with "A" are

                                               that the economy      will always find a stable path allows us to rule out
  system is presented in Appendix B.) Assuming

  solutions B and C.
                                                     in dsrfdx.5 and d4dp1 gives a cubic equation. It was not feasible to
           Combining the two non-linear equations
                                                                would hold forall plausible   combinations ofparameters ansI
  show snalytically whether the nice properties of solution "A"

                                                  of suchcombinations     were examined in computer simulations of the model.
  endogenous variables. Instead, a broad spectrum
  A constant elasticity production fuection was assumed, = dk ,with elasticity
                                                          f                    a =0.3 and scale pamineter d= 10. The
                                                                                          of the following parameters values:
  rate of population growth wasset at 0.7, and simulations were run at all combinations
                                          = .25,35,5.1
                                            = .1,8,2;

                                        p= -.8.8.
                                                                                    in the figure: all solutions were real, only
            Foreach of these 24 cases the solution sets conformed to those depicted
                                                                           in cases between rem and unity.
   one of them stable. In addition, the absolute values of own effects were all
                                                               17


           The signs of the elements of the transition matrix are in each case the same as the signs of the direct effects displayed

in Table 1. The size of these elements differ from the direct effects, however, atcording to the sign of associated changes in


j. In particular,a rise   in Ir   will tend to cause the terms of trade to appreciate between the current period and the next


(d/d1r1 <0),which in turn reducestheamountby which currentportfolio sharesfall below 1/2 and also reduces the
amount by which the current terms of trade depreciates. A rise in the previous terms of trade.     p,   will have the opposite

effects.




                 PART III: THE EFFECTS OF UNANTICIPATED                            OUTPUT DISTURBANCES



lILA:      A Temporary, Unanticipated Shock              to Output

           We will analyse the effects of an unanticipated, transitory positive shock to domestic output using the framework

derived above, considering first the 'direct" effects and then composite effects, which incorporateendogenous changes in

expected change in the terms of trade.


Direct Effects

           The increased output associated with a higher realization of     tends todepreciate the terms of trade because the rise

in the quantity of domestic goods relative to the available quantity of foreign goods drives down the relative price of the

former. According to the prodection function, the entire increase in output represents a rise in the realized own-good returns

to domestic capital. Since half of that capital is owned by domestic investors and halfby foreign investors, the increase in

domestic output accrues equally to domestic and foreign residents. All of these recipients wilt consume half of their increased

income as domestic goods and try to turn the other half into foreign goods, driving down the price of domestic goods. Thus,

the depreciation can be attributed to an increase in domestic imports, as in Laursen and Metzler (1950), only if we ignore an

equally large decline in foreign imports.

           Investors shift their portfolios towards foreign equities because their expected own-good returns rise relative to those

for domestic capital. M noted earlier, the current terms of tradedepreciation will increasenext-period domestic capital and
                                                                 18


cuase a symmetric decline in foreign capital. This in turn reduces expected own-good equity returns in the home country

relative to those abroad, eliciting the portfolio shift.


Composite Effects

          Will this same pattern emerge when the expected terms of trade depreciation,       ,   is endogenized? Using our

completed transition matrix, we can answer this question.

          To begin our analysis of dnJdao, we define agents expectedvalue for the terms of trade in period 1. Since the

shock to output will not be repealed, it can only affect the terms of trade in period I via its effects on current endogenous
                                                                                                -- then this will tend to increase
variables, if the output shock causes todaysterms of trade todepreciate -- dpç/dao> 0

tomorrows terms of trade by the amount (dpildp0)(dpcj/da0)= (dpo/dpidpo/daj).Any portfolio shifts caaused by the

output shock, dse/druj      d'dcsj, will change tomorrows terms of trade by the amount 2(dpi/dnXd1a/daj) = 2(dpo/drr
                                                                                                            = pcj/c-i = 0. In sum,
j)(dra/da). Anychanges in savings have no effects on tomorrows terms of trade, since dpo/ds'l
                                       dE(p1) =        dp0 dir0 + ——
                                                      2——         dp0 dp0                                              (15a)
                                                       d,r1da0                                                 -
                                          cia0                             dp1da0
This implies
                                                                                                                        15b
                                    da0          dirt da0            dp1 cia0     da0


                                                                                      will be affected by changes in     as follows:
 Accordingto our linearization, current portfolio shares and the terms of trade

                                                     dir0 —
                                                     ——          air0     +0—
                                                                            dx0
                                                      da0                   da0
                                                                                                                       (16)

                                                     —=
                                                      dp0        P0 +(d—
                                                                       d10
                                                     da0             a0        da0




                                       ———
                                       da0
                                                 2  dX.t   aao
                                                                           to
 Substitutingtheseinto (14b) givesan equationin do,/dao which can be solved yield:

                                                                 -
                                                                          dp   arto
                                                                                                                                    I

                                                                                                                              of this
           Finally, subsitutingthisexpressionback into equations(16) allows us to analyse the short-run effects
                                                                                                 in        to a one-shot
 temporary output shock. From this we conclude that the terms of trade will definitely depreciate response
                                                              19


rise in domestic output. It will then appreciate between the current period and the next (dxG'daO < 0), though the next


period's terms of trade will also have depreciated relative to its initial value of unity. It is not clear whether portfolios

allocations will shift towards foreign equities, as indicated by the 'direct effects" discussedabove, or whether domestic equities

will be favored. The motivation for a shift towards foreign equities has already been discussed, but it's worth repeating: the

current depreciation of the terms of trade will raise the domestic capital stock relative to the foreign capital stock, which in

turn reduces expecteddomestic equity renimns relative to those abroad. A shift towards domestic equities would be associated

with the anticipated appreciation in the domestic terms of trade. Despite the ambiguity surrounding the direction of change of

portfolio allocations, it can be ascertained that the current account moves into deficit.

         Laursen and Metzler (1950) also conclude that scuslent account deficit will arise in response to a domestic output

shock; their motivation for the change and ours axe entirely different, The concluded that an appreciation in the terms of trade

faced by foreigners will increase their real income, leading them to save more, and therebycause the domestic current account

deficit. Our result relies on the fact that a depreciation in the terms of trade increases the value of foreign investment in the

domestic economy and also raises the value of capital repatriatedfrom abroad, causing a surplus on the capital account.

         Though current foreign output is independent of current shocks to domestic output, such a shock will definitely

affect foreign output in the nextperiod. The depreciation of the terms of trade will Lend to raise the domestic capital stock for

the next period, and lower the foreign capital stock; since portfolio shifts are ambiguous they could affect capital stocks in

either direction, It can be ascertained analytically that the domestic capital stock will rise, the foreign capital stockwill fall,

and therewill be parallel effects on expected domestic and foreign output levels. Though future foreign output is likely to fail

as a result of the current domestic output shock, foreign welfare may actually rise since their terms of trade will be stronger

:elative to its initial value of unity. It's not possible to determine the direction in which welfare changes.

         This negative relation between foreign output and domestic output shocks is exactly the reverse of the relationship

discussed by Stockman and Svensson (1987). In their analysis a small country imports all its investment goods from the rest

of the world. When foreign output rises, the cost of that output, and therefore domestic capital imports, is reduced by the

associated terms of trade depreciation. This tends to increase domestic investment and domestic output The difference

between the results of these two models is not related to the fact that theirs is a small-country analysis, but is due instead to

different assumptions about the origins ofcapital. While allphysical capital must be imported it' the model ofStockrnan and

Svensson, physical capital cannot be imported in our model. In reality, physical capital comprises both domestic output and
                                                             20


importedoutput. For example, the U.S. is     a major capital goods producer, butJapanese lirnss have been known to import

specialized capital when building manufacturing plants here. The relevant question, then, is not whether capital is imported at

all, but whether the amount of imported foreign direct investment is sufficiently large to outweigh the terms of trade effect on

direct investment that is not imported and on purchases of equities themselves. In this respect, it is interesting to note that

Ray (1988) finds the terms of wade to be one of the major determinants of the volume of foreign investment, and that such

investment is increased when the dollar is "cheap" (depreciated)(p. 24): this is consistent with the approach adopted here.

         What are the subsequent effects of a temporary output shock? tf properties of the transition matrix could be pinned

down beyond simply their sign, we could do an analytical impulse-responaeanalysis and trace these effects through time.9 it

is possible to infer in this way that in the next period domestic savings definitely rises, savings abroad declines, and the terms

of waderemain above unity but decline (appreciate) relative to their value in the initial period. Beyond this, all the

comparative statics are ambiguous. To ascertain the likely directionofthese changes, the model was simulated using the

same specification that was used to analyze the transition matrix, with results that are consistent for all parameterizstions.t°

         In the rust period, Mirect effects dominate" forportfolio shares as well as for the terms of wade, andportfolio shares

shift towards foreign assets: the increase in the expected own-good return to domestic assets relative to the own-good retsrn

of foreign assets, caused by the terms of trade depreciation, dominates the expectedappreclation in the terms of trade.

         In the second period, we know from our analytical results that the rise in domestic output relative to foreign output

once again deprecates the terms of trade, though by less than the rust period. The simulations show that the depreciated

terms of wade causes domestic output to rise relative to foreign output in the third period, which causes the terms of trade to

depreciate once again... In this way, changes in the terms of trade acts to perpetuate an initial productivity shock into the

future, causing domestic output to rise relative to foreign output throughout the period of return to the initial equilibrium.

The difference between domestic and foreign output declines periodby period, the terms of wadedepreciates by less each

period, and the system returns incrementally to its initial equilibrium.

         The current account moves into surplus after the initial deficit, and remains there until the effects of the shock have

wom offcompletely. This shift can best be understood by thinking of the current account in terms of net capital flows. For

convenience, the expression for the capital account is reproduced below:

                                =   (r-         (l-iro)so)
                                                             - (th)(zir.t-(1-7r_t)s.t)
                                                              21


          The current account surpluse in period two is due in part to repamation of the positive net foreigninvestment      of the

first period. The increase in domestic savings relative to foreign savings, due in turn to the change in relative wages, also

helps create the deficit on capital account, and contributes to its persistenceduring the period of adjustment. This pattern of

current account adjustment, represented schematically below, does not correspond to any of the patterns associated with terms

of trade shocks in Persson and Svenssons small country analysis.




          These simulations represented sit opportunity to test the solution algorithm described in Part ll.B. Two approaches

were possible: one was to take a very small change in a and test whether consumers first-order conditions are satisfied at the

resulting equilibria; the other was to take a good-sized change in a and test to see whether the subsequent equilibria are

consistent with the linearized first-order conditions that constitute the Hessian matrix of the system, and from which the

analytical comparative statics are actually derivesi The latter appronchwas chosen and the algorithm proved accurate in every

case. The (linearized) first-order conditions were consistently fulfilled within rounding errors, and the system was always

stable. This is true for all the simulations described in the rest of the paper.




lH.B.     A Persistent Productivity Shock


          In this section we analyze the effects of an unanticipated positive shock to domestic output which is expected to

persist. Suppose for concreteness that the shocks follow a random walk:

                                                        a, = a,1     + v1

with   u distributed with zeiss mean and variance 2•
          To understand the implications of this assumption, let us retum to our derivation of the short-run effects of a

temporary shock to domestic productivity, and modify it slightly to incorporate the persistence of the shock at a constant

level for the indefinite future. First we must note that the 'direct effects of an unanticipated but permanent productivity

shock include the direct effects of todays shock and the direct effect of tomorrows repeat of the shock. We modify Equations

16 as follows:
                                                                22


                                                     =          +             +
                                            da0             & ?i7                 da0
                                                                                                               (16')
                                             dp,,         ap0 + 2p0        +0—    chTh
                                            da0            a0        a1      da0
where the subscript "p' refers to the permanence of the shock. The direct effect" now comprises two parts which have

opposite signs, since


                                                           >0, a,0 <0.
                                                    oa5          cia5

        These signs derive from higher expected returns to domestic capital which are associated with higher expected

domestic output. The portfolio shift towards domestic assets will in turn appreciate the domestic terms of trade, Here we

begin to see why the terms of tradecould initially appreciate in response to apositive output shock, If portfolios wers to

shift towards domestic assess sufficiently strongly, then the terms of trademight appreciate despite the increase in domestic

supply. How strong is "sufficiently strongly"? Unfortunately, the relative sIzes of the two parts of the direct effects cannot

be compared analytically.

         To consider this possibility further we must incorporatethe endogeneity of zo into our analysis. Equation 15s can

be modified to incorporate the effect of the repeat short

                                   dE(p1}
                                    da0          da0,,           d,r5   da0         dp5 da07
Here we ass using the fact that in our linear approach the effect of the repeat shock on the terms of trade one period hence will

be the sante as the effect of the current shock on current terms of trade, or dpi/dat = dpo/dao. This expression implies that



                               da0         da0            d&5   da5           dp1 da0     da0
                                  —
                                      2   d    dir0 + dP
                                          thr.1da0          dp1da0
                                                                     1P0


Substituting expressions (16') into this expression for slinjdasj we finth

                                                 dp,      srs    tr5          dpj &p5    3p,

                                   dce0                         1-29-wdtr,t
                                                               23


            Though   this expression cannot be signed.analytically because of the ambiguities menOoned above, simulated

versions of this model can help us understand how these ambiguities are likely to be resolved. We find that the terms of trade

will always be expected to depreciate between the current subsequentperiods, dx0/dao> 0, but initially the terms of trade

may appreciate or depreciate, dpD/daop        0. In all cases portfolios shift towards domestic assets despite the expected

depreciation. The likelihood that the increase in portfolio demand for domestic goods exceeds their increased supply depends

on two factors: (i) the value of diversification, and (ii) the aggregate size of portfolios/savings relative to consumption.

Diversification provides greater benefits to investors when equity riskiness is relatively high (say,   2=   0.8 instead of 0.1),

and also when equity returns are less well correlated (when p = -.8 rather than .8). As the value of diversification rises,

portfolios shift less strongly towards domestic assets for a given increase in expected domestic equity returns relative to

foreign returns. Portfolios arc larger relative to consumption when consumer discount rates are higher (say, $ = I rather than

.3 5).   For a given incresse in the share of assets devoted to domestic equities, the increase in demand for domestic output will

be higher as total assets rise.

            Suppose instead that a current shock were expected to be followedby a persistentshock of greater magnitude. What

then would be the association between productivity shocks and the terms of trade? To answer this question with our model

we must take it in pieces, beginning with an increase in the future expected values of a which is unassociated with any

current change. It is to this topic that we turn next,



llI.C Anticipated          Rise   in the Distribution     o Domestic Output
            Since shocks to productivity in this model are unanticipated by their very nstwc, we cannot consider an anticipated


productivity shock, temporary or permenant, in the way that Peesson and Svensson (1985) consider an anticipated shock to

the terms of trade. What can be anticipated in our model is a change in the disthbution of productivity shocks.

            We approach this analysis just as we did the previous cases, considering first the direct effects of a permanent rise in

the d.isthbution of a, and then endogenizing the expected change in the terms of trade, io.

The "direct effects" of an anticipated increase in the expected value of a are those of the higher expected domestic output in

period 1, which have already been discussed. To endogenizethe indirect effects, we modify Equations (15) once again. The
                                                                24


change in the expected terms of trade one period hence, relative so its original value of unity, can be expressed as the sum of

three components:

                               dE[p1) = dpt dP0 dir0 + dp0                              dp0
                               dE{a5) dr/2drrdE(a5J                           tIE( J                            (l5a)

where the subscript "a' refers so the anticiapted nature of the change in the distribution of a. The first component is due to

the expected high realization of at itself, the next is associated with the changes in current portfolio shares, and the last due

to the change in the current terms of trade. The complete expressions for changes in portfolio shares and the current terms of

trade are:

                                                   dir0     - ax0 +
                                                            —                 d10
                                                 dE(rta}

                                                            - a0             ____
                                                 dE[aJ
The expecteddepreciationin the terms of trade between the current period and the next is:


                                   !i_+2-!2.. dir0                     4p0          -     dp                    (l5'b)
                      dE(a1}       da5 dirtdE[aa}                      dp1dE(aJ         dE{aJ
or, solving:


                                          5ff0     =
                                                       2t+- 1tfi
                                                         dt.i      da dp1 aat
                                                                3rtt

                                                                  di '"1Iltl
                                                                12et÷
                                        dE(czj
                                                                          ds4

             This is ambiguous because dps/datp is ambiguous. Simulations results, on the other hand, display one consistent

pastem. Initially, portfolios shift towards domestic assets and the increased demand fordomestic output appreciates the

domestic terms of trade. This is not surprising, since there is now no direct reason for the terms of tradeto depreciate

domestic output has not yet risen relative to foreign output. Once the shift in the distribution of a occurs, and domestic

output does rise, the terms of trade depreciates well beyond its original value. Thus thereis in this case a short run

appreciation of the currency which is notexpected to continue, a panemwhich could be characterized as the inverse of

'overshooting": in the short run the currency moves in the direction opposite so the one it will follow in the long run.
             Since the terms of trade initially appreciate, does an anticipated increasein E[ a} = have a positive effect os

foreign output, rather than the negative effect we have observed in previous cases? No. In this case the portfolio shifts see
                                                              25


strong enough to dominate, and foreign output declines in the next period despite the terms of trade appreciation. In both

cases the mechanism by which the positive domestic impulse is transmitted as        a negative impulse to foreign output relies on

equities markets. The terms of trade depreciation of the unanticipated productivity shock can only affect foreign output so

long as the foreign capital stock is owned in part by domestic investors. The anticipated increase in the expected value of

domestic productivity affects foreign output insofar as equity portfolios shift Out of foreign capital.

         The current account goes immediately into deficit in the long run the deficit is reduced but not eliminated. The

initial deficit is due to the domestic capital inflow, and its reduction is associated with the subsequent terms of trade

depreciation.

         At this point we can answer the question that originally prompted us to analyse an anticipated increase in

E(a)     =   : Whatifacurrentshockwereexpecredtobefollowedbyapermanentincrease                   inE(a). = 1ofgreaser
magnitude? In our modelling format we can recreate the consequences of sucha scenario by taking linear combinations of the
effects of (i)   a temporary productivity shock and   (ii) an anticipated rise in E( cx)    .   A permanentshocksuchas we

analysedin the previous section represents a combination in which these effects have equal weights. In our simulations, this

is always sufficient to cause the terms of trade to appreciate initially when $ = 1.   If$ = .5, this occured only for p    -.8, and

for lower values of j3 the terms of trade always depreciated initially. When $ is at its base value of .35 (individuals rate of

time preference is about .03 and one period corresponds to 35-40 years),the subsequent increase in E( a) must be roughly one

third above its current value for the terms of tradeto appreciate initially; for $ as low as .25 the ratio E(   a)    1:ao must

be around 1.7.

         Let's observe this situation through some other prism to see what our analysis has conthbuted. The terms of trade

will depreciate in the next period in all of our scenarios, regardless of the relative sizes of saj and E(   a) =    Supposewe

had treated this future, expected depreciation of the terms of trade as exogenous. As we notedin Part IL the small country

analysis of Persson and Svensson indicates that a rise in P1 would lead portfolios to shift towards foreign assets and the

domestic capital stock to decline, exactly the opposite of what we find here. Our own two-country analysis would have

implied a current depreciation in the terms of trade, once again the opposite of what we actually find, had we treated

expectations as exogenous. Since the future terms of trade change is in fart an endogenous response to a more fundamental

disturbance, this is an example of a principle familiar to all economists; analysing the effects of a change in an endogenous

variable in isolation from the fundamental disturbance itselfcan be misleading.
                                                             26




                                               IV.     CONCLUSION


         In this paper we have considered productivity shocks in a two-country, intertetnporal maximizing model, focusing on

the mechanism by which these affect the terms oftrade and future domestic and foreign output. We first considered a

                                                                                              this output, will chive down its
temporsry, unanticipated shock to domestic output which, by increasing the relative supply of
                                                                                                                     stock
price -- depreciate the domestic terms of trade. In mm, this depreciation causes an increase in the domestic capital

relative to the foreign capital stock, so long as international equities markets are non-trivially integrated. When domestic

output is once again higher than foreign output in the next period, as a result of the relatively large capital stock at home, the

terms of trade once again depreciates relative to its original value, raising domestic capital once again relative to foreign

capital in the next period, and causing the terms of trade to depreciate relative to its original value once again in the next

period... As is clear from our analysis, the propagation of the initial output shock through time and across countries
would not occur without integrated national equities markets.

         A productivity shock that causes investors to revise upward their expected value of domesic productivity in the future

may cause the terms of trade to appreciate initially, rather than to depreciate. This appreciation will be the result of portfolio

shifts towards domestic equities in anticipation of higher own-good returns to these assets. Whether the terms of cede


appreciatesor depreciates depends on three fsetors: (I) the size of the increase in the expected value of productivity at home

relative to the initial shock; (ii) the size of the shift portfolio in portfolio shares, which in arm depends on the variability of

equity returns (productivity)and on the correlation between domestic and foreign equity returns; and (iii) the size consumer
                                                               -
savings relative to their consumption.

         Even whena domestic output shock causes an initial appreciation of the terms of trade, foreign output in the future

can be rxpected to decline relative to future domestic output. This is because if the terms of trade do appreciate, the portfolio

shifts towards domestic assets that cause the appreciation will also be reducing foreign capital relative to domestic capital.

Once again, the mechanism by which aproductivity shock is propagated relies on the integration of international equities

 markets.

            Though we follow Pemson and Svensson (1985), and many other authors, in analysing temporary and permanent,

 anticipated and ananticipasedshocks,our two-country format requsies that we locate the exogenous determinants of economic
                                                            27


acuvity at a morefundamentallevel than the termsof tradeitself. In our analysis, we take producuvity shocks to be the

exogenous disturbance. The terms of trade responses to these shocks will not necessarily follow the pattern of the shocks

themselves. For instance, when we consider a temporary shock to domestic ouut, we find that the terms of trade response

takes many periods to die out though the shock lasts but one period. In   ft, the terms of trade in oureconomies will never
follow the pattern of a one-period change considered by Persson and Svensson. In this and other respects the conclusions of

small counoy analyses with an exogenous terms of trade do not carry over well to the two-country setting.

         We began this paper expressingan interest in the current real exchange rate appreciation in the United Kingdom,

which seems to be associated with a simultaneous productivity increase there. We have shown that this appreciation could be

due to an increase worldwide in investors expectations of long-run productivity in that country. Such a suggestion is entirely

plausible for the U.K.: current strong output growth is generally agreed to be the result of 'supply side" reforms of the

Thatcher goverment, and thia government is expected to be in power for a number of years to come and to pursue these same

goals vigorously during the rest of its tenure. Any reading of the business press will show how far investor perceptions of

the British economy have shifted in the lastdecade. Further support for this hypothesis comes from the fact that this country

experienced positive net foreign equity purchases during 1987far out of proportion to its share of the world equity market

(Merrill Lynch, presentation at the Tuck School. May 1988).



                                                           NOTES



   The termsof trade is typically defined as the priceof the home good in terms of the foreign good, which is the
inverse of our definition. According to the definition used here, an appreciation will imply a decline inp. The real
exchange rate is more authentically defined as the relativeprice of traded and nontraded goods. In a model such as
 this one, without nontraded goods, the real exchange rate becomes synonymous with the terms of trade.
2 The choice of functional form for the production function deserves some comment, It is more common to
analyze a linear homogenous function multiplied by a stochastic term with unit mean: Q = aF(K,L). Examples
includeBao-a1975; Mayer 1976; BaronandForsythe1979; Helpmanand Razin 1978a and b; Grossman and
Razin 1984, 1985. In this case the variance of the return to capital is (fl2o2, implying that any change in per-
worker capital stock affects not only the return to capital but also its variance. Since this is a complication with
which this thesis is not concerned, our alternative formulation was adopted Another advantage of the additive form is
that it mimics reality more closely than the model with multiplicativeisiscertainty,since in actuality the return to
capital does absorb most of the variance in ouq,ut. The risk-sharing arrangements responsible for this asymmetry
between labor and capital, which are the focus of the implicit contracts literature (Bailey 1974),are notreadily
incorporated into this particular model.
                                                               28




3The requirementthat 0 < d < 1 ensuresthat members of the older generationwill always consume a positive
amount. Since we assume r > 0, their retirementresources will be posiUve whenever a, a >l.
4Strictly speaking, finn managers in this world try to maximize returns to their shareholdersrather than
economicprofits. That is, when choosing their level of capital for the nextperiod, a managers objective
function is:



This has first-orderconditions
                                        EL,K     ii1F(K,L) K
                                                               + ctK- wL


                                                 FL(K,L) = w,

                                         F   'K T \ -      F(K,L) - wL
                                                                 K

Since these conditions imply that both factors of production should be paid their marginal product, the
change in objective functionfrom the norm of excessprofit maximization does not imply any change in
firm behavior. (The implications ofresidual maximizationdo differ from those of economic profit
maximization under certain conditions of asymmetricinformation.)

5k is interestingto distinguish this expression for the real return to domestic savings from a relatedexpression used
in both Perssonand Svensson (1985)and Frenkel and Razin (1985). Their expression corresponds to the case where
returns to capital are alwaysequal across countries, once changes in the tenns of tradeare accounted for. Using an
approximationapproachanalogous to the one employedfor R in the text, their expression for the real returns to
consumers invesunents,call it 'R"', is R' = r+ tx. When r = ? + x in our model, thenR = R'. However, this is
unlikelyto be satisfied very often in this model.

6This is implied when we assume          urn -kf"(k) = 0.
                                        k-+co

7To derivethe comparativestatics of this model, the consumers first-order conditionswere approximatedusing a
second-order TayloYs expansion. This effectively rules Out the possibilityfor third and higher moments of the
                 a
distributionsof and so affect the equilibrium. Since -1 a 1, these moments and their possible effects are
likely to be quite small.
8The use of the assumption of symmetriccountries togetherwith the assumptionof a pooled portfolioequilibrium
originatedwith Lucas (1980).




                                 i=+-9.
                                   ds
                                 dir0

                                  ds1
                                                     da0
                                                                 +2+
9 For example,the effect of the output disturbanceon the major endogenousvariables for period one are:



                                                               da0

                                                               °
                                                                           dir1 da0   dp1 da0
                                         —     ds0         +          2 ds0 dir0      ds0 dp0
                                 da0         ds da0            da0      dir1 da0      dp1 da0

                                                da0            dir1 da0     dp1 da0

                                                 i=2!22+
                                               da0         d,r1da0         dp1da0
                                                             29




       accomplish this we began with the simulationsdescribed in Part II. Each set of parameterswas associated
10 To
with a long-runequilibrium solutionand with a stable transition mathx. The solutionvalues were used to calculate
the 'direct effects' of a rise in ao, which were combinedwith the transitionmatrix elements in equations 15 and 16
to calculatethe total initial effects of the shock. Thereafterthe equations listed in the previous footnote were used to
calculatethe subsequentequilibria.




                                                         APPENDIX A

Using relations (3) and (4) we can re-expressreal wealth of retirees as follows:

                                 =                                +
                                      [21+r+' (1-1++1                                                 (Al)


Define:


                                           (l+zb) =                   and (1+z1)     =
                                                                                          (JP
We can restate (Al) this way:

                                      =                           +      + (l-Jt%1-4-+l +
                                          (s )[2r1+r+l
                                                                        +
                                          (f)11v(1+r+a÷zt)
Finally, note that:


which implies
                                                zh   Z- x             , and       zf=px

                                W                  +    lr(r4-a) +      (l-(?-4-) + (.u-r)x]
                                          (_)[1


                                                            APPENDIX B


 1. Proof that        =         = 0

          Let
                                           0=     -.=-- ,         = -=—       ,
                                                                                  -e = -0)-
                                                                                      C - —a
                                                  jX0               tXo                    9
                                     —
                                     —          '—        —
                                                          —                         '— = v
                                            p                   —
                                                                          = q
                                            —
                                                  °d
                                                                          tdpthtp       P bip/thip unsi joqidcq oi uj
                                                                                     a3b         o= Tsp/O Ispfldp 1035! s!mouo
qi jo             Amxnqzs   ioj p   srrns   q uso suo!ssJdx soip (t Ajuouj                       1pIOdp103 spoq uoisoidxmpuns V
                                                                                                   =
                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                             :2sop puTJ
-sp1p = v/O'p= 1sp/Qcp rnp   sj ip uisnpu uM!os                     soi O1A puS TspIOdp Jo uouunjs so I'pdp so                     stasnj
                                            =     _—E-  o+-e-i
                       Ogp    0dp                   OSp
                                                    °dp  °p    °dp
                                                     Os                                 =              PuS               =
                                                                °dp8      O                 0iip                °P           °dp
                       -—           a =               -— -               (1)   +   —         -      —
                                                    °p 0p t                        02(p             °dp
                        P9           +                    (1)   =              -   -      - J (! +         —
                   0jp °dp                  °SP   0p                   °S'P        0p                      °dp
                                                                                                           —
                                                                                                           —
                                                                                                               T'p       —
                                                                                                                         —
                                                                                            °dp                              °ap
                    ipiPz    +iPiP                               =                            a'+
                    oitp °dp  Op O                                     Op °dp                               °dp
                    ts.ptsp gp1ip                      +        'sp dp               Tp                -
                                                                oo
                 t- T-I_                                         +                                             —
                                                                                                               —
                                       +
                 °dp    °dp 0c/p             01cp   0cJp             Op °dp           0p     0dp       j           0dp
                                                                                      .10                   =        up 2umou q uu2
                                                         31




                                         dir0           thr0          dp0            ap0
                                        dir1            dp1          dir1             p1

Equation 1:


                 0 =     2ov2 +   a[2 - a1 - ëi2) - ij +                    + cib +        [   —   (1-e/2)I

Equation 2:


                         0   =          +   b[2-o1-ë)-1J             +   2ab +

3. Stability Condition

         lntertemporaJ stability of the systemrequires that the eigenvaluesof the transition matrixlie between-1 and 1.
There are 5 eigenvalues, threeof which equal zero and the other two of which must satisfy:

                                                -   (d+2a) + 2(ad-bc) =         0.




                                                      REFERENCES


Aizenman, Joshua, and Jacob Frenkel, "Optimal Wage Indexation, Foreign Exchange Intervention, and Monetary
    Policy,' American Economic Review, VoL 75, No. 3, June 1985: 402-23.

Bailey, Martin N. "Wages and Employment UnderUncertain Demand," Review ofEconomic Studies 41, January
     1974: 37-50.

Baron, David P., and RobertForsythe, "Models of the Firm and International Trade UnderUncertainty,' American
    Economic Review Vol. 69, September 1979: 565-74.

Batra, R. N., 'Production Uncertainty and the Hecksher-Ohlin Theorem." Review of Economic Studies 4, April
     1975: 259-68.

Diamond, P. S., "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth ModeL" American Economic Review Vol 55, 1965.

Dornbusch, R. and P. Krugman, "Flexible Exchange Rates in the ShortRun,' Brookings Papers on Economic
    Activity, No. 2, 1976.

Fleming,M., "Domestic FinancialPolicies under Fixed and under Floating Exchange RAtes." International
    Monetary Fund StaffPapers Vol. 9, 1962.

Rood. Robert P., and Nancy Peregrun Marion,'The Transmission of Disturbances UnderAlternative Exchange-Rate
                                                                              1982: 43-66.
   Regimes with Optimal Indexing," QuarterlyJournal ofEconomics, February,

Grossman, Gene M. and Assaf Razin, "International Capital Movements Under Uncertainty," Journal ofPolitical
    Economy 92, April 1984: 286-306.
                                                       32



_________        'The PatternofInternational Trade in a Ricarriian Model with Country-Specific Uncertainty,"
    InternationalEconomic Review 26, February 1985: 193-202.

Helpman, Elhanan, and Assaf Razin. "Uncertainty and International Trade in the Presence of Stock Markets."
    Review of Economic Studies,45, June 1978: 239-50 (a).

_________ A Theoryof International       Trade Under Uncertainty. Academic Press,New York: 1978. (b)

LaSalle,   J2., The Stability ofDynamicalSystems, (J.W.   Arrowsmith Ltd., Bristol; 1976).

Laursen, Svend, and Metzler, LloydA., "Flexible Exchange Rates and the Theoryof Employment," Review of
    Economics and Statistics Vol. 32, November 1950: 281-99.

Lucas, Robert J., "Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country WorltL" Journal of Monetary Economics,
    Vol. 10, 1980.

Mundell, Robert A,, InternationalEconomics (Macmillan Publishing Co., New York: 1968).

Persson, Torsten,and Lars E.O. Svensson. 'Current Account Dynamics and the TErms of Trade: Harberger-Laursen-
     MetierTwo Generations Later,' Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 93, no. 1: 1985, 43-65.
Ray, Edward John, "The Determinnats of Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: 1979-1985." Presentedat
    aconferenceon Trade Policies for international Competitiveness sponsored by the National Bureauof Economic
   Research, April29, 1988.

Stockman, Alan, and Svensson, Lars E.O., "Capital Flows, Investment, and Exchange Rates," Journal of Monetary
    Economics, Vol. 19, 1987, 171-201.
