                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC DETERMINANTS OF BUDGET DEFICITS
                        IN THE INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACIES




                               Nouriel Roubini

                                Jeffrey Sachs




                           Working Paper No. 2682




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetta Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 August 1988




We thank-Professor Robert Gordon, Mr. Isao Kubota of the Japanese Miniatry of
Finance and the other participants at the ISDM Conference for many helpful
comments and suggestions.     We also thank Mr. Grignon of the OECD for
providing us the data on the general government net debt.    Of course, all
cemaining errors are ours. This research is part of NBER's research program
in Economic Fluctuations.   Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #2682
                                       August 1988


           POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC DETERMINANTS OF BUDGET DEFICITS
                        IN THE INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACIES


                                  ABSTRACT



           This paper focuses on the management of fiscal deficits and

      the public debt in the industrial democracies. Given the large

      deficits in many OECD countries in recent years, and the resulting

      sharp rise in the public debt, it is important to determine the

      economic and political forces leading to such large deficits. We

      find only partial support for the "equilibrium approach to fiscal

      policy", which assumes that tax rates are set over time in order

      to minimize the excess burden of taxation. Tax rates do not seem

      to be smoothed, and budget deficits in many countries in recent

      years appear to be too large to be explained by appeal to

      transitory increases in government spending. We suggest that in

      several countries the slow rate at which the post-'73 fiscal

      deficits were reduced resulted from the difficulties of political

      management in coalition governments. There is a clear tendency for

      larger deficits in countries characterized by a by a short average

      tenure of government and by the presence of many political parties

      in a ruling coalition.




Nouriel Roubini                         Jeffrey Sacha
Department of Economics                 Department of Economics
Yale University                         Harvard University
New Haven, CT D6520                     Cambridge, MA 02138
            It is only recently that mainstream macroeconomists have made an

important effort to formulate a positive theory of government behavior.

The traditional macroeconomics literature took government policy variables

to be exogenous, and examined the comparative statics effects of

alternative policy choices.     More recently, normative rules of behavior

for government policy were derived based on structural macroeconomic

models combined with simply objective functions assigned to the

government.    As a general rule, there was little interest in explaining

what governments actually did, but only interest in explaining what

governments ought to do in order to accomplish certain objectives.

            Macroeconomists are now recognizing the need to explore more

carefully what governments actually do, rather than what they ought to do.

The first reason for this change of emphasis is simply the overwhelming

and ever-increasing role of the government in modern industrial economies.

For example, with the share of government spending in GNP now more than 40

percent in most OECD economies, up significantly from the early 1960s, it

is obviously of fundamental importance to understand the forces behind

actual government spending decisions.

            Second, modern economic theory stresses that intertemporally

optimising individuals must form expectations about future government

policies as a key part of their decisionmaking process. In order to form

expectations, it is crucial to understand the nature of government

behavior in order to derive appropriate expectations about future

policies.      If private agents are forming expectations over future
government policies, macroeconomists must do the same in order to get an

acceptable model of the macroeconomy.
                                            2

                Third, many economists blame faulty macroeconomic policies for

the poor macroeconomic performance of much of the world economy since the

early l970s.      A long and growing list of apparent policy failures (e.g.

the inflationary monetary policies in the industrial countries during the

1970s, the large budget deficits in the U.S. and elsewhere in the 1980s)

have led many economists to ask whether there are systematic biases in

government decisionmaking or political incentives that lead to poor

economic policies.

          One important possibility, for example, explored in the
important contributions of Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and

Gordon (l983a, l983b), is that optimal policies are time inconsistent, so

that actual government policies may deviate importantly from optimal

policies if governments cannot commit their future actions.               This

literature has led to an important theoretical exploration of key ideas

such as the reputation of policymakers; the difference of "statutory"

versus   "constitutional" limitations on policymaking;          the role of
institutions (e.g. central bank independence) on economic outcomes, and so
            -

on.

          Our      paper focuses on a specific, but important area of

macroeconomic policymaking: the management of fiscal deficits and the

public debt. Given the large deficits in many economies in recent years,

and the resulting sharp rise in the public debt, it is important to

determine the economic and political forces leading to such large

deficits. The basic data that motivates our exploration is given in Table

1. There we see the very sharp rise in the share of taxes and aggregate

spending in the national economies of the major industrial countries in
                                        3

the past 25 years, as veil as the large budget deficits in many of the

economies in recent years.    (Here as elsewhere in the paper, our measure

of the budget deficit is not the financial balance of the general

government, as is typically reported, but rather        change in the ratio

of net public debt to GDP).1 In three countries, Belgium, Ireland, and

Italy, the ratio of net debt to GDP has reached remarkable levels of

around 100 percent or more.

          Our starting point of analysis is the so-called "equilibrium

approach to fiscal policy, which has been championed by Barro (1979, 1983,

1985, among other works), and recently summarized by Aschauer (1988).

This approach argues that actual tax and deficit policies are a reflection

of an intertemporal optimization over a long time horizon y the budgetary

authorities, who choose their policies to reduce the excess burden of

taxation for a given path of government spending. Jhile this viewpoint,

sometimes summarized as the 'tax smoothing" hypothesis of government

budgetary policy, offers some important insights, it does not fully

account for the differences in the magnitudes of budget deficits across

OECD economies in recent years. It also seems to be inconsistent with the


1.    This choice of measure is motivated by several considerations.
First, it is the variable used by Barro and others in testing the tax-
smoothing hypothesis of   St management.     Second, the typically
reported measure of fir.   al balances overstates the economically
relevant deficit by incUJing the inflation component of interest
payments on the public debt, which should be counted properly as a form
of debt repayment rather than a current budgetary expenditure.     The
change in the net-debt-to-GNP ratio automatically adjusts for this
coaponent.   Third, the long-run tax implications of current deficits
are best measured by looking at the net-debt-to-GNP ratio. Note that
to the extent that conventionally measured deficits are financed by
seignorage (i.e. the inflation tax) rather than by debt accumulation,
our measure will understate the deficit.           Put another way, we
implicitly count seignorage as a form of taxation rather than as a form
of deficit financing.
                                          4

steady rise in tax rates in most of the OECD economies during the past two

decades.

            Our   main goal is to demonstrate that differing institutional

arranaemep in the political process in the various OECD economies also

help to explain the markedly different patterns of budget deficits in the

different countries.      Of course, the public choice approach to budgets

(as developed by James Buchanan and others), and the recent so-called

"partisanship theory" of policy-making, of Alesina, Havrilesky, Sachs,

Tabellini, and others, have also drawn our attention to aome of the

important political features of budget management, by recognizing the role

of political conflict in affecting budgetary policy.        However, these

theories have not stressed enough the role of alternative political

institutions in mediating the effects of political conflict on budgetary

outcomes.

            We wish to stress in our analysis that governments are not the

monolithic entities of standard economic models that have full control of

the policy instruments and that manage them according to a stable and

well-defined objective function. When power is dispersed, either across

branches of the government (as in the U.S.), or across many political

parties in a coalition government (as is typical in Italy), or across

parties through the alteration of political control over time,         the

likelihood of intertemporally inefficient budgetary policy is heightened.

Thus, we find that the size and persistence of budget deficits in the

industrial countries in the past decade is greatest where there have been

divided governments (e.g. multi-party coalitions rather than majority-

party governments).
                                          5

            Some basic support for this view is garnered in Table 2. There

we show the pattern of budget deficits during 1975-86, together with the

"typical' institutional form of the government, and the average tenure of

governments        It is apparent that governments with large coalitions

and/or short tenures (e.g. Belgium, Italy, Sweden, and Denmark) are

characterized by particularly large average budget deficits in the past

decade.2      While there are exceptions to this proposition (e.g. the

Netherlands, and Finland for reasons described in footnote 2 and later),

there are       cases of long-lived governments (with an average tenure

greater than 3 years) showing an average annual change in the debt-GDP

ratio in excess of 3 percentage points during the period 1975-85.

            The importance of the time-horizon of the gcvernment for budget

policy has recently been stressed in an important paper by Alesina and

Tabellini (1987).       They emphasize that when political power alternates

randomly between competing political parties, each government will be

tempted to leave a legacy of high debt for its successor, whose spending


2.   Later we will discuss a political classification scheme in
greater detail.   Suffice it here to note that Finland and France
present certain ambiguities in classification, since they are mixed
parliamentary - presidential systems.  In both cases, we treat them
more as presidential than as parliamentary systems, and therefore
expect them to show low budget deficits on average. In France, the
ambiguity in form is not highly problematical, since even as a
parliamentary system, France would be classified as a small coalition
case (with coalition partners that are typically rather similar in
ideology).    In Finland, there is much greater problem, however.
Finnish coalition governments are typically multi-party, and extend
over a very wide ideological range.  Therefore, in its parliamentary
aspect, the Finnish government has the kind of structure that seems to
give rise to large budget deficits in other countries. We believe that
the strong presidency overcomes many of the problems that would
otherwise arise.  Some observers Stress that Finland has behaved more
like a presidential than parliamentary system in part because of the
personal political strength of the long-time president of the postwar
period, Mr. Kekkenon.
                                         6

priorities it is not likely to share.        The high debt restrains the

 spending by the next government, but the current government cares little

about the next government's spending in any case.     Presumably, the more

rapid the turnover of government, the more important would be this deficit

bias effect.

           We also stress the role of rapid turnover of governments, but

through a different channel.      In our interpretation, the problem of

coalition governments is the inability to secure agreements           among

coalition partners withina given government. The shorter is the expected

tenure of the government, the more difficult it may be to achieve

cooperation among the coalition partners (game theory establishes the

general point that cooperation is easier to maintain the longer is

expected time horizon over which agents will interact).

          A word should be said at the beginning about the possibility of

reverse causality in the correlation that we are stressing. Might not

large and persistent budget deficits account for the weak and multi-party

character of some countries, rather than vice versa? This alternative

interpretation is in fact highly doubtful, since: (1) the regime character

depends intimately on the constitutional process (e.g. most importantly,

whether elections are governed by proportional representation, which tends

to produce short-lived multi-party coalition governments); (2) the regime

character is highly stable over time, and is little influenced by the

budgetary situation.

          The paper is organized as follows.     Section II examines the

"equilibrium" approach to fiscal policy.        While the theory offers

interesting insights, some key aspects of the theory are not supported by
                                                7

the data for several OECD economies. Section III sheds some light on the

origins of the large budget deficits after 1973 in many OECD economies.

We attribute the onset of large deficits to the growth slowdown and rise

in unemployment after 1973, as well as the sharp rise in real interest

rates after 1979.     By the early 1980s, most governments recognized that

large budget deficits were likely to continue in the absence of majot

adjustments in spending and taxes, but only some countries (notably the

Germany, Japan, and the U.K. among the major economies) successfully

stabilized the ratios of public debt to GOP. Section IV suggests that the

success of fiscal consolidation has been importantly related to political

institutions.



Section II. The Equilibrium Model of Fiscal Policy

            Our starting point of analysis is the equilibrium approach to

fiscal deficita.       The equilibrium model is based on the following

assumptions: (1) the time path of future government spending is given, and

is known; (2) the discounted value of taxes is equal to the discounted

value of future government spending plus the initial stock of public debt;

(3)     the time path of taxes has no effect on output via aggregate demand;

and (4) the excess burden of taxation is a convex function of the tax

rate.     It is assumed that the government chooses taxes to minimize the

present discounted value of the deadweight burden of taxation.

            Given these assumptions, it is easy to prove the celebrated "tax

smoothing" hypothesis, which holds that taxes are set at the fixed rate

that minimizes the intertemporal deadweight loss of the tax system.                To

show this result, let G1, G2, G3,       .   .       . be   the exogenous time path of
                                                         8

real government spending. GNP in period t is denoted by 'i'                  Let   g1, g2.
               be the path of government spending relative to GNP, i.e.                  —

G/Y.      Let
                   T1, T2, T3, .       .   . be the time path of taxes, and let t, t2,

t3              be the time path of taxes relative to GNP (we will also call

     the tax          in period t). The real interest rate is given and (for

convenience only) is fixed at the rate r .                    The stock of public debt in

real terms at the beginning of period t is denoted by B The public

debt evolves according to the dynamic budget constraint:


                          —      (1 + r) * B + (G -
             (1)
                                                             T)
(G -    T)     is the primary budget deficit.                We will denote the debt-GNP
ratio as b —

                The taxes are assumed to be distortionary, with deadweight

losses per unit of GNP given by D(t), with D' > 0 and D'' > 0. The

governments intertemporal loss function as of period t is given by:


             (2) L —              (1 + r)1 D(tj) *


Under the assumptions of the equilibrium model, the goal of the government

as of period t is to find the time path of taxes which minimizes (2)

subject to the constraint that the discounted value of taxes equal the

discounted value of expenditures:


                                  ii
                                   -                              00
             (3) E     (l-4-r)
                                           T+.
                                                 — (1.   + r)B +E (l+r) 1
                                                                i0                 G+.


It is straightforward to show that the first-order conditions for the

government's optimal tax program are simply:
                                                      9


               (4) D'(t+) —           A                      for all i —   0,1,2,...

where A is the Lagrange multiplier associated with the intertemporal

constraint that total taxes must equal total expenditure. From (4) it is

obvious that the tax rate should be set at a constant value across all

future time periods, consistent with the intertemporal budget constraint

in (3).

               In a stochastic environment, the equivalent condition for

optimal tax smoothing is that the tax rate is a random walk without drift,

and that changes in the tax rate between period t-l and t are
unpredictable given the information set at time t-l.

               To find the appropriate constant value of taxes for the model

(l)-(4), it is convenient to define the "permanent" level of government

spending relative to income as follows. Let ni be the compounded growth

rate of real GNP between period t and period t+i:                          —       *   (1 +
n.)1.     Then, the discounted value of government spending can be written as:

                         -i
         (5)     (l+r)        Gt. —           (1+r)   ''÷.

                                          —
                                                  (1+r)(1+n)i
I..et    gP be the constant level of                      starting at time t such that the

discounted value of gP is the same as the discounted value of

the actual path of               Specifically:

(6) gP —                              1+n             I   / [Z   (l+r) (l+n1)' I



In      the special case where growth n is constant n, (6) reduces to the

simpler expression:
                                                        10

            (7) gP — [(r-n)/(l+r))                  (   [(l+r)/(l+n)]



            It    is now straightforward to show that the appropriate constant

tax rate t is given as follows:


            (8) t — (l+r)                 * a *
                                                  b     +    gP

                           -i         i
where a — E            (l+r) (l+ni)               In the case where the growth rate n
                 i—c

is   constant, we can write:


            (9)        t' —     (r-n) bt +         gP


The important implication of (8) and (9) is that the tax rate is optimally

set at the level of DerTnanent spending, plus a fraction of the interest

payment due on the outstanding stock of debt. It is then straightforward

to show that the change in the debt-GNP ratio may be written as follows

(in the constant n case):


                                           —                               gP)
            (10)        (b+i -    b)           [l/(1+n)1          (g   -




According to (10)             the debt-GNP ratio is a function of the gap of

temporary and permanent government spending. When government spending is

above its permanent level, b rises, and when government spending is

below its permanent level, b falls.

            Equation (10) is the basis for Barro's celebrated emphasis on

deficits and wartime. During wars,                      will greatly exceed gP, and debt

will rise. During peacetime,                      will tend to be less than gP (because

gP will included expected expenditures of future wars), and the debt-GNP
                                           11

ratio should fall.   Barro has confirmed these basic trends for peacetime

and wartime for the U.S. and the U.K.

          As another illustration of equations (9) and (10) ,           consider     the

case in which government spending relative to GNP is rising each period,

as has been the case in several European countries.                 Suppose that

rises by the amount y each period, so that                      —        +i   * -1


Then, permanent spending is always above temporary spending, by the amount

           Therefore, we would find from (9) that taxes are always above

current government spending plus (r-n) b by the same amount:


          (11)       —    g   +   (r-n) b + y       /   (r-n)

The debt-GNP ratio would always be falling, according to:


          (12) b+i -      b   —   -[l/(1+n)]   *   y / (r-n)

          The economic interpretation of (12) is as follows. In order to

minimize the excess burden of taxation, the tax rate should be held

constant, despite the constant rise in the rate of government spending.

ut how can this be done if government spending is constantly rising as a

proportion of CNP?       Taxes should be set to generate a budget surplus,

leading to a declining ratio of debt to CNP, so that the interest payments

on the debt as a fraction of income fall over time, to compensate for the

constant rise in non-interest government expenditure.



Testing the Equilibrium Approach for the OECD Economies

          The equilibrium approach stands in strong contrast to the

pessimistic forebodings of some economists (notably Buchanan and Tullock),
                                        12

who claim that there is a chronic tendency towards budget deficits in

representative democracies.    The equilibrium view predicts falling debt-

GDP ratios during normal peacetime years.       As shown in Table 3, the

prediction of falling b was strikingly confirmed for most industrial

countries during the period 1960 to 1973.     Debt-GDP ratios fell in the

U.S. France, the U.K., Canada, Belgium during the period, or in 5 of the

7 countries with net debt data as far back as the mid-l960s. Only Italy

and Germany showed a contrary trend, and in the case of Germany, the level

of the net debt was negative or insignificant until the mid-1970s. Thus,

at least for the years 1960-73, there is little evidence of a chronic bias

towards deficits.

            Even during the 1960 and early 1970s, however, the OECD fiscal

data are not wholly kind to the equilibrium model. While taxes are high

enough in most countries to result in a falling debt-CNP ratio, they are

decidedly       high enough at any point in time to allow for smooth taxes

in the face of a rising rate of government spending.     In particular, in

most countries, the share of government spending in GNP rises steadily,

and the share of taxes in GNP rises steadily alona side the higher share

of government spending. In other words, rather than being set in order to

smooth the tax rate, as in equation (11), taxes are set along a rising

path to keep them roughly aligned with government spending.    As is shown

in Table 4, tax rates (measured as government revenues as a proportion of

GDP) rose quite markedly and steadily during 1960-73 in most countries,

and have in fact continued to rise steadily during the period 1973-1986.

            The most direct statistical test of the tax-smoothing model is

to ask whether the observed path of tax rates is likely to have been
                                       13

generated by a mean-zero random walk, versus an alternative hypothesis in

which the changes in t have a constant non-zero drift. Table S reports

the regression results of the null hypothesis of a pure random walk for

tax ratea, first for the period 1960-73 and then for the overall period

1960-86.   We test the shorter period first to make certain that our

results are not simply some artifact of the low-growth phase after 1973.

           In the short sample, the null hypothesis of a driftlass random

walk in tax rates is rejected at the S percent level for 7 of the 12

countries for which tax data are available back to 1960. For the longer

sample, the null hypothesis is rejected for a whopping 12 out of 15

countries (the U.S., the U.K., and Finland being the only exceptions). It

is also rejected at the 10 percent level for the U.K. in the larger

sample.    It would seem, therefore, that Barro's (1979,1981) earlier

results supporting the tax-smoothing model for the U.S. and the U.K. are

rather special cases. Note that for the U.S., Sahasakul (1985) has also

rejected the random-walk model for taxes. That rejection is not because

of a constant drift (as in our test), but instead because of the finding

that other variables help to predict future changes in U.S. tax rates.

           The equilibrium theory's presumption of peacetime declines in

the debt-GNP ratio is turned on its head after 1973.      Between 1973 and

1986, the net-debt-to-GDP ratio rose in 13 of 15 cases shown, with the

U.K. and Norway being the only exceptions.       This is an extraordinary

turnabout for peacetime years.     It is certainly possible that as the

likelihood of war fell sharply during the 1960s and 1970s for the European

countries, the estimation of gP fell as well, leading to a reduction in

the optimal peacetime surplus for these countries.    But such a shift (if
                                        14

it could be proved) would hardly be sufficient to explain the dramatic

r.i.t in b in many countries. We are led, therefore, to ask whether

other shocks might have led to an excess of        over       during these

years that could explain the rise in debt consistently with the

equilibrium theory. Our answer is mixed. In the next section we identify

some important shocks (mainly the growth slowdown in the OECD after 1973

and the accompanying rise in unemployment) that probably raised

relative to it permanent level, at least for part of the period after

1973. On the other hand, the rate at which        has declined relative to

its previous trend seems to have been too slow in many countries to

suggest that optimal tax smoothing is at work. As we have already noted,

taxes as a percent of GNP have trended upward rather strongly in most OECD

countries in the years after 1973.     Moreover, the equilibrium approach

would appear to offer little explanation of the glaring fact that in some

countries (e.g. Germany, Japan, and the U.K.) the rise in the debt-GNP

ratio was stopped by the mid-198Os, while in other countries (e.g. Belgium

and Italy), the rise has continued.           To help account for these
differences, we must turn to differences in political institutions.

          Before examining the large post-1973 deficits, we test one

further implication of some versions of the equilibrium model. A minor

(and much less plausible) implication of the tax smoothing model involves

the government's choice over different kin of taxes. Recently, Mankiw

(1987) suggested that since inflationary finance is one kind of tax (to-

wit, a tax on real money balances), and since the goal of the tax

authorities is to minimize the overall excess burden of taxation, a rising

path of total revenues relative to GDP should be met by a rise both in
                                           15

explicit tax rates and a rise in the inflation tax (the efficiency rule is

that the various taxes should be levied to the point where the deadweight

loss per dollar of marginal revenue is equalized across the available

array of taxes) .       Mankiw tests this proposition by examining the

correlation of explicit tax rates with the inflation rate (which is taken

as a proxy of the tax rate on real money balances). Using U.S. data, he

finds a positive and significant correlation, in support of the underlying

hypothesis.

          In Table 6, we extend Mankiw's test to the other industrial

countries in our sample, by regressing the inflation rate on the average

rate of taxation. The hypothesis finds no general support. For 12 of the

15 countries, we find no significant relationship, and in five of the

countries (France, Austria, Italy, Ireland, and Denmark), the sign of the

regression coefficient is wrong (inflation and tax rates are negatively

correlated) .   We   confirm Mankiw's result for the U.S., and also find

supportive results as well for Finland and the Netherlands.



III. The Post-1973 Rise in Budget Deficits in the OECD

          Our basic interpretation of the emergence of large budget

deficits in the OECD after 1973 is on the whole consistent with the

equilibrium viewpoint. The sudden and sharp increase in budget deficits

after 1973 can be linked directly to the sudden slowdown in OECD growth

and the corresponding sudden rise in unemployment after 1973.            These

shocks increased       on what appeared to be a cyclical basis, and so the


3. In a recent paper Poterba and Rotemberg (1988) perform similar tests
for 5 OECD countries and provide further evidence against the optimal
theory of seignorage.
                                        16

shocks increased         relative to expectations of gP.      Since it was

widely expected during the l970a that the growth slowdown and the riae in

unemployment would be transitory, it is consistent with the equilibrium

view that these shocks would be accommodated initially by budget deficits.



          By the early 1980s, however, it had become clear that the shocks

had considerable persistence (to the point of spawning the new

"hysteresis" theory of unemployment), and many governments began reducing

the budget deficits.    In broad terms, the equilibrium approach is much

less successful in accounting for the persistence of budget deficits

throughout the 1980s in many countries.        (Remember, as well, that in

almost all countries, the theory fails to account for the steady secular

increase in tax rates from the early 1960s).

          The linkage of higher          to the post-1973 growth slowdown

arises from several channels.     As is described in the detailed fiscal

histories in the IMF's (1982) Fiscal Policy in Twelve Small OECD

Economies, the growth of real government spending in the years just after

1973 was largely "uncontrollable", in the sense that previous spending

commitments based on pre-1973 economic assumptions were politically

difficult to adjust for several years. As a result, when GDP growth fell

after 1973, and government spending continued to increase, the ratio of G

to '1 rose sharply in most countries.   The growth of taxes, on the other

hand, slowed along side the slowdown in GDP, leaving the ratio of T to Y

basically unchanged.4 With G/Y increasing faster than the earlier trend,



4.   Of course, the failure of T/Y to rise in parallel to G/Y would be
optimal to the extent that the rise in C/I is transitory.
                                          17

and T/Y continuing along the earlier trend, large budget deficits

naturally emerged.

          This tendency towards a deficit after the slowdown in growth was

exacerbated for two additional reasons. First, many major areas of public

spending (e.g. unemployment compensation, social welfare expenditure,

early retirement benefits, job retraining, subsidies for ailing firms) are

inherently countercyclical, so that portions of Gt actually tend to rise

automatically above prior forecasts when growth slows down below prior

forecasts.     This induced rise in       tended to be greatest in economies

where the growth slowdown was accompanied by a sharp rise in unemployment,

Ut, since several kinds of social benefits are linked directly to the

unemployed.

             Another reason for induced deficits was the intentional

application by some countries of Keynesian aggregate demand policies in

the face of the growth slowdown. The equilibrium model explicitly rejects

the links of       or Tt to the level of output and employment via aggregate

demand, but many governments did not (and many still do not) reject those

links. Right or wrong, many governments are loath to raise taxes or lower

government spending during a recession.

             As already noted, the large budget deficits that resulted from

the growth slowdown and high unemployment can be viewed as consistent with

the equilibrium model of budget deficits under the assumption that

policymakers believed that C/Y would fall back to the previous trend path.

No doubt, most policymakers thought that at least part of the sharp jump

in G/Y after 1973 would be transitory, since it resulted from a growth

slowdown and rise in unemployment that were themselves viewed as
                                         18

transitory for most of the 1970s. The unemployment rates, in particular,

were expected (incorrectly, it turned out) to fall quickly back to the low

levels before 1973, thus directly reducing a considerable part of the

fiscal deficit.

             The adverse shocks of slow growth and high unemployment were

aggravated after 1979 by the rise in world real interest rates, which

significantly and unexpectedly raised most governments' costs of debt

servicing.     One useful measure of the budgetary costs of higher interest

rates is given by         *           where A(r.n) signifies the year-to-
year change in the value of r-n .       Between 1979 and 1981, this measure

rose by several percent of GOP in most of the industrial economies,

thereby greatly adding to the fiscal burden.     This rise was particularly

large, of course, in countries such as Belgium, Ireland, and Italy, that

had already accumulated a large stock of debt. As with the unemployment

increase and the growth slowdown, the effects of higher interest rates

have turned Out to be more persistent than many policymakers expected as

of the early l980s.

             It would be useful at this point to present a full structural

model of tax and spending adjustments, in order to quantify the effects of

the growth slowdown, the rise in unemployment, and the higher interest

rates, on the emergence of large budget deficits after 1973.     The model

could be used to evaluate the extent to which budget deficits have

deviated from the levels predicted by the equilibrium model. Such a task

is unfortunately beyond the scope of the present paper. At a minimum, it

would require a rather sophisticated view about the ex ante expectations

of economic growth, unemployment rates, and interest rates that were held
                                                19

by policymakers during the period 1973 to the present. Rather, we attempt

something more modest, to describe the (basic) dynamic response of budget

deficits to the major macroeconomic shocks in a semi-reduced-form

equation.

             We estimate a pooled cross-section time-series regression where

the left-hand side variable is the annual deficit, measured as the change

in the debt-GDP ratio, bjt. The basic explanatory variables are: (1) the

lagged deficit, Ab1 t-l (2) the chanee in the unemployment rate,                      Uj;
(3) the chanre in the GDP growthrate, denoted nj; (4) the change in the

real interest rate minus the growth rate, multiplied by the lagged debt-

CDP ratio, bj*(rt -              and (5) a political variable, p, described in
                          ne);
the next section; and (6) an error term, vj. The basic structure of the

pooled regression model is the following (i denotes country, t                   denotes
time, and x denotes the change in variable x)




             (13)         —       - 01 *   Abji + 02 *         Ujt   +    03 *    +


                              +a4          it
                                                +    a5   *pit +   v.it


             According   to our discussion, we expect that the deficit should

be: a positive function, with a coefficient less than 1.0, of the lagged

deficit (to allow for any slow adjustment of budget deficits); a positive

 function of the change in the unemployment rate (since a rise in the

unemployment race raises            above gP in the short term); a negative



 5.   The exact definitions of the variables are given in the data
 appendix.
                                        20

function of the change in the GDP growth rate (Since a rise in GDP growth

lowers     below gP in the short term); a positive function of the change

in the real interest rate, since a rise in r-n directly raises
                                                                 (rn)bi
which if transitory should be accomodated by a temporary rise in the

budget deficit.

           The equation gives a rather successful account of the role of

exogenous shocks in inducing the budget deficits in the industrial
countries, as shown in Column 1 in Table 7.        As expected, a rise in

unemployment (denoted by DUB) raises the budget deficit; a rise in the

debt-servicing cost (denoted by DRB) raises the budget deficit; an

acceleration of GDP growth (denoted by DCR) lowers the budget deficit,

indicating that the deceleration of GDP growth after 1973 contributed to

the rise in budget deficits; finally, the lagged deficit enters with a

coefficient of about 0.70, suggesting that about 70 percent of the lagged

budget deficit persists to the next period.     (Of course, without a full

stochastic model for growth, unemployment, and interest rates, we can not

easily judge whether the 0.70 is an appropriate speed of adjustment or

not).    Note that the variable measuring the slowdown in growth is the

highly significant.   Its magnitude suggests that each 1 percentage point

slowdown in GDP growth initially raises the budget deficit relative to GDP

by 0.45 percentage points.   Since the average slowdown in growth was on

the order of 3 percentage points, the impact effect was more than 1
percent of GDP.




Section IV. Political Institutions and Deficit Adjustment
                                       21

         The results in the previous section suggest that the shocks that

hit the macroeconomics of the industrial countries, particularly slower

growth and higher unemployment after 1973, and higher real interest rates

in the 1980s, all contributed to a jump in the budget deficits of the

industrial countries, particularly because the shocks were viewed to be

transitory at the time that they hit. y the early l980s, however, the

growth slowdown and the rise in unemployment were widely understood to be

highly persistent. At that point, some countries began to adjust to these

shocks with strong fiscal consolidation, while in other countries, there

continued to be many years of a steeply rising debt-GDP ratio. The aim of

this section is to show that political factors help to account for rapid

versus slow reductions of budget deficits.      Our main finding is that

multi-party coalition governments, especially those with a short expected

tenure, are poor at reducing budget deficits.

          Note first from Table 3 the countries that were successfully in

stemming the rise in the net debt to GDP ratio, at least in the 1980s.

Eight countries were able to keep the rise in b to below 10 percentage

points between 1981 and 1985:      the U.S., Germany, the U.K. ,   Finland,
France, Austria, Japan, and Norway. These countries are characterized by

a majority parliamentary system (the U.K., Austria, Japan), a two-party

coalition (Germany), or a presidential system (the U.S., Finland, France).

Norway is the only multi-party coalition government in the group.       The

other Countries in Table 3, which failed to restrain the growth of public

debt, are mostly characterized by proportional representation voting and

multi-party coalitions    (this   is true in Italy, Belgium,       Ireland,

Netherlands, Sweden at times, and Denmark).
                                          22

           The data also suggest upon closer inspection an asymmetry in the

link of political structures to budget deficits. Coalition governments are

not inherently prone towards large deficits.      During the l960s, no major

differences in budgetary behavior         are   evident between coalition

governments and majority governments.     Rather, it appears that coalition

governments are prone to large deficits in circumstances of highly adverse

macroeconomic shocks. We will attempt to explain this asymmetry later.

           To set the empirical basis for the discussion, it is best to

start with an empirical illustration of the basic linkages. We aim to

show that an index variable measuring political structure can help to

explain the evolution of budget deficits when added to the list of

variables already included in equation (13). We create an index denoted

    for country i at time t, that measures (in a simple way) the degree of

political cohesion of the national government. The index is constructed

as follows:



   Value          0   one-party majority parliamentary government;
                      or
                      presidential government, with the same party in the
                      majority in the executive and legislative branch

              1       coalition parliamentary government with 2
                      coalition partners;
                      or
                      presidential government, with different parties in
                      control of the executive and legislative branch

              2        coalition parliamentary government with 3 or
                      more coalition partners

              3       minority parliamentary government


Details on the construction of the index for each particular country are

given in the Data Appendix.
                                               23

      In entering the political variable, we want to test the proposition

that multi-party coalition governments have a bias towards larger budget

deficits, but perhaps only during periods of macroeconomic stress.

Therefore, we include both             (termed POL in Table 7)     and        *   D


(tenned FOLD), where D is a dummy variable equal to 0 during the rapid

growth period 1960-74, and equal to 1 during 1975-85. We expect that the

variable            * D   will be much more important than       itself. We also

investigate an interaction term of the political variable with the lagged

deficit (termed DYLPOL), on the view that the a divided political

structure might reduce the speed of adjusting to an inherited level of the

deficit, bitl.
                The results of the estimation are shown in columns 2 -       4 in

Table 7.          Several different versions of the regression are shown,

involving different ways of entering the political variable.             The basic

point      is     the following.       The political variable always enters

significantly when interacted with the dummy variable for 1975-86.             The

magnitude of the coefficient on this variable, 0.005, signifies that the

difference cet. Dar. between a majority government and a minority

government (p — 0 versus p —          3),   is 0.015, or 1.5 percentage points of

added budget deficit per year.              (Note that adding the dummy variable

itself for 1975-86, in level form, to the regression does not change any

results, and the dummy variable itself enters insignificantly). Note also

that the interaction term of the political variable with the lagged

deficit (DSYLPOL) is of small magnitude and statistically insignificant.

Why   coalition     governments find it hard to balance the budget ?
                                        24

           Having given some empirical support to the role of the political

variable   it is now time to offer some possible explanations of the

observation.    In our view, the essence of the budget problem for a

coalition government results from three factors.     First, the individual

coalition partners in multi-party governments have distinctive interests

and distinctive constituencies.     There is no single uniform objective

function for the various political parties in the government.      There is

likely to be a fundamental prisoner's dilemma with respect to budget cuts:

all of the partners of the coalition may prefer comprehensive budget cuts

to a continuation of large deficits, but each coalition partner may have

the incentive to protect its particular part of the budget against the

austerity measures. In the absence of strong coordination between members

of the coalition to produce the "cooperative" outcome, the noncooperative

solution of no-budget-cutting is quite likely to arise.

           Second, individual coalition partners will often have enormous

power to prevent a change in the status quo, though they will not

typically have the power by themselves to implement a positive program of

change.    In other words, coalition members will have a veto against

change.    Even a very small party in a multi-party coalition can have

enormous power by virtue of its ability to break up the government

(formally, small parties may have very large Shapley values). Moreover, a

coalition will typically divide responsibilities over various parts of the

budget among the various members (this is certainly true in part by virtue

of the distribution of ministerial positions among the parties). Third,

the enforcement mechanisms among coalition partners to assure the
cooperative outcome will often be very weak.
                                       25

         Some of the political weaknesses of coalition governments are

inherent in any legislative environment, as discussed by Weingast and

Marshall (1988) in the context of policy in the U.S. Congress.        These

authors stress that trading votes in order to arrive at an efficient

overall budget invariably involve exchanges of benefits that are hard to

monitor and hard to enforce.6        Other problems of enforcement are

particular to the case of multi-party coalition governments. Perhaps most

important, because of the rapid turnover of multi-party coalition

governments, the incentives for cooperation are reduced.     As argued by

Axeirod (1984), the enforceability of cooperation depends heavily on the

repeated-play aspects of decision making.    To the extent that the rapid

turnover of governments reduces the time horizon for the repeated play

among coalition members, their incentives to cooperate are reduced.

          In these circumstances (with coalition members having distinct

spending objectives, veto powers over parts of the budget, and an

inability to make binding commitments with the other coalition members),

adverse shocks to the economy, which require cuts in sDending programs,

can easily result in prolonged excessive budget deficits.      Even if all

coalition members would favor an across-the-board cut in spending in order

to reduce a large budget deficit, each coalition member may have the

incentive to block the spending Cuts in its o area, while gladly




 6.  Weingast and Marshall stress that exchanges of votes will
typically provide a stream of benefits for the traders that is
noncontemporaneous (i.e. one of the voters will benefit earlier than
the others), making a vote-trading deal easier to renege on. Also vote
trades are likely to be noncontemporaneous (one coalition partner must
support the other on the promise that the latter will support the
former at a later date).
                                       26

supporting the spending cuts on other parts of the budget. The result is

an obvious prisoner's dilemma: reducing the budget deficit is a public

good among the coalition members.

          Note that coalition governments might manage the budget quite

well when overall macroeconomic circumstances are favorable. The point is

simple. Individual coalition members may have the power to !Q spending

cuts, but not have the power to push through spending increases without

the support of the other coalition members.        Since the other coalition

members will not generally have the incentive to support excessive

spending increases, the coalition does not have a bias of generating

excessive increases in overall spending, but only insufficient decreases

in spending when spending cuts are needed. There is thus likely to be a

fundamental asymmetry between the budgetary responses to adverse

macroeconomic shocks (which will produce excessive budget deficits) and to

favorable macroeconomic shocks (which will result in appropriate overall

levels of the deficit).

          An additional and important point is made by Sir Karl Popper

(1988), who stresses that the electorate can do little to discipline

misbehaving parties in a system of multiple-party coalitions under

proportional representation voting.   It might be supposed, for example.

that political parties will cooperate with each other because of the glare

of bad publicity, and subsequent electoral punishment, for parties that

refuse to cooperate.      In Popper's view, elections cannot effectively

punish individual parties for the failures of coalition governments in a

PR system, with the result that the critical electoral mechanism for

enforcing good behavior is rendered ineffective.
                                        27

          Popper puts the issue this way.

     While proportional representation is based on the idea that the
     influence of a party should be proportional to its voting power, a
     coalition government means, more often than not, that small parties
     can exercise a disproportionately great -    - and   often decisive- -
     influence, on the formation of a government and on its resignation,
     and so on all its decisions.     Most important of all, it means the
     decay of responsibility.     For in a coalition government there is
     reduced responsibility for all the partners in the coalition.
     Proportional representation - - and the greater number of parties as a
     result thereof - - may therefore have a detrimental effect on the
     decisive issue of how to get rid of a government by voting it out of
     office, for instance in a parliamentary election. The voters are led
     to expect that perhaps none of the parties will obtain an absolute
     majority. With this expectation in their minds, the people hardly
     vote against any of the parties. As a result, on election day none
     of the parties is dismissed, none is convicted. Accordingly, nobody
     looks on election day as a day of judgement.
     The loss of 5% or 10% of votes by one or other of the parties is not
     seen by the voters as a verdict of "guilty".         They look at it,
     rather, as a temporary fluctuation in popularity.        In time, the
     people become used to the idea that none of the political parties or
     their leaders can really be made accountable for their decisions
     which may have been forced on them by necessity to form a coalition.


          Of course, all of these problems of coordinating austerity

measures are present, to some extent, in all types of democratic

governments.      The U.S. Congress is in some ways like a multi-party

coalition government, given the enormous variety of regional, sectoral,

and other special interests that are organized into powerful factions in

the Congress.      The specific party discipline of the Democrats and
Republicans is often very low.    It is our assumption, however, that the

problems are typically exacerbated by the need to mesh the interests of

many parties in a single government.     An individual majority party has

many crucial powers and constraints that allow it to come closer to

enforcing "good behavior".



A case study: France in the Fourth Republic
                                         28

            To further illuminate the underlying mechanisms behind our

findings, and to bolster the case that they in fact reflect actual

phenomena, we examine one historical case in some detail, a case that is

as close to a pure laboratory experiment as we could find.      After World

War II until 1958, the French political regime (known as the Fourth

Republic)    was a parliamentary system with multi-party coalition

governments. The political system was widely regarded as a failure. In

1958, de Gaulle became Prime Minister and was given extraordinary powers.

At the end of the year, a new constitution was voted (the Fifth Republic),

which created a presidential system.           We examine the budgetary

implications of that change in political regime.2

            As a reaction to the authoritarian regimes of the World War II

period, the Fourth Republic was formed in 1946 in the form of a

proportional representation (PR) political system. The PR electoral laws

led to a very fractionalized party structure and the need to form

coalition governments.     The resulting governments were multi-party
coalitions of the center and right, with very different ideologies, and

economic and political agendas.        The instability of the resulting

governments was notorious: during 1946-1958, there were 26 different

governments, with an average tenure of 6 months!

            The rivalries between the parties led to an ineffectual budget

process, leading to the term "immobilisme" to characterize the political

system and the economic management.     As seen in Table 8 ,   large   budget

deficits resulted from the lack of cohesion of the various coalition


7.   This section relies heavily on Edgar S. Furniss, Jr., France.
Troubled Ally: De Gaulle's heritage and DrosDects, New York: Frederick
A. Praeger, 1960, for the Council on Foreign Relations.
                                        29

governments, which were subjected to pressures for increased spending on

patronage and local projects. The war in Vietnam was a major source of

expenditure until 1954. but the growth of spending and the size of the

deficits remained very large even after the end of the French military

involvement in Vietnam (the defense burden did remain large, however,

because of the deteriorating situation in Algeria).

          Furniss (1960) describes the budgetary process in the Fourth

Republic as follows:

     Getting the cabinet to agree on a budget was frequently painful, but
     this was  only the beginning of a French premier's ordeal. He had
     still to  fight the budget, item by item, through any number of
     National  Assembly committees, beating back amendments and even
     complete  substitutes, almost all of which would seek to increase
     expenditures.  Finally if he had not fallen on some other issue, he
     had to maneuver for a series of favorable votes in the Assembly, on
     each of which his cabinet's life was at stake.   (pp. 157-158).

The budget ordeal in 1958, on the eve of the collapse of the Fourth

Republic, is symptomatic:


     Bourges-Maunoury fell on the Algerian question before his budget
     could come to a vote. Stepping up from Finance Minister to Premier,
     Gaillard tried to push through the same budget on the theory that
     deputies will sometimes accept disagreeable policies after a premier
     has first been sacrificed. As his shaky government tottered towards
     the abyss, pressures to restore the Cuts rose rather than diminished.
     y the time Pflimlin appeared on the scene, the Right, having caused
     the collapse of three governments within the year, was all set to
     attack that portion of the budget allocated to national defense .
     In June 1958, when de Gaulle assumed power, the budget still had not
     been voted (p. 158)

          The Fourth Republic disintegrated in 1958 submerged under the

mounting political, economic and diplomatic crises of the system.          De

Gaulle came to power in June 1958 with the power to rule by decree for six

months.   A new Constitution was written, approved by referendum in

September, and made effective in October.    Dc Gaulle came   into   power as
                                       30

president in January 1959.    De Gaulle irxunediately attacked the budget

deficit, completing the 1958 budget by decree.         In early 1959, he

announced an emergency program of "truth and austerity" aimed at cutting

drastically the budget deficit.    250 different economic ordinances were

issued by decree between January and February 1959. The program included

both increases in revenues and reductions in expenditures.8 As shown in

Table 8, the budget deficit that had averaged 4.7 percent of GDP per year

during 1950-58, and was 4.9 percent of GDP in 1957, fell to 2.8 percent in

1958, 2.4 percent of GDP in 1959, and 1.4 percent of GDP in 1960 and 1961.

In 1965, the budget was in balance, and the budget was in substantial

surplus during 1970 and 1972-74.

         We have attempted to test statistically for the effect of the

political transition by estimating a budget deficit equation for France

over the post-war period. The main reason for the estimating a regression

equation is to control for other factors (particularly temporary shifts in

government expenditure) that might have been influencing the size of the

budget deficits during the transition period.   The most important set of

factors includes the high and declining level of military spending in the

l950s (tied to the French Indochina War, the Algerian War, the NATO




8.   On the revenue side 313 billion francs were raised with
increased tax rates for corporate profits, higher tax rates on personal
income at all levels, increases of taxes on tobacco, alcohol, wine and
distilled spirits by between 20 percent and 100 percent; greater levies
on intermediate and final goods. On the spending side, a wide range of
expenditures and subsidies were abolished or reduced, with savings of
245 billion francs.
                                                  31

buildup) (MIL), post-war reconstruction expenditures (WARDAM) and a dummy

variable for the Fourth Republic              The basic equation is as follows:9


Sample: 1947-1972             R2 — 0.83        D.W. —      127
DEF —   -0.49    +   0.28 MIL + 0.48 WARDAM            -    0.67 USAID +    2.91    FOtJRREP
        (0.74)       (2.54)          (1.30)                (2.33)          (3.43)


Sample: 1950-1972             R2 —   0.92      D.W. — 1.55

DEF —   -2.05 + 0.60 MIL. + 0.28 WARDAM -                  0.88 USAID +    2.23 FOURREP
        (4.03)       (6.53)          (1.09)                (4.59)          (3.48)


The estimated equations show the significant role of temporary military

expenditures (MIL) in affecting the French fiscal deficits during the

period considered but also confirm the structural break in the deficits

between the Fourth and the Fifth Republic: the Fourth Republic dummy is

significant and its value suggests an average reduction in fiscal deficits

of over 2% of GD? between the Fourth and the Fifth Republic.

     Many other possible case studies come to mind in addition to the

French experience.        We hope to examine some of these other cases in more

detail in later work.             Some obviously fruitful cases for political

analysis include: Italy, with decades of chronically weak coalition

governments; Belgium, with weak coalition governments with parties that

are divided along linguistic and geographical lines as well as ideological

lines.; and the U.S., with divided responsibility between Republican



9.   The definitions of the variables, and the data sources, are as
follows: DEF — Central Government Budget Deficit; MIL — Total Military
Expenditures; WARDAM   Expenditures for War Damages; USAID — Grants from
the United States; FOURREP — Dummy variable equal to 1 during the Fourth
Republic and 0 otherwise. All budget data are expressed as a share of GDP
and are taken from: Ministere de L'Economje et des Finances Statistigues
& Etudes Financieres ,        Special   Issue, 1974.
                                        32

control of the White House during the l980s, and Democratic Party control

of one or both houses of the Congress during the same period. On the

other side are fascinating case studies of successful budget deficit

reduction in the l980s. Surely the most impressive case in this regard is

Japan, where the ruling Liberal Democratic Party - -   with   its unbroken

majority control - -   has   been able to announce, implement, and follow

through on a multi-year plan of deficit reduction that was begun in 1981.



Part IV. Conclusions

          Our conclusions may be succinctly stated. We have found little

evidence to support the equilibrium model of fiscal policy, which assumes

that taxes are set over time in order to minimize the excess burden of

taxation. Tax rates do not seem to be smoothed, and budget deficits in

many countries appear to be too large to explain by appeal to transitory

increases in government spending.

          In most of the countries, deficits were small before the

slowdown in OECD growth after 1973.       During 1960-73, most of the OECD

economies experienced falling or very gently rising debt-GDP ratios, With

the growth slowdown and with the rise in unemployment, the ratio of

 government spending to GDP increased markedly and beyond expectation,

producing significant budget deficits, and sharply rising ratios of debt

 to CDP in several countries. This process was greatly exacerbated by the

 sharp rise in real interest rates after 1979.      To the extent that the

 bulge in the ratio of C to CDP was temporary, it would be appropriate to

 run budget deficits during the period in which G/Y falls back to more

 normal levels. It appears, however, that the size of the actual deficits
                                        33

in most of the countries is too large to be accounted for by this

transitional phenomenon.

          We suggest that in several countries, the slow rate at which the

post- '73 fiscal deficits were reduced resulted from the difficulties of

political management in coalition governments. During the period 1975-85,

there is a clear tendency for larger deficits in weaker governments, where

weakness is indicated by a short average tenure of government and by the

presence of many political parties in the coalition. In the final section

of the paper we illustrate the problems of budgetary management with

coalition governments, first in two case studies, and then in a simple

theoretical model.    The greatest difficulties appear to arise because

small coalition partners have veto power over changes in the status quo.
                                                 34




                                       Ref a rentg.s




Alesina, A. (1986) "Macroeconomics Policy in a Two-Party System as a Repeated

    Game", quarterly Journal of Economics , 102, 651-678.




___________   (1986) "Macroeconomic Policy in a Two-Party System", Unpublished
     Ph.D. Thesis, Harvard University.




___________ and C. Tabellini (1987) "A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and
     Government Debt in a Democracy", mimeo.



Alesina, A. and J. Sachs (1988) "Political Parties and the Business Cycle in

     the United States, 1948-1984", Journal of Money Credit and Banking,

     February, 63-82.



Aschauer, D.(1988) "The Equilibrium Approach to Fiscal Policy", Journal of

     Money. Credit and Banking, February, 41-62.



 Axeirod, R. (1984) Tha Evolution of Coooaration.



 Barro, R. (1979) "On the Determination of Public Debt", Journal of Political

      Economy, 87, October, 940-971.




 ________ (1981) "Output Effecta of Government Purchases", Journal of Political
      Economy, 89, December, 1086-1121.
                                                35




__________   (1985)   "Government Spending, Interest Rates, Prices and budget

     Deficits in the United Kingdom, 1730-1918', working Paper No.1 Rochester

     Center for Economic Research, March.




________     and D. Gordon (1983 a) "Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a model

     of Monetary Policy", Journal of monetary Economics, 12, July. 101-121.

________________________     (1983 b) "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a

     Natural Rate Model", Journal of Political Economy, 91, August, 589-610.



Blondal, G. (1986) Fiscal Policy in the Smaller Industrial Countries: 1972-

     12.j,   International   Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.



Suchanan, J. , C. Rowley and R. Tollison (1986) Deficits ,     Basil   Blackwell.



Canarella, G. and N. Garston (1983) "Monetary and Public Debt Shocks", Journal

     of Money. Credit and Banking , May, 199-211.



Furniss, E. (1960) France. Troubled Ally : Dc Gaulle's Heritage and Prospects,

     New York, Praeger, for the Council on foreign Relations.



Havrilesky, T. (1988) "Monetary Policy Signalling from the Administration to

     the Federal Reserve", Journal Money. Credit and Banking, February. 83-

     101.
                                              36

Kydland, F.    and E. Prescott (1977) "Rules Rather Than Discretion: The

     Inconsistency of Optimal Plans", Journal of Political Economy, 85, June,

    473.93.



International Monetary Fund (1982) Fiscal Policy in the Smaller Industrial

     Countries; 1972-1982, Washington, D.C.



Mar.kiw, G. (1987) "The Optimal Collection of Seignorage: Theory and Evidence",

     Journal of Monetary Economics, 20, 327-342.



Poterba, J. and J. Rotemberg (1988) "Inflation and Taxation with Optimizing

     Governments", NBEP. Working Paper No.2567 (April).



Popper, K. (1988) "The Open Society and Its Enemies Revisited', The Economist,

     April   23, 19-22.



Powell, G. B. (1982) Contemporary Democracies: Participation. Stability and

     Violence, Harvard University Press, Cambridge.



Sahasakul, C. (1986) "The U.S. Evidence on Optimal Taxation over Time", Journal

     of Monetary Economics, 18, November, 251-275.



Saunders, P. and F. Kisu (1985) "The Role of the Public Sector: Causes and

     Consequences of the Growth of Government", OECD Economic   Studies, spring.
                                            37

eingast, B. and W. Marshall (1988) The Industrial Organization of Congress;

    or, Why Legislatures, Like Firms, Are Not Organized as Markets", Journal

    of Political Economy, 96, February, 132-163.
                                          38




Data Appen4kx



Government Expenditures:        General government expenditures    including

interest payments on net debt corrected for inflation and growth. Data on

expenditures from OECD National Income Accounts (OECD NIA)

Governments Revenues: General government revenues from OECD NIA.

GDP: Gross Domestic Dutput from DECD NIA.

Government Debt: General Government Net Debt. OECD data.

Inflation Rate: Base on GDP deflators from DECD NIA. For regressions in

Table 5 CPI inflation rates from IMF-IFS are used

Unemployment Rates: Standardized Unemployment Rates. OECD Main Economic

Indicators.

Average Tenure of a government: Variable created with data on national

governments in "Political Parties of Europe" ed. by V. MdHale and S.

Skowronski, Greenwood Press, 1983; "The Europa Yearbook", 1987.

BY   : Net debt to GD? ratio.

DBY : Change in net debt to GD? ratio.

DBYL: DBY(t-l).

DGR : Change in GD? growth rate — Growth in GD? at time t minus an average

 of GD? growth rates in the previous three years.

 DUB : Change in the unemployment rate — Unemployment rate at time t minua

 an average of unemployment rates in the previous eight years.

 ?OL : Index of ?olitical Cohesion. Described in detail below.

 POLD: ?OL multiplied by a dummy variable for the 1975-1985 period.

 DEYLPOL: POL * DBYL.
                                           39

DUJAP : DUB times a dummy variable equal to 1 for Japan.

ORB :   -(r5 - n) BY (t-l) where re —           - ,e       —   interest   payments on

government debt divided by gross general government debt; it              — weighted
average of inflation rates at time t and 3 lagged periods; n —              weighted
average of GDP growth rates at time t and 3 lagged periods.



Description of POL variable.

POL Index of the Political Cohesion of the National Government.


        United   France   Germany   Japan        United        Austria Belgium
        States                                   Kingdom


1960       0       1           1       0               0          1            1
1961       0       1           1       0               0          1            1
1962       0       1           1       0               0          1            1
1963       0       1           1       0               0          1            1
1964       0       1           1       0               0          1            1
1965       0       1           1       0               0          1            1
1966       0       1           1       0               0          0            1
1967       0       1           1       0               0          0            1
1968       0       1           1       0               0          0            1
1969       1       1           1       0               0          0            1
1970       1       1           1       0               0          0            1
1971       1       1           1       0               0          0            1
1972       1       1           1       0               0          0            1
1973       1       1           1       0               0          0            2
1974       1       1           1       0               0          0            2
1975       1       1           1       0               0          0            2
1976       1       1           1       0               0          0            2
1977       0       1           1       0               0          0            2
1978       0       1           1       0               0          0            2
1979       0       1           1       0               0          0            2
1980       0       1           1       0               0          0            2
1981       1      1            1       0               0          0            2
1982       1      1            1       0               0          0            2
1983       1      1            1       0               0          1            2
1984       1      1            1       0               0          1            2
1985       1      1            1       0               0          1            2
                                        40




       Denmark Finland Italy   Netherlanda Norway   Sweden   Ireland




1960       1      1       3        2          0        0       0
1961       1      1       3        2          O        0       0
1962       1      1       2        2          0        0        0
1963       1      1       3        2          0        0        0
1964       O      1       2        2          0        0        0
1965       0      1       2        2          2        0        0
1966       0      1       2         1         2        0        0
1967       0      1       2         2         2        0        0
1968       2      1       3         2         2        0        0
1969       2       1      1         2         2        0        0
1970       2       1      2         2         2        0        0
1971       0       1      2         2         O        0        0
           3       1      3         2         2        0        0
1972
1973       3       1      2         2         O        0        1
1974       3       1      3         2         0        0        1
1975       3       1      3         2         O        0        1
1976       3       1      3         2         0        2        1
1977       3       1      3         2         O        2        1
1978       1       1       3        2         O        3        0
1979       3       1       3        2         O        2        0
1980       3       1      2         2         O        2        0
1981       3       1      2         2         3        3        1
1982       3       1      2         3         2        3        1
1983       3       1      2         2          2       1        1

1984       2       1      2         2          2       1        1
1985       2          1   2         2          2       1        1




Source: Data on national governments in "Political Parties of Europe"
ed. by V. McHale and S. Skowronaki, Greenwood Press, 1983; "The Europa
Yearbook", 1987.


Note: France and Finland are given a score of 1 for being presidential regimes
where coalition governments are usually formed. The United States is given a
score of 1 when there is divided power (different parties in control of the
executive and legislative branch).
Table 1. Basic Statistics on the General Government Accounts.


Country          Expenditures   Revenues    Annual       Level of
                                            Change in    Net Debt
                                            Net Debt     (in % of GD?)

Austria

1961-1964
1965-1969
1971-1974           37.6          41.5        -0.45         17.6
1975-1979           44.7          44.2         3.66         35.9
1980-1985           46.9          47.0         1.90         47. 3




Belgium

1961-1964           24.1          29.2        -3.34         68.9
1965-1969           29.0          32.8        -1.94         59.2
1970-1974           31.9          36.1        -2.33         47.5
1975- 1979          42.2          41.5         2.84         61.7
1980-1985           48.5          44.8         8.25        111.2


Canada

1961-1964           23.7          26.7          4.71            18.9
1965-1969           25.8          30.4         -1.93            9.2
1970-1974           30.5          35.2         -1.62             1.1
1975-1979           33.6          35.8          1.95            10.9
1980-1985                                                       30.5


Denmark

1961-1964                 -         -            -               -
1965-1969                 -         -            -               -
1971-1974           41.5          46.8         -2.70        -13.6
1975-1979           46.9          48.2          3.08          1.8
1980-1985            52.9         53.6          5.56         35.2


Finland

1961-1964             -             -                -           -
1965-1969             -             -                -           -
1971-1974            31.2          35.7         -1.37           -10.5
1975-1979            35.8          38.6          0.74            -6.8
1980-1985            36.7          38.0          1.22             0.6
France

1961-1964   33.3     36.9     -2.77   18.0
1965-1969   36.2     38.7     -0.91   13.4
1970-1974   35.9     38.7     -0.93    8.7
1975-1979   41.2     42.2      0.20    9.7
1980-1985   46.8     47.2      1.16   16.8



Germany

1961-1964   35.1     36.4     -0.38   -14.8
1965-1969   37.0     37.0      1.17    -8.9
19701974    40.0     40.0      0.84    -4.7
1975-1979   45.8     44.1      3.23    11.5
1980-1985   45.5     45.1      1.77    22.2


Ire land

1961-1964    -        -
1965-1969    -        -         -        -
1971-1974   34.1     35.2      0.50     37.1
1975-1979   34.7     36.0      5.56     64.9
1980-1985   42.2     41.6      6.35    103.0


Italy

1961-1964        -    -                 24.7
1965-1969   30.9     30.7      2.00     36.7
1970-1974   30.0     30.6      2.50     49.2
1975-1979   32.4     34.0      2.90     63.7
1980-1985   43.0     42.0      5.43     96.3


Japan

1961-1965    -        -         -        -
1966-1969   17.0     19.4      0.02     -5.5
1970-1974   21.3     22.1      0.03     -5.3
1975-1979   26.7     24.6      4.04     14.9
1980-1985   28.8     29.6      1.94     26.5


Norway

1961-1964    -            -     -            -
1965-1969    -            -     -            -

1971-1974   41.4     482      -1.08      -1.8
1975-1979   46.8     51.0      3.72      16.8
1980-1985   43.8     53.9     -5.96     -19.0
Netherlands

1961-1964           -              -           -                -
1965-1969           -              -           -                -
1971-1974          40.5          45.1        -2.47             19.0
1975-1979          49.1          50.3         0.56             21.8
1980-1985          55.5          54.0         3.30             41.6


Sweden

1961-1964           -              -           -                    -
1965-1969           -              -           -                    -
1971-1.974         43.9          48.8        -1.52             -30.1
1975-1979          52.9          55.5         2.06             -19.8
1980-1985          56.5          58.7         5.86              15.4


United States

1961-1964          23.9          26.4        -1.65              38.3
1965-1969          24.8          27.6        -2.01              28.3
1970-1974          26.9          29.2        -1.20              22.2
1975-1979          27.6          29.6        -0.49              19.8
1980-1985          30.5          31.0         1.22              27.1




United Kingdom

1961-1964          25.9          31.7        -6.39             102.6
1965-1969          30.6          36.1        -4.09              82.1
1970-1974          31.0          39.0        -5.44              54.9
1975-1979          33.1          39.8        -1.24              48.7
1980-1985          41.0          43.1        -0.21              47.4


Source: OECD National Income Accounts for expenditures and revenues. OECD data
for net public debt.
Table 2. Basic data on deficits and governments. 1975-1985.




Country     Change in Debt/GDP    Average Tenure    Typical Form of the
            Ratio (per year)      of Governments    Political Regime
            (in percent)          (in years)




Belgium             6.16                1.0          Multi-Party
                                                     Coalitions

Ireland             5.80                2.2          Small Coalitions


Denmark             4.53                1.5          Multi-Party
                                                     Coalitions

Sweden              4.41                1.5          Small Coalitions


Italy               3.65                1.2          Multi-Party
                                                     Coalition

Japan               2.86               11.0          Single Party
                                                     Majority

Austria             2.34                5.5          Single Party
                                                     Maj ority

Netherlands         2.19                 1.8         Multi-Party
                                                     Coalitions

Germany             2.12                 5.5         Two-Party Coalitions


Finland             1.00                 1.5          Presidential with
                                                      Coalition Governments

France              0.57                 3.6          Presidential with
                                                      Coalition Governments

United    States    0.25                 3.6          Presidential with
                                                      Divided Legislature

United Kingdom     -0.97                 5.5         Single Party
                                                     Majority

Norway             -1.97                 3.6          Single Party Majority
                                                      or Small Coalitions

Source: See Data Appendix
Table 3. General Government Net Debt to GDP ratio. 15 OECD countries.
1960-1986


YEAR        US     GERMANY   FRANCE   UK      ITALY   CANADA   BELGIUM   IRELAND


1960        65.0    -13.2      29.1   123.2   na       na       82.3       na
1961        44.7    -15.4      25.8   120.9   na        21.8    80.0       na
1962        42.5    -15.5      22.2   116.1   na        20.7    76.8       na
1963        40.4    -13.3      19.9   109.2   na        20.9    74.5       na
1964        38.3    -14.8      18.0   102.6   26.7      18.9    68.9      na
1965        35.3    -12.8      16.1    96.7   30.2      16.7    66.6      na
1966        32.5    -11.9      15.0    92.5   34.2      15.3    65.1      na
1967        32.4    -10.1      14.6    92.4   34.1      15.2    63.3      na
1968        30.7     -8.8      14.8    86.8   36,9      13.2    62.2      na
1969        28.3     -8.9      13.4    82.1   36.7       9.2    59.2      na
1970        27.8     -8.1      11.4    74.8   39.1       6.1    55.5     35.7
1971        27.9     -7.1      11.0    70.1   43.9       4.6    54.6     35.1
1972        25.8     -5.7       9.1    65.3   49.9       4.2    52.6     33.2
1973        23.0     -6.7       8.3    57.9   52.0      2.6     50.9     32.0
1974        22.2     -4.7       8.7    54.9   49.2      1.1     47.5     37.1
1975        24.6      1.0      11.1    57.2   59.8      4.3     49.8     45.9
1976        24.4      4.6      10.9    56.0   60.8       5.2    50.1     51.6
1977        23.3      7.0      10.2    55.7   60.7       7.5    53.7     50.6
1978        21.3      9.4      10.2    53.4   63.8      10.3    57.5     56.3
1979        19.8     11.5       9.7    48.7   63.7      10.9    61.7     64.9
1980        19.8     14.4       9.1    48.1   61.8      11.6    69.0      69.4
1981        19.1     17.5       9.9    47.2   66.8      10.8    81.5      75.1
1982        21.7     19.8      11.3    46.6   73.4      17.0    89.2      81.2
1983        24.4     21.4      13.4    47.2   80.6      20.5    99.4      88.0
1984        25.4     21.8      15.2    48.9   87.8      24.9   104.3      94.6
1985        27.1     22.2      16.8    47.4   96.3      30.5   111.2     103.0
1986        28.7     22.1      18.2    46.5   99.2      33.7   113.3       na
  YEAR      FINLAND        AUSTRIA NETHERL SWEDEN      NORWAY     JAPAN     DENMARK

  1960          na           na       na       na         na         na        na
  1961          na           na       na       na         na         na        na
   1962         na           na       na       na         na         na         na
   1963         na           na       na       na         na         na         na
   1964         na            na      na       na         na         na         na
   1965         na            na      na       na         na         -5.6       na
   1966         na            na      na       na         na         -5.6       na
   1967         na            na      na       na         na         -7.0       na
   1968         na            na      na       na         na         -6.3       na
   1969         na            na      na       na         na         -5.5       na
   1970         -5.0          19.4     28.9   -24.0        2.5       -6.5       -2.8
   1971         -7.3          18.2     27.7   -27.5        2.6       -7.2       -5.9
   1972          -8.0         17.5     24.5   -29.5        0.6       -6.5       -9.0
   1973         -10.7         17.5     21.0   -31.1       -1.4       -6.1      -12.2
   1974         -10.5         17.6     19.0   -30.1       -1.8       -5.3      -13.6
   1975          -9.5         23.9     19.7   -28.7        0.7       -2.1      -10.1
   1976         -10.5         27.4     20.3   -29.7        3.5        1.9       -7.7
   1977          -9.9         30.0     19.2   -28.8        9.5        5.5       -5.0
   1978          -8.3         33.8     20.0    -25.3      14.0       11.3       -2.1
   1979          -6.8         35.9     21.8    -19.8      16.8       14.9        1.8
   1980          -6.0         37.1     24.9    -13.5       6.9       17.3        7.2
   1981          -4.6         39.2     27.3     -5.2       3.9       20.6       16.5
   1982          -1.8         41.6     31.3      4.4       1.3       23.2       26.3
   1983              0.4      46.4     36.5     10.5      -2.4       26.2       34.1
   1984              0.7      47.8     38.3     12.6       -9.6      27.0       37.5
    1985             0.6      47.3     41.6     15.4      -19.0      26.5       35.2
    1986             0.0      47.7     46.0     14.5      -24.4      26.3       28.4


Source: OECD Data.
Table 4. General Government Revenues as a share of GDP. 1960-1965.


Year    United    Japan     Germany   France    United    Italy      Canada
        States                                  Kingdom
1960    0.263        NA     0.350     0.349     0.300     0.288      0.260
1961    0.263        NA     0.362     0.362     0.312     0.282      0.263
1962    0.265        NA     0.365     0.363     0.328     0.291      0.266
1963    0.270        NA     0.367     0.371     0.314     0.295      0.263
1964    0.259        NA     0.362     0.380     0.315     0.306      0.272
1965    0.259     0.197     0.355     0.384     0.331     0.301      0.276
1966    0.267     0.191     0.361     0.384     0.343     0.301      0.288
1967    0.271     0.193     0.367     0.382     0.362     0.310      0.303
1968    0.287     0.196     0.378     0.388     0.376     0.316      0.317
1969    0.299     0.196     0.393     0.398     0.395     0.307      0.337
1970    0.289     0.207     0.383     0.390     0.412     0.304      0.342
1971    0.282     0.216     0.394     0.383     0.391     0.311      0.347
1972    0.293     0.215     0.398     0.382     0.375     0.309      0.352
1973    0.296     0.225     0.422     0.386     0.368     0.304      0.349
1974    0.303     0.245     0.427     0.394     0.406     0.306      0.372
1975    0.288     0.240     0.427     0.403     0.413     0.312      0.361
1976    0.295     0.236     0.440     0.425     0.404     0.329      0.358
1977    0.297     0.247     0.450     0.424     0.399     0.343      0.361
1978    0.299     0.245     0.447     0.423     0.385     0.360      0.357
1979    0.305     0.263     0.444     0.437     0.393     0.357      0.355
1980    0.308     0.276     0.447     0.455     0.410     0.378      0.362
1981    0.316     0.291     0.448     0.462     0.431     0.393      0.385
1982    0.311     0.295     0.454     0.471     0.442     0.420      0.390
1983    0.307     0.298     0.451     0.477     0.432     0.450      0.387
1984    0.307     0.304     0.454     0.485     0.437     0.442      0.389
1985    0.311     0.312     0,454     0.485     0.437     0.441      0.389
Year Denmark Finland Netherlands Norway Sweden      Ireland Austria Belgium


1960     NA      0.297        NA    0.331     NA         NA    0.344   0.275
1961     NA      0.285        NA    0.342     NA         NA    0.361   0.284
1962     NA      0.297     0.308    0.355   0.354        NA    0.372   0.292
1963     NA      0.290     0.323    0.355   0.361        NA    0.369   0.294
1964     NA      0.307     0.325    0.360   0.363        NA    0.379   0.300
1965     NA      0,316     0.355    0.368   0.390        NA    0.385   0.307
1966     NA      0.328     0.356    0.383   0.407        NA    0.393   0.324
1967     NA      0.346     0.365    0.405   0.428        NA    0.391   0.332
1968      NA     0.348     0.419    0.411   0.459        NA    0.389   0.338
1969      NA     0.338     0.427    0.433   0.469        NA    0.396   0.343
1970      NA     0.341     0.420    0.435   0.466     0.353    0.397   0352
1971   0.464     0.357     0.433    0.466   0.494     0.363    0.405   0.357
1972   0.459     0.354     0.445    0.484   0.495     0.349    0.411   0.355
1973   0.468     0.360     0.459    0.496   0.477     0.345    0.419   0.364
1974   0.484     0.357     0.470    0.485   0.488     0.352    0.425   0.377
1975   0.461     0.378     0.492    0.496   0.505     0.346    0.429   0.404
1976   0.469     0.410     0.495    0.509   0.551     0.379    0.424   0.402
1977   0.476     0.403     0.505    0.510   0.580     0.364    0.437   0.416
1978   0.496     0.380     0.509    0.520   0.575     0.352    0.462   0.424
1979   0.508     0.360     0.514    0.519   0.564     0.359    0.458   0.431
1980   0.522     0.359     0.528    0.542   0.566     0.388    0.464   0.428
1981   0.521     0.376     0.535    0.528   0.583      0.396   0.478   0.436
1982   0.512     0.375     0.538    0.532   0.589      0.417   0.467   0.453
1983   0.536     0.375     0.553    0.531   0.599      0.439   0.463   0.447
1984   0.559     0.391     0.543    0.544   0.596      0.443   0.472   0.460
1985   0.570     0.405     0.544    0.561   0.594      0.445   0.477   0.465




Source: OECD National Income Accounts
Table 5. Tests of Tax Rates as a Random Walk without Drift.
Dependent Variable: Change in the Revenue to GDP ratio.


Country         Independent Variable: Constant


                                     **
Sample:                1960.1985                 1960-1973


Austria                0.002     *               0.005     *
                       (3.36)                     (3.56)

Belgium                0.007     *               0.007     *
                       (5.37)                     (5.64)

Canada                 0.005     *               0.007     *
                       (2.96)                     (3.60)

Denmark                0.009     *                NA
                       (2.57)

Finland                0.004                     0.005
                       (1.61)                     (1.68)

France                 0.005     *               0.003
                       (3.78)                     (1.59)

Germany                0.004     *               0.005 *
                       (2.71)                     (2.12)

Italy                  0.006     *               0.001 *
                       (2.82)                     (0.65)

Ireland                0.006     *                NA
                       (2.06)

Japan                  0.005     *                NA
                       (3.38)

Norway                 0.009 *                   0.012     *
                       (4.38)                     (5.15)

Netherlands            0.006 *                   0.013 *
                       (3.29)                     (2.78)

Sweden                 0.007 *                   0.011 *
                       (2.56)                     (2.43)
                                                               10
United States          0.002                   0.002
                       (1.29)                  (1.10)

United Kingdom         0.005                   0.005
                       (1.89)                  (1.28)

Note: t-ststistics in parentheses.
NA: Not available for lack of data points.
* : Null hypothesis of zero drift rejected at the 5% level.
**: For a few countries the sample does not go back to 1960 for lack of data.
Source: OECD National Income Accounts.




                                                                                11
Table 6. Test of the Theory of Optimal Seignorage. 15 OECD countries.
Dependent Variable: Inflation Rate.


                          Independent Variables:

Country            Time Trend        Governnienr Revenues
                                     as a share of GDP




Austria               0.001              -0.007
                      (0.37)             (0.01)

Belgium               0.001               0.14
                      (0.19)             (0.17)
Canada                0.00005             0.57
                      (0.02)             (1.65)

Denmark               0.003              -0.58
                      (0.67)             (0.96)

Finland               -0.001              0.88
                      (0.48)             (2.00)

France                0.006              -0.64
                      (3.50)             (1.79)

Germany               -0.001              0.47
                      (1.00)             (1.64)

Ireland                0.007             -1.02
                      (1.30)             (1.45)

Italy                  0.01              -0.74
                      (4.66)             (2.16)

Japan                 -0.003              0.17
                      (0.35)             (0.13)

Norway                -0.002              0.50
                      (0.62)             (1.65)

Netherlands           -0.01               1.25
                      (3.43)             (2.76)
Sweden                -0.002             0.40
                      (0.84)            (1.37)

United Kingdom        0.0008             0.55
                      (0.25)            (0.92)

United States         -0.001             1.91
                      (0.84)            (2.68)


Source: IMF-IFS for inflation rates. OECD National Income Accounts for general
government revenues.

t-statistics in parentheses.
Table 7. Panel data regression of deficits with political variables.

Dependent Variable: D8Y.


Variable                               Equation

                   (1)              (2)           (3)         (4)


DBYL               0.74         0.70         0.66        0.68
                  (16.8)       (15.9)        (9.36)     (15.2)

                   0.21         0.16         0.15        0.10
                  (2.72)       (2.05)        (1.93)     (1.32)

DRB                0.76         0.82         0.86        0.76
                  (3.09)       (3.36)        (3.47)     (3.12)

DC?.              -0.46        -0.45         -0.45      -0.44
                  (8.37)       (8.18)        (8.18)     (8.04)

DUJAP              1.80         2.74          3.02       2.77
                  (1.45)       (2.11)        (2.31)     (2.21)

POL                 -          0.004        0.004       0.001
                               (2.84)       (2.74)      (0.55)

POLD                -           -             -         0.005
                                                        (2.11)

DBYLPOL             -           -            0.03         -


                                            (0.88)

R2                  0.67        0.68         0.68        0.68



Data Source: See Appendix.

t-statistics in parentheses.
Table 8. France. Central Covernxsent Budget Deficit as a share of GD?.
1950-1985.



1950   -0.056
1951   -0.040
1952   -0.060
1953   -0.054
1954   -0.041         Fourth Republic
1955   -0.038
1956   -0.052
1957   -0.049

1958   -0.028
1959   -0.024
1960   -0.014
1961   -0.014
1962   -0.017
1963   -0.020           Fifth Republic
1964   -0.004
1965    0.000
1966   -0.004
1967   -0.011
1968   -0.015
1969   -0.005
1970    0.005
1971 -0.004
1972    0.007
1973    0.004
1974    0.005
1975   -0.026
1976   -0.010
1977   -0.012
1978   -0.014
1979   -0.015
1980    0.000
1981   -0.027
1982   -0.031
1983   -0.036
1984   -0.030
1985   -0.030


Source: IMF-IFS.

Note: De Gaulle came to power in July 1958 and the new constitution was
promulgated in January 1959.
