                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  THE RICARDIAN APPROACH TO BUDGET DEFICITS




                               Robert J. Berro




                            Working Paper No. 2685




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 August 1988




This research is part of NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opiniona expressed are those of the author not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #2685
                                       August 1988


                 THE RICARDIAN APPROACH TO BUDGET DEFICITS


                                  ABSTRAcT



    Persistent budget deficits have increased economists' interest in

theories and evidence about fiscal policy. This paper develops the Ricardian

approach and contrasts it with standard models. The discussion considers

from major theoretical objections to Iticardian equivalence—finite lifetimes,

imperfect capital markets, uncertainty about future taxes and incomes, and

the distorting effects of taxation Then the paper considers empirical

evidence on interest rates, consumption and saving, and current-account

deficits. The conclusion is that the Ricardian approach is a usefnl

first-order approximation, and that this approach will probably become the

benchwork model for assessing fiscal policy.




                                        Robert J, Barro
                                        Department of Economicts
                                        Harvard University
                                        Cambridge. MA 02138
    In recent years there has been a lot of discussion about U.S. budget

deficits. Many economists and other observers have viewed these deficits as

harmful to the U.S. and world economies. The supposed harmful effects,

predicted by theories of the life-cycle type, include high real interest

rates, low saving, low rates of economic growth, large current-account

deficits in the United States and other countries with large budget deficits,

and either a high or low dollar (depending apparently on the time period).

On the other hand, this crisis scenario has been hard to maintain along with

the robust performance of the U.S. economy since late 1982. This performance

features high average growth rates of real GNP, declining unemployment, much

lower inflation than before, a sharp decrease in nominal interest rates and

some decline in expected real interest rates, high values of real investment

expenditures, and (until October 1987) a dramatic boom in the stock market.

    Persistent budget deficits have increased economists' interest in

theories and evidence about fiscal policy. At the same time, the conflict

between standard predictions and actual outcomes in the U.S. economy has, I

think, increased economists' willingness to consider approaches that depart

from the standard paradigm. In this paper I will focus on the alternative

theory that is associated with the name of David Iticardo.




1. The Standard Model of Bud2et Deficits

    Before developing the Ricardian approach, I will sketch the standard

model. The starting point is the assumption that the substitution of a
                                                                        4




the   path of government expenditures and non-tax revenues, a cut in today!s

taxes must be matched by a corresponding increase in the present value of

future taxes.1

      Suppose now that households' demands for goods depend on the expected

present value of taxes—that is, each household subtracts its share of this

present value from the expected present value of income to determine a net

wealth position. Then fiscal policy would affect aggregate consumer demand

only if it altered the expected present value of taxes. But the preceding

argument was that the present value of taxes would not change as long as the

present value of spending did not change. Therefore, the substitution of a

budget deficit for current taxes (or any other rearrangement of the timing of

taxes) has no imparct on the aggregate demand for goods. In this sense,

budget deficits and taxation have equivalent effects on the economy—hence,

the term, "Ricardian equivalence theorem."2 To put the equivalence result

another way, a decrease in the government's saving (that is, a current budget

deficit) leads to an offsetting increase in desired private saving, and hence

to no change in desired national saving.

      Since desired national saving does not change, the real interest rate

does not have to rise in a closed economy to maintain balance between desired

national saving and investment demand. Hence, there is no effect on

investment, and no burden of the public debt or social security in the sense

of Modigliani (1961) and Feldstein (1974). In a setting of an open economy

there would also be no effect on the current-account balance because desired

private saving rises by enough to avoid having to borrow from abroad.

Therefore, budget deficits would not cause current-account deficits.
                                                                       5




.3.   Theoretical Objections to Ricardian Equivalence

      I shall discuss four major theoretical objections that have been raised

against the Ricardian conclusions. The first is that people do not live

forever, and hence do not care about taxes that are levied after their death.

The second is that private capital markets are "imperfect," with the typical

person's real discount rate exceeding that of the government. The third is

that future taxes and incomes are uncertain. The fourth is that taxes are

not lump sum, since they depend typically on income, spending, wealth, and so

on. I assume troughont that the path of government spending is given. The

Ricardian analysis applies to shifts in budget deficits and taxes for a given

pattern of government expenditures; in particular, the approach is consistent

with real effects from changes in the level or timing of government purchases

and public services.

      It turns out that each of the four issues implies that budget deficits

matter, and are in that sense non-Ricardian. It is important, however, to

consider not only whether the Ricardian view remains intact, but also what

alternative conclnsions emerge. Many economists raise points that invalidate

strict Ricardian equivalence, and then simply assume that the points support

a specific alternative; usually the standard view that a budget deficit

 lowers desired national saving and thereby drives up real interest rates or

 leads to a current-account deficit. Many criticisms of the Ricardian

 position are also inconsistent with this standard view.
    A. Finite Horizons and Related Issues

    The idea of finite horizons, motivated by the finiteness of lif, is

central to life-cyclemodels—see, for example, Franco Modigliani and Richard

Brumherg (1954) and Albert Ando and Franco Modigliani (1963). In these

models individuals capitalize only the taxes that they expect to face before

dying. Consider a deficit-financed tax cut, and assume that the higher

future taxes occur partly during the typical person's expected lifetime and

partly thpreafter. Then the present value of the first portion must fall

short of the initial tax cut, since a full balance results only if the second

portion is included. Hence the net wealth of persons currently alive rises,

and households react by increasing consumption demand. The rise in consumer

demand means that desired private saving does not rise by enough to offset

fully the decline in government saving; hence desired national saving falls.

It follows in a closed economy that the current real interest rate increases:

thereby investment demand falls in the short run and the stock of capital

declines in the long run. For an open economy, the short-run response is a

current-account deficit, which leads in the long run to a smaller stock of

national wealth.

    A finite horizon seems to generate the standard result that a budget

deficit reduces desired national saving. The argument works, however, only

if the typical person feels better off when the government shifts a tax

burden to his or her descendants. The argument fails if the typical person

is already giving to his or her children out of altruism. In this case

people react to the government's imposed intergenerational transfers, which
are implied by budget deficits or social security, with a compnsating

increase in voluntary transfers (see Robert Barro, 1974) .   For   example,

parents adjust their bequests or the amounts given to children while the

parents are still living (or, equivalently, children rise their transfers to

aged parents).

    The main point is that a network of intergenerational transfers makes the

typical person a part of an extended family that goes on indefinitely. In

this setting, nouseholds capitalize the entire array of expected future

taxes, and thereby plan effectively with an infinite horizon. In other

words, the Ricardian results, which seemed to depend on infinite horizons,

can remain valid in a model with finite lifetimes.

    Two important points should be stressed. First, intergenerational

transfers do not have to be "large"; what is necessary is that transfers

based on altruism be operative at the margin for most people.3 Specifically.

most people must be away from the corner solution of zero transfers, where

they would, if permitted, opt for negative payments to their children.

(However, the results also go throngh if children typically support their

aged parents.) Second, the transfers do not have to show up as bequests at

death. Other forms of intergenerational transfers work in a similar manner.

    One objection to Ricardian equivalence is that some persons, such as

those without children, are not connected to future generations (see James

Tobin and Willem Buiter, 1980, pp. 86ff.). Persons in this situation tend to

be made wealthier when the government substitutes a budget deficit for taxes.

At least this conclusion obtains to the extent that the interest and
                                                                      S




principal payments on the extra public debt are not financed by higher taxes

during the remaining lifetimes of people currently alive. However, the

quantitative effects on consumption tend to be small. For example, for

someone with 30 years of remaining life who consumes at a constant rate, a

one-time budget deficit of 81 would increase real consumption demand by 1.4

cents per year if the annual real interest rate is 5%, and by 2.1 cents per

year if the real interest rate is 3%•4

    The aggregate effect from the existence of childless persons is even

smaller because people with more than the average number of descendants

experience a decrease in wealth when taxes are replaced by budget deficits.

(In effect, although some people have no children, all children must have

parents.) The presumption for a net effect on aggregate consumer demand

depends on different propensities to consume out of wealth for people with

and without children. Since the propensity for those without children tends

to be larger (because of the shorter horizon), a positive net effect on

aggregate consumer demand would he predicted. However, the quantitative

effect is likely to be trivial. Making the same assumptions as in the

previous example, a budget deficit of 81 would raise aggregate real

consumption demand by 0.3 cents per year if the real interest rate is 5%, and

by 0.9 cents if the real interest rate is 37..

    Michael Darby (1979, Ch. 3) and Laurence Kotlikoff and Lawrence Summers

(1981) calculate that the accumulation of households' assets in the United

States for the purpose of intergenerational transfers is far more important

than that associated with the life cycle. This observation suggests that
                                                                     9




intergenerational transfers would be operative for most people, a conclusion

that supports the Ricardian position.

    Douglas Bernheim, Andrei Shleifer and Lawrence Summers (1985) note that

the motivation behind intergenerational transfers matters for the results.

These authors consider the possibility that bequests, instead of being driven

by altruism, are a strategic device whereby parents induce their children to

behave properly. Some imaginative evidence is presented (involving how often

children visit and communicate with their parents) to document the importance

of strategic bequests.

    This enforcement theory of giving may have different implications for the

effects of budget deficits and social security. If the government

redistributes income from young to old (by running a deficit or raising

social security benefits), the old have no reason in this model to raise

transfers to offset fully the government's actions. Instead, the old end up

better off at the expense of the young, and aggregate consumer demand rises.

Then, as in the standard approach, real interest rates increase or domestic

residents borrow more from abroad.

    One shortcoming of this approach is that it treats the interaction

between parents and children as equivalent to the purchases of services on

markets. In this setting parents would tend to pay wages to children, rather

than using bequests or other forms of intergenerational transfers. These

features—as well as the observation that most parents seem to care about

their children's welfare—can be better explained by introducing altruism

along with a desire to influence children's behavior. In this case Iticardian
                                                                       1.2




corresponding narrowing of the spread between the two discount rates, r and

r. In the aggrege investment may either rise or fall, and the long-term

effect on the capital stock is uncertain. The major change, however, is a

better channeling of resources tn their ultimate uses. Namely the persnns

from group B—who have relatively high values for rates of time preference

and for marginal returns to investment—command a greater share of current

output. In any event the outcomes are non-neutral, and in that sense

non- Ricardian.

    The important finding from the inclusion .f imperfect loan markets is

that the governments issue of public debt can amount to a useful form of

financial intermediation. The government induces people with good access to

credit markets (group A) to hold more than their share of the extra public

debt. Those with poor access (group B) hold less than their share, and

thereby effectively receive loans from the first group. This process works

because the government implicitly guarantees the repayment of loans through

its tax collections and debt payments. Thus loans between A and B take place

even though such loans were not viable (because of "transaction costs") on

the imperfect private credit market.

    This much of the argument may be valid, although it credits the

government with a lot of skill in the collection of taxes from people with

poor collateral (which is the underlying source of the problem for private

lenders). Even if the government possesses this skill, the conclusions do

not resemble those from the standard analysis. As discussed before, budget

deficits can amount to more financial intermediation, and are in that sense
                                                                              13



  equivalent to a technological advance that improves the functioning of loan

 markets. From this perspective it is reasonable to find      a reduced spread
 betveen various discount rates and   an   improvement in the allocation of

 resources. If the government really is better at the process of

 intermediating, then more of this activity—that is, more public
                                                                     debt—raises
 perceived wealth because it actually improves the
                                                      workings of the economy.

     Instead of introducing costs of enforcing the collection of loans,

 Toshilci Yotsuzuka (1987) extends the analysis of
                                                     Mervyn King (1984) and Fumio
 Ilayashi (1985) by allowing for adverse selection   among borrowers with

 different risk characteristics. Individuals know their     probabilities of

default, but the lenders' only possibility for learning these probabilities

comes from observing the chosen levels of borrowing at going interest rates.

In this setting the government's borrowing amounts to a loan to a group that        -




pools the various risk classes. Such borrowing matters if the
                                                                   private
equilibrium does not involve similar pooling. However,
                                                            by considering the
incentives of lenders to exchange or not exchange information about     their

customers, Yotsuzuka argues that the private equilibrium typically involves, a

pooled loan of limited quantity at a relatively low interest     rate. Then the

high-risk types way borrow additional amounts at a high interest     rate. In
this case the government's borrowing replaces the private pooled lending, and

leads to no real effects-. That is, Ricardian equivalence
                                                             holds despite the
imperfect private loan market where high-risk people face
                                                             high marginal
borrowing rates. The general lesson again is that Iticardian equivalence

falls because of imperfect credit markets only if the    government does things
                                                                          14




                                                             better than, those
in the loan market that are different from, and perhaps

carried out privately.



    C.
           tJncertaintv about Future Taxes and Iocn!!

    Some economists argue that the uncertainty about individuals future

                                             them—implies a high rate of discount
taxes—or the complexity in estimating

in capitalizing these future liabilities (see Martin Bailey, 1971, pp.
                                                           17, 101, 130; and Martin
157- 58; James Buchanan and Richard Wagner, 1977, pp.

Feldstein, 1976, p.335). In this case, a substitution of a budget deficit
                                                  the present value of the higher
for current taxes raises net wealth because
                                        the current tax cut. It then follows
expected future taxes falls short of
                                                    demand and lower desired
that budget deficits raise aggregate consumer

 national saving.
                                                     different conclusions. Louis
     A proper treatment of uncertainty leads to
                                                        taxes that have a known
 Chan (1983) first considers the case of lump-sum
                                                               of future taxes and
 distribution across households. However, the aggregate
                                                   debt are subject to uncertainty.
 the real value of future payments on public
                                               has no real effects. Individuals
 In this case a deficit-financed tax cut
                                                  the debt is a perfect hedge
 hold their share of the extra debt because
                                                     (This analysis assumes that
 against the uncertainty of the future taxes.
                                    'imperfections" of the sort discussed
 private credit markets have no

 earlier.)
                                             still lump sum but have mit uncertain
         Suppose now that future taxes are
                                                           that there are no
  incidence across individuals. Furthermore, assume
                                                                      15




insurance markets for relative tax risks. Them a budget deficit tends to

increase the uncertainty about each individual's future disposable income.

Chan (1983, p. 363) shows for the "usual case" (of non-increasing absolute

risk aversion) that people react by reducing current consumption and hence,

by raising current private saving by store than the tax cut. Consequently,

the effects on real interest rates, investment, the current account, and so

on are the opposites of the standard ones.

   The results are different for an income tax (Chan, 1983, pp. 364-366, and

Robert Barsky, Gregory Mankiw and Stephen Zeldes, 1986) .   Suppose that each

person pays the tax ry1, where     is the person's uncertain future income.

Suppose that there are no insurance markets for individual income risks, and

that r is known. (The analysis thus abstracts from uncertainties in relative

tax rates across individuals.) In this case a budget deficit raises the

future value of r and thereby reduces the uncertainty about each individual's

future disposable income. In effect, the government shares the risks about

individual disposable income to a greater extent. It follows that the

results are opposite to those found before; namely, a budget deficit tends to

raise current consumption and hence, to raise private saving by less than the

tax cut.

    Overall, the conclusions depend on the net effect of higher mean future

tax collections on the mncertainty associated with individuals' future

disposable incomes. Desired national saving tends to rise with a budget

deficit if this uncertainty increases, and vice versa.
                                                                          16




    9.    Thejjtn of Taxes
    Departures from Ricardian equivalence arise also if taxes are nOt lump

sum; for example, with an income tax. In this situation budget deficits

change the timing of income taxes, and thereby affect peoplets incentives to

work and produce in different periods. It follows that variations in

deficits are non-neutral, although the results tend also to be inconsistent

with the standard view.

    Suppose, for example, that the current income-tax rate, i-1,     declines,   and

the expected rate for the next period, r2, rises- To simplify matters,

assume that todayrs budget deficit is matched by enough of a surplus next

period so that the public debt does not change in later periods. Because the

tax rate applies to income, people are motivated to work and produce more
                                                                                       -

than   usual in period I and    less than usual in period 2. Since the tax rate

does not apply to expenditures (and since wealth effects are negligible

here) ,   it   follows that desired national saving rises in period 1 and falls in

period 2. Therefore, in a closed economy, after-tax real interest rates tend

to be relatively low in period 1—along with the budget deficit—and

relatively high in period 2—along with the surplus. In an open economy, a

current-account surplus accompanies the budget deficit, and vice versa.5

Hence the results are uoa-Ricardian, but also counter to the standard view.

(Temporary variations in consumption taxes tend to generate the standard

pattern where real interest rates, current-account deficits, and budget

deficits are positively correlated.)

       Unlike in the Ricardian case where debt and deficits do not matter, it is

possible in a world of distorting taxes to determine the optimal path of the
                                                                        17




budget deficit, which corresponds to the optimal time pattern of taxes. In
effect, the theory of debt management becomes a branch of puhlic finance;

specifically, an application of the theory of optimal taxation;

    One result is that budget deficits can be used to smooth tax rates over

time, despite fluctuations in government expenditures and the tax base. For

example, if time periods are identical except for the quantity of government

purchases—which are assumed not to interact directly with labor supply

decisions—then optimality dictates uniform taxation of labor income over

time. This constancy of tax rates requires budget deficits when government

spending is unusually high, such as in wartime, and surpluses when spending

is unusually low.

    Constant tax rates over time will not be optimal in general;6 for

example, optimal tax rates on labor income may vary over the business cycle.

To the extent that some smoothing is called for, budget deficits would occur

in recessions, and surpluses in booms. If optimal tax rates are lower than

normal in recessions and higher than normal in booms, the countercyclical

pattern of budget deficits is even more vigorous. The well-known concept of

the full-employment deficit, as discussed in E. Cary Brown (1956) and Council

of Economic Advisers (1962, pp. 78-82), adjusts for this cyclical behavior of

budget deficits.

    The tax-smoothing view has implications for the interaction between

inflation and budget deficits if the public debt is denominated in nominal

terms. Basically, the fiscal authority's objective involves the path of tax

rates and other real variables. Therefore, other things equal, a higher rate
                                                                       15



of   expected inflation (presumably reflecting a higher rate of monetary

growth) motivates a correspondingly higher growth rate of the nominal,

interest-bearing debt.     This response keeps the planned path of the real

public debt invariant with expected inflation. This behavior means that

differences in expected rates of inflation can account for substantial

variations in budget deficits if deficits are measured in the conventional

way to correspond to the change in the government's nominal liabilities.

However, this element is less important for an inflation-adjusted budget

deficit, which corresponds to the change in the government's real obligations

(see Jeremy Siegel, 1979).

      With perfect foresight, the strict tax-smoothing model implies constant

tax rates. More realistically, new information about the path of governmeut

spending, national income, and so on, would lead to revisions of tax rates.

ifowever, the sign of these revisions would not be predictable. Thus, in the

presence of uncertainty, tax smoothing implies that tax rates would behave

roughly like random walks.

      It is possible to use the tax-smoothing approach as a positive theory of

how the government operates, rather than as a normative model of how it

should act.7 Barro (1979, 1986) shows that this framework explains much of

the behavior of U.S. federal deficits from 1916 to 1983, although the

deficits since 1984 turn out to be substantially higher than predicted. Over

the full sample, the major departures from the theory are an excessive

reaction of budget deficits to the business cycle (so that tax rates fall

below 'normal1' during recessions) and an insufficient reaction to temporary
                                                                        19




military spending (so that tax rates rise above normal during wars). These

departures are found also by Chaipat Sahasakul (1986), who looks directly at

the behavior of average marginal tax rates. Barro (1987, Section 3) finds

for the British data from the early 1700s through 1918 that temporary

military spending is the major determinant of budget deficits. Also, unlike

the U.S. case, the results indicate a one-to-one response of budget deficits

to temporary spending.

    Gregory Mankiw (1987) used the tax- smoothing model for a joint analysis

of the inflation tax and other taxes. This perspective can explain why

short-term nominal interest rates, which are the tax rate associated with

money, have been close to a random walk since the founding of the Federal

Reserve System in 1914 (see N. Gregory Mankiw and Jeffrey Miron, 1986).

Moreover, Mankiw (1987) finds for the Utiited States from 1952 to 1985 that

changes in nominal interest rates are positively associated with changes in

the ratio of federal tax receipts to GNP or with changes in average marginal

tax rates. These results accord with a model where nominal interest rates

and other tax rates are jointly determined from an optimal-tax perspective.



4. Empirical Evidence on the Econoj.Effects of Budçet Deficits

    It is easy on theoretical grounds to raise points that invalidate strict

Ricardian equivalence. Nevertheless, it may still be that the Ricardian view

provides a useful framework for assessing the first-order effects of fiscal

policy. Furthermore, it is unclear theoretically that the standard analysis

offers a more accurate guide. For these reasons it is especially important

to examine empirical evidence.
                                                                      20



    The Ricardian and standard views have different predictions about the

effects of fiscal policy on a number of economic variables. The next two

sections summarize the empirical evidence on interest rates and saving.

Although these variables have received considerable attention, the theories

also have divergent implications for other variables, sorb as the

current-account balance and exchange rates. However, because less empirical

work has been done, even less is known about these variables than about

interest rates and saving.



    A. Interest Rates

    The Ricardian view predicts no effect of budget deficits on real interest

rates, whereas the standard view predicts a positive effect, at least in the

context of a closed economy. (any economists have tested these propositions -

empirically   (for a summary, see U.S. Treasury Department, 1984). Typical

results show little relationship between budget deficits and interest rates.

For example, Charles Plosser (1982, p. 339) finds for quarterly U.S. data

from 1954 to 1978 that unexpected movements in privately-held federal debt do

not raise the nominal yield on government securities of various maturities.

In fact, there is a weak tendency for yields to decline with innovations in

federal debt. Plosser's (1987, tables VIII and XI) later study, which

includes data through 1985, reaches similar conclusions for nominal and

expected real yields. Paul Evans (1987b) obtains similar results for nominal

yields with quarterly data from 1974 to 1985 for Canada, France, Cermany,

Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
                                                                       21




    Evans (1987a, Tables 4-6) finds for annual U.S. data from 1931 to 1979

that current and past real federal deficits have no significant association

with nominal interest rates on commercial paper or corporate bonds, or with

realized real interest rates on commercial paper. Over the longer period

from 1908 to 1984, using monthly data, there is some indication of a negative

relation between deficits and nominal or real interest rates (Evans, 1987a,

Tables 1-3). Evans also explores the effects of expected future budget

deficits or surpluses.   lie assumes that people would have expected future

deficits in advance of tax cuts, such as in 1981, and future surpluses in

advance of tax hikes. Rut interest rates turn out typically not to rise in

advance of tax cuts and not to fall in advance of tax hikes. If anything,

interest rates tended to move with the opposite pattern. Mankiw's (1987)

analysis, which views the nominal interest rate as a form of tax rate, is

consistent with these findings.

    Overall, the empirical results on interest rates support the Ricardian

view. Given these findings it is remarkable that most macroeconomists remain

confident that budget deficits raise interest rates.



    B. C.onsumDtion and Saving

    Most empirical results on the interplay between budget deficits and

saving come from the estimated coefficients of fiscal variables in

consumption or saving functions. Examples of this work are Levis Kochin

(1974), J. Ernest Tanner (1979), Martin Feldstein (1982), Roger Kormendi

(1983), John Seater and Robert Mariano (1985), and Franco Modigliani and
                                                                    22




Arlie Sterling (1986). The majority of these (selected) studies finds that

fiscal policy has little effect on consumer demand, but Feldsteio and

Modigliani/Sterling reach opposite conclusions.

    The consumption-function approach has also been used to assess the effect

of retirement programs under social security. When funded on a pay-as-you-go

basis, such programs are similar to budget deficits in terms of their

theoretical effects oo national saving. Feldstein (1974, 1977) initially

concluded that more generous social security programs depressed national

saving. This finding was contested in subsequent research—see, for example,

Barro (1978), Darby (1979), Louis Esposito (1978), Sterling (1977), Barro and

Glenn MacDonald (1979), and Dean Leimer and Selig Lesnoy (1982). Overall,

the evidence from the U.S. time series and from a cross-section of countries

fails to demonstrate a clear link between social security and natiooal

saving.

    The empirical studies mentioned above rely on estimates of consumption

functions; an approach that involves well-known identification prohlems. For

example, the analysis does not deal satisfactorily with the simultaneity

among consumption, income, and real interest rates. Another difficulty

concerns the definitions of wealth and income; the inclusion of capital gains

has dramatic effects on measures of U.S. saving (see James Poterba and

Lawrence Summers, 1986, Appendix Table A-2). Other problems concern the

fiscal variahles that enter as regressors. These variables can play a

signaling role for future income or government expenditure, and this role

affects the interpretation of estimated coefficients. For example, if the
                                                                          23




government adjusts its budget deficits to smooth out tax rates, as suggested

before, then the current tax rate proxies for the expected long-run ratio of

government expenditure to income, which influences current consumption demand

(see Levis Kochin, Daniel Benjamin, and Mark Meador, 1985). Similarly, the

correlation of the deficit with recessions, wars, etc. ,   affects   the analysis.

   Chris Carroll and Lawrence Summers (1987) compare private saving in the

United States and Canada. they note that the private saving rates were

similar in the two countrus until the early 1970s, but have since diverged;

for 1983-85 the Canadian rate was higher by about 6 percentage points. After

holding fixed some macroeconomic variables and aspects of the tax systems

that influence saving, the authors isolate a roughly one-to-one, positive

effect of government budget deficits on private saving. That is, as implied

by the Ricardian view, the relative values of net national saving in the

United States and Canada appeared to be invariant with the relative values of

the budget deficits. These results are particularly interesting because the

focus on relative performance in the United States and Canada holds constant

the many forces that have common influences on the two countries. It may he

that this procedure lessens the problems of identification that hamper most

studies of consumption functions.

    Recent fiscal policy in Israel comes close to a natural experiment for

studying the interplay between budget deficits and saving.8 Figure 1 shows

the values from 1974 to 1987 for the gross national saving rate, the gross

private saving rate, and the gross public saving rate. (The underlying

variables were converted at effective exchange rates into U.S. dollars.)
Note that in 1983 the gross national saving rate of 137. corresponded to a

private saving rate of 177. and a public saving rate of -47,. In 1984 the

dramatic rise in the budget deficit led to a public saving rate of -117..      (A

principal reason for the deficit was the adverse effect of the increase in

the inflation rate on the collection of real tax revenues.) For present

purposes, the interesting observation is that the private saving rate rose

from 177. to 267,, so that the national saving rate changed little; actually

rising from 137. to 15%. Then the stabilization program in 1985 eliminated

the budget deficit, along with most of the inflation, so that the public

saving rate increased from -117. in 1984 to 0 in 1985- 86 and -2% in 1987. The

private saving rate decreased dramatically at the same time—from 26% in 1984

to 197. in 1985 and 14% in 1986-87. Therefore, the national saviog rates were

relatively stable, going from 15% in 1984 to 18% in 1985, 147. in 1986. and

127. in 1987.

    One episode cannot be decisive in verifying or refuting a theory. Rut

the recent Israeli experience on fiscal policy—driven mainly by exogenous

changes in policy, rather than as reactions to the economy—reveals the

roughly one-to-one offset between public and private saving that the

Ricardian view predicts. For detailed analysis of the longer time series

evidence for Tsrael see Leiderman and Razin (1988) and Meridor (1988).



    C. Current-Account Deficits

    Popular opinion attributes the large current-account deficits in the

United States since 1983 to the effects of budget deficits. There has not

been much careful analysis of this relationship, but the data reveal a
                                                                        23




positive association between the two deficits only if the experience since

1983 is included.

    Figure 2 shows the values since t948 of the ratio of the total government

budget surplus (national accounts' version) to GNP (solid line) and the ratio

of net foreign investment to GM' (dotted line).9 Through 1982 there is no

association between these two variables (correlation =   - .02).   However,

including the data since 1983 raises the correlation to .37. In effect, the

15.8. data since World War II reveal a single incident—the period since

1983—when budget and current-account deficits have been high at the same

time. While this recent co-movement is interesting, it does not provide

strong support for the view that budget deficits cause current-account

deficits. It would be useful to investigate this relationship further,

possibly with data from other countries.



5. Concluding Observations

    The Iticardian approach to budget deficits amounts to the statement that

the government's fiscal impact is summarized by the present value of its

expenditures. Given this present value, rearrangements of the timing of

taxes—as implied by budget deficits—have no first-order effect on the

economy. Second-order effects arise for various reasons, which include the

distorting effects of taxes, the uncertainties about individual incomes and

tax obligations, the imperfections of credit markets, and the finiteness of

life. To say that these effects are second order is not to say that they are

uninteresting; in fact, the analysis of differential taxation in the theory
                                                                         26




of   public finance is second order in the same sense. However, careful

analysis of these effects tends to deliver predictions about budget deficits

that differ from those of standard macroeconomic models.

      I have argued that empirical findings tend mainly to support the

fticárdian viewpoint. However, these findings deal primarily with interest

rates and consumption/saving, and the results are sometimes inconclusive. It

would be useful to assemble additional evidence, especially in an

international context.

      Although the majority of economists still lean toward standard

macroeconomic models of fiscal policy, it is remarkable how respectable the

Ricardian approach has become in the last decade. Most macroeconomists now

feel obligated to state the Ricardian position, even if they then go on to

argue that it is either theoretically or empirically in error. I predict

that this trend will continue and that the Ricardian approach will become the

benchmark model for assessing fiscal policy. This is not to say that most

analysts will embrace Ricardian equivalence and therefore conclude that

fiscal policy is irrelevant. But satisfactory analyses will feature explicit

modeling of elements that lead to departures from Ricardian equivalence, and

the predicted consequences of fiscal policies will flow directly from these

elements.
                                                                                          27



                                              Footnotes
     *professor of Economics, Harvard University, and Research Associate of

the National Bureau of Economic Research and the Rochester Center for

Economic Research. I am grateful for support of research from the National

Science Foundation -

     1The calculations use the government's interest rate in each period to

calculate present values, and assume perfect foresight with respect to future

government expenditures and taxes. For further discussion see Ben McCallum

(1984) and Rohert Barro (1989).

     2The term, Ricardian equivalence theorem, was introduced to

macroeconomists by James Buchanan (1976). After Gerald O!Driscoll (1977)

documented Ricardu's reservations about this result, some economists have

referred to the equivalence finding as being non-Ricardian. But, as far as I-

have been able to discover, David Ricardo (1951) was the first to articulate

this theory. Therefore, the attribution of the equivalence theorem to

Ricardo is appropriate even if he had doubts about some of the theorem's

assumptions. As to whether the presence of this idea in Ricardo's writings

is important for scientific progress, I would refer to Nathan Rosenberg's

(1976, p. 79) general views on innovations in the social sciences: "..                         . what

often happens in economics is that, as concern mounts over a particular

problem ... an increasing number of professionals commit their time and

energies to it. We then eventually realize that there were all sorts of

treatments of the subject in the earlier literature.                       ... We   then proceed to

read much of our more sophisticated present-day undertanding back into the
                                                                             28




work of earlier writers whose analysis was inevitably more fragmentary and

incomplete than the later achievement. It was this retrospective view which

doubtless inspired Whitehead to say somewhere that everything of importance

bas been said before——but by someone who did not discover it.'

    3Philippe Weil (1987) and Miles Kimball (1987) analyze conditions that

ensure an interior solution for intergenerational transfers. Douglas

Bernheim and Kyle Bagwell (1988) argue that difficulties arise if altruistic

transfers are pervasive. See Barro (1989) for a discussion of their

analysis.

    4The assumption is the the real debt remains permanently higher by 81.

For some related calculations, see Merton Miller and Charles Upton (1974,

Chapter 8) and James Poterba and Lawrence Summers (1987, Section I).

    5'rhese results follow if the effects on investment demand are small.

With adjustment costs, investment would tend to respond little to this kind

of temporary change in income taxes.

    6The conditions for optimality, based on results from optimal taxation

theory, appear in David Aschauer and Jeremy Greenwood (1985). On the ootion

of tax smoothing, see AC. Pigou (1928, Chapter 6), Robert Barro (1979,

1986) ,   and Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott (1980).

    7A colleague of mine argues that a "normative" model should be defined as

a model that fits the data badly.

     81 am grateful to Ed Offenbácher for calling my attention to the Israeli

experience. Because of the magnitude of the variations, the Israeli case is

more revealing than the "Reagan experiment" associated with the large U.S.

budget deficits from 1984 to 1986. The effect of the Reagan deficits on
                                                                          29




saving and investment is controversial.

    9The data are quarterly, seasonally-adjusted values from Citibase The

results are similar if the federal surplus is used instead of the total

government surplus.
                                                                        30




                                    References

Ando, Albert and Franca Modigliani, "The tLife Cycle1 Hypothesis of Saving:

    Aggregate Implications and Tests," American Economic Reviewi, 53. March

    1963, 55-84.

Aschauer, David A. and Jeremy Greenwood, "Macroeconomic Effects of Fiscal

    Policy," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 23,

    Autumn 1985, 91- 138.

Bailey, Martin .J., National Income and the Price Level, 2nd edition, McGraw

    Hill, New York, 1971.

Barro, Robert J., "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political

    Economy, 82, November/December 1974, 1095-1117.

___________     The Impact of Social Security on Private Saving: Evidence from

    the 11.5.   Time Series, American Enterprise Institute, Washington DC.

    1978.

__________      "On the Determination of the Public Debt," Journal of Political

    Economy, 87, October 1979, 940-971.

___________     "U.S. Deficits since World War I," Scandinavian Journal of

    Economics, 88, no. 1, 1986, 195-222.

___________     "Governotent Spending, Interest Rates, Prices, and Budget

    Deficits in the United Kingdom, 1701- 1918," Journal of Monetary

    Economics, 20, September 1987, 221-247.

___________     "The Neoclassical Approach to Fiscal Policy," in Robert J.

    Barro, ed., Modern Business Cycle Theory, Harvard University Press,

    Cambridge, MA, 1989.
                                                                         31



Barro,   Robert 3. and Glenn M. MacDonald, Social Security and Consumer

    Spending in an International Cross Section," Journal of Public Economics,

    ii, 1979, 275-289.

Barsky, Robert B. , N. Gregory Mankiw, and Stephen P. Zeldes, "Ricardian

    Consumers with Keynesian Propensities," American Economic Review, 76,

    September 1986, 676-691.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, Andrei Shleifer. and Lawrence H. Summers, "The

    Strategic Bequest Motive," Journal of Political Economy, 93, December

    1985, 1045-1076.

___________________ and Kyle Bagwell, "Is Everything Neutral?" Journal of

    Political Economy, 96, April 1988, 308-338.

Brown, E. Cary, "Fiscal Poicy in the 'Thirties: a Reappraisal," Journal of

    Political Economy, 46, December 1956, 857-879.

Buchanan, James M. ,   "Barro   on the Ricardian Equivalence Theorem," Journal of

    Political Economy, 84, April 1976, 337-342.

______________ and Richard E. Wagner, Democracy in Deficit, Academic Press,

    New York, 1977.

Carroll, Chris and Lawrence B. Summers, "Why Rave Private Savings Rates in

    the United States and Canada Diverged?" Journal of Monetary Economics,

    20, September 1987, 249-279.

Chan, Louis K.C., "Uncertainty and the Neutrality of Government Financing

    Policy," Journal of Iometary Economics, 11, May 1983, 351-372.

Council of Economic Advisers, Annual Report, U.S. Government Printing Office,

    Washington D.C., 1962.
                                                                           32




Darby, Michael IL, The Effects of Social Security on Income and the Capital

    Stock, American Enterprise Institute, Washington D.C., 1979.

Esposito. Louis, "Effect of Social Security on Saving: Review of Studies

    Using U.S. Time-Series Data,TM Social Security Bulletin, 41, May 1978,

    9-17.

Evans, Paul, "Interest Rates and Expected Future Budget Deficits in the

    United States," Journal of Political Economy, 95, February 198Th, 34-58

___________    "Do Budget Deficits Raise Nominal Interest Rates? Evidence from

    Six Industrial Countries," Journal of Iomctary Economics, 20, September

    1987b, 281-300.

Feldstein, Martin S., "Social Security, Induced Retirement, and Aggregate

    Capital Accumulation,'1 Journal of Political Economy, 82,

    September/October 1974, 905-926.

_______________     "Perceived Wealth in Bonds and Social Security: a Comment,"

    Journal of Politicul Economy, 84, April 1976, 331-336.

_______________     "Social   Security and Private Savings: International

    Evidence in an Extended Life Cycle Model," in Martin S. Feldstein acd

    Robert Inman, editors, The Economics of Public Services, Macmillan,

    London, 1977.

______________      "Government   Deficits and Aggregate   Demand," Journal   of
    lometary Economics, 9,     January   1982, 1-20.
llayashi,   Fumio, "Tests for Liquidity Constraints: a Critical Survey,"

    National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 1720, October

    1985.
                                                                         33




Kimball,   Miles S., "Making Sense of Two-Sided Altruism," Jomrnal of Monetary

           Economics, 20, September 1987, 301-326.

King, Mervyn A. ,   iTax Policy and Consumption Smoothing," unpublished, London

    School of Economics, April 1986.

Kochin, Levis A., "Are Future Taxes Anticipated by Consumers?" Joirnal of

    Money, Credit and Banking, 6, August 1974, 385-394.

____________    Daniel K. Benjamin and Mark Meador, "The Observational
    Equivalence of Rational and Irrational Consumers if Taxation Is

    Efficient," in Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Seventh kest Coast

    Academic Conference, San Francisco, 1985.

Kormendi, Roger C. , "Government Debt, Government Spending, and Private Sector

    Behavior," American Economic Review, 73, December 1983, 994-1010.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J. and Lawrence El. Summers, "The Role of

    Interrnerational Transfers in Aggregate Capital Accumulation," Journal

    of Political Economy, 89, August 1981, 706-732.

Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, "A Competitive Theory of

    Fluctuations and the Feasibility and Desirability of Stabilization

    Policy," in Stanley Fischer, editor, Rational Expectations and Economic

    Policy, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1980.

Leiderman, Leo and Assaf Razin, "Testing Ricardian Neutrality with an

    Intertemporal Stochastic Model," Journal of Iomey, Credit and Banking,

    20, February 1988, 1-21.

Leimer, Dean R. and Selig 0. Lesuoy, "   Social   Security and Private Saving:

    New Time-Series Evidence," Journal of Political Economy, 90, June 1982,

    606- 629.
                                                                              34




Mankiw, N. Gregory, "The Optimal Collection of Seigniorage: Theory and

    Evidence,!i Journal of lonetary Economics, 20, September 1987, 327-341.

Mankiw, N. Gregory and Jeffrey A. Miron. "The Changing Behavior of the Term

    Structure of Interest Rates,t' Quarterly Journal of Economics, loi. May

    1986, 211-228.

McCallum, Ben T., "Are Bond-financed Deficits Inflationary? A Rirardian

    Analysis," Journal of Political Economy, 92, February 1984, 123-133.

Meridor, Leora, "The Role of the Public Sectnr in the Israeli Economy,

    1960-1986: Facts, Canses and Implications," Program for the Study of the

    Israeli Economy, M.I.T. ,   Working paper no. 1-88, February 1988.
Miller, Merton H. and Charles W. Upton, ,Vacroeconomics, a Neoclassical

    Introduction, Irwin, Homewood Illinois, 1974.

Modigliani, Franco, "Long-run Implications of Alternative Fiscal Policies and

    the Burden of the National Debt," Economic Journal, 71, December 1961,

    730-755.

___________________ and Richard Brumherg, "Utility Analysis and the

    Consumption Function: an Interpretation of Cross-Section Data," in K.K.

    Kurihara, editor, Post-Keynesian Economics, Rutgers University Press, New

    Brunswick, New Jersey, 1954.

__________________ and Arlie G. Sterling, tcovernment Debt, Government

    Spending and Private Sector Behavior: a Comment," American Econom2c

    Review, 76, December 1986, 1168- 1179.

Mundell, Robert A., "Money, Debt, and the Rate of Interest," in R.A, Mundell,

    Ionetary Theory, Goodyear, Pacific Palisades, California, 1971.
                                                                                          35




U'Driscoll, Gerald P., "The Ricardian Nonequivalence Theorem," Journal of

    Political Economy, 85, February 1977, 207-210.

Pigou, A.C. ,   .4   Study in Public finance, Macmillan, London, 1928.

Plosser. Charles I.. "Government Financing Decisions and Asset Returns,"

    Journal of Monetary Economicm, 9, May 1982, 325-352.

___________________        "Further   Evidence on the Relation between Fiscal Policy

    and the Term Structure," Journal of Monetary Economics, 20, September

    1987, 343-367.

Poterba, James M. and Lawrence H. Summers, "Finite Lifetimes and the Savings

    Effects of Budget Deficits," unpublished, Harvard University, October

    1986.

______________ and ____________,        "Finite   Lifetimes and   the   Savings Effects of

    Budget Deficits," Journal of Monetary Economics, 20, September 1987,

    369-391.

Ricardo, David, "Funding System," in Piero Sraffa, editor, The               Works and

    Correspondence of David Ricardo, volume IV, Pamphlets and Papers,

    1815-1823, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1951.

Rosenberg, Nathan, Perspectives on Technology, Cambridge, Cambridge

    University Press, 1976.

Sahasakul, Chaipat, "The U.S. Evidence on Optimal Taxation over Time,"

    Journal of Monetary Economics, 18, November 1986, 251-275.

Seater, John J. and Robert S. Mariano, "New Tests of the Life Cycle and                  Tax

    Discounting       Hypotheses," Journal of Monetary Economics, 15, March 1985,

    195- 215.
                                                                              36




Siegel, Jeremy J., "Inflation-Induced Distortions in Government and Private

    Saving Statistics," ReviEw of Econotnic.s k Statistics, 61, April 1979,

    83-90.

Sterling, Arlie G., "An Investigation of the Determinants of the Long-Run

    Savings Ratio," unpnblished, M.I.T., May 1977.

Tanner, J. Ernest, "An Empirical Investigation of Tax Discounting," Journal

    of Honey, Credit   and Banking, 11, May 1979, 214-218.
Tobin, James and Willem kiter, 'Fiscal and Monetary Policies, Caiital

    Formation, and Economic Activity," in George M. von Furstenberg. editor,

    The Government and Capital Formation, Ballinger, Cambridge Massachusetts,

    1980.

U.S. treasury Department, The Effect of Deficits on Prices of Financial

    Assets: Theory and Evidence, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington

     D.C. 1984.

Weil, Philippe., "Love Thy Children: Reflections on the Harm Debt

    Neutrality Theorem," Journal of Monetary Economics, 19, May 1987,

    377- 391.

Yotsuzuka, Toshiki "Ricardian Equivalence in the Presence of Capital Market

    Imperfections," Journal of Monetary Economics, 20, September 1987,

    411-436.
 0.3
                                     gross private saving rate
                                                                   /
 0.2                                                              //
                                                              /


 0.1    nationalsaving rate
 0.0
                                                                               /
                                                          A
                                                                              /
                                                                             /
                                                         / \ I
—0.1                             /                                     \\/
                                     gross public saving rate


                                               1
            I                             I                                    I   I

       74   75   76   77    78   79       80   81   82   83             84    85   86   87
                  Figure   1:
                           Saving Rates in Israel, 1974—t987
                  Source: Bank of Israel, Annual Report, 1987
                          a    C


                               09




                          ri


                          o


                               09

                          L    •—




                               C
                               09



                               09




                          .0   -
                               C
                               z
        C   C\2
                  C
Q           Q     C   C
    C   C   C     C   C
