NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OUT OF THE WOODWORK:
ENROLLMENT SPILLOVERS IN THE OREGON HEALTH INSURANCE EXPERIMENT
Adam Sacarny
Katherine Baicker
Amy Finkelstein
Working Paper 26871
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26871

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2020

We are grateful to Heidi Allen, Sarah Miller, Kosali Simon and seminar participants at ASHEcon
and IHEA for helpful comments. We thank Sam Wang for outstanding research assistance on this
study and Rose Burnam for outstanding research assistance on preparatory work. We gratefully
acknowledge funding from the National Institute on Aging: R01-AG034151. This research was
overseen and approved by the institutional review boards of Columbia University, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology and the National Bureau of Economic Research. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26871.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Adam Sacarny, Katherine Baicker, and Amy Finkelstein. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Out of the Woodwork: Enrollment Spillovers in the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment
Adam Sacarny, Katherine Baicker, and Amy Finkelstein
NBER Working Paper No. 26871
March 2020
JEL No. H53,I13,I38
ABSTRACT
We analyze the impact of expanded adult Medicaid eligibility on the Medicaid enrollment of
already-eligible children. To do so, we exploit the 2008 Oregon Medicaid lottery, in which some
low-income uninsured adults were randomly selected for the chance to apply for Medicaid.
Children in these households were eligible for Medicaid irrespective of whether the household
won the lottery. We estimate statistically significant but transitory impacts of adult lottery
selection on children’s Medicaid enrollment: for every 9 adults who enroll in Medicaid due to the
lottery, one additional child also enrolls at the same time. Our results shed light on the existence,
magnitude, and nature of so-called “woodwork effects”.
Adam Sacarny
Mailman School of Public Health
Columbia University
722 West 168th Street
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
ajs2102@columbia.edu

Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics, E52-442
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
afink@mit.edu

Katherine Baicker
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1307 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kbaicker@uchicago.edu

Additional information on the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment is available at
http://www.nber.org/oregon/1.home.html

1. Introduction
With the 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), the United States has moved
closer to universal health insurance eligibility, but universal health insurance enrollment remains more
elusive. Incomplete enrollment is particularly pronounced in the Medicaid population, where 14.3
percent of eligible adults and 7.2 percent of eligible children remain uninsured in spite of access to
free or heavily subsidized coverage (Blumberg et al., 2018). To shed light on barriers to enrollment,
we examine the impact of expanded Medicaid eligibility for adults on the Medicaid enrollment of
their already-eligible children. Estimation of this so-called “woodwork” or “welcome-mat” effect
also has implications for the total costs and benefits of expanded Medicaid eligibility; indeed, states
cited potential woodwork effects to explain their reluctance to expand Medicaid under the ACA
despite substantially enhanced federal subsidies, since the enhanced subsidies did not apply to the
previously-eligible (Sommers and Epstein, 2011).
Credibly estimating woodwork effects, or any spillover effects of a policy, is challenging.
Where the researcher may see a spillover effect from a policy change for group A on the behavior of
group B, the skeptical seminar participant or referee may see a failed placebo test. Moreover, if one
expects spillovers to be smaller than direct effects, plausible spillovers may be too small to be
reliably detected. For good reason, therefore, the empirical bar for credibly identifying spillovers, or
the lack thereof, is high.
Given these concerns, the 2008 Oregon Health Insurance Experiment provides an excellent
opportunity to examine enrollment spillovers. A lottery randomly assigned some low-income adults
and not others the ability to apply for Medicaid. The vast majority of children of these low-income
adults were already eligible for Medicaid, and Medicaid eligibility for children did not depend on
whether their parents won the lottery. The lottery only determined eligibility for adults.

2

We link existing Oregon Health Insurance Experiment data on the households that signed
up for the lottery – including whether they were selected and whether and when they enrolled in
Medicaid – to newly obtained data on Medicaid enrollment for all Oregon Medicaid beneficiaries.
Prior work found that, in the year after random assignment, adults selected by the lottery to be able
to apply for Medicaid were 25 percentage points more likely to enroll in Medicaid than adults who
signed up for the lottery but were not selected (Finkelstein et al., 2012). Here, we use the lottery to
study the impact of this expanded adult eligibility on the enrollment of their previously-eligible
children.
Figures 1 and 2 summarize our key finding: a statistically significant impact of expanded
adult Medicaid eligibility on children’s Medicaid enrollment, with a spillover effect that is about an
order of magnitude smaller than the direct effect. Specifically, we estimate that for every 9 adults
who enroll in Medicaid due to the lottery, one additional child also enrolls. This impact of lottery
selection on child enrollment occurs at the same time as the impact of lottery selection on adult
enrollment. Both the direct effect of winning the lottery on adult enrollment and the spillover effect
on child enrollment attenuate over time as some households not selected in the lottery gradually
enroll in Medicaid through other mechanisms and some selected households that did enroll
following the lottery do not re-enroll. As a result, one year after the lottery, the effect on child
enrollment has declined from the initial, statistically significant increase of 0.024 children (compared
to 0.22 adults) to a statistically insignificant increase of 0.008 children (compared to 0.14 adults). We
estimate that the initial woodwork effect of 0.024 children newly enrolled represents about 5 percent
of the total number of Medicaid-eligible children that could have enrolled in these households.
These results suggest that woodwork effects may be quantitatively less important than
previously conjectured. Claims of potentially large woodwork effects – in excess of half of the direct
effects – were prominent in discussions of the likely impact of the adult Medicaid expansion under
3

the ACA (Murray, 2009; Norman and Ferguson, 2009). The existing literature is primarily based on
difference-in-difference analyses of state Medicaid expansions in the 1990s and 2000s and of the
ACA Medicaid expansions of the 2010s (Aizer and Grogger, 2003; Dubay and Kenney, 2003; Frean
et al., 2017; Hamersma et al., 2019; Hudson and Moriya, 2017; Sommers et al., 2016; Sonier et al.,
2013). Studies of pre-ACA adult Medicaid expansions have tended to find fairly large child
enrollment spillovers; for example, Dubay and Kenney (2003) find that Massachusetts’s adult
Medicaid expansion raised child coverage rates by 15 percentage points. However, analyses of the
ACA Medicaid expansions have tended to find more modest effects, with child Medicaid coverage
rates rising by roughly 3 percentage points due to expanded parental eligibility (Hudson and Moriya,
2017; Sommers et al., 2016); this is roughly comparable to our estimate of an increase in 0.024
children enrolled per winning household relative to the average 0.85 children living in each
household according to survey data. Of course, spillover effects may differ across contexts, and
particularly between the large-scale expansions studied by most of the prior literature and a smallscale expansion such as the one we study in Oregon. The Medicaid enrollment of the children of
adults participating in the Oregon lottery has also been the subject of prior study (DeVoe et al.,
2015a), however the matching of children to parents was based on data that itself was directly
affected by the lottery outcome, raising concerns about inference.1
More broadly, our findings contribute to the growing empirical literature on the pervasive
phenomenon of incomplete take-up of social safety net programs. Commonly hypothesized barriers

The cohort construction is described in Angier et. al. (2014); adults on the lottery list were matched to their children
using data on adult and child Medicaid enrollment within the same household and also on adult and child use of the
OCHIN community health center network. Adults were linked to their children if both adult and child enrolled in
Medicaid and/or if both used a community health center in the network. Unfortunately, these family linkages were made
using data from both pre (2002-2007) and post (2008-2010) lottery, which creates challenges for identifying the impact
of winning the lottery on children’s enrollment, since adult Medicaid enrollment and adult community health center use
were significantly higher among lottery winners (DeVoe et al., 2015b; Finkelstein et al., 2012). Thus, for example, if
children of lottery winners and losers were equally likely to enroll in Medicaid post lottery, children of winners might be
more likely to be matched to their parents since the lottery increased the chance the parents themselves would be
enrolled in Medicaid.
1

4

to take up include lack of information about eligibility, transaction costs associated with enrollment,
or stigma from program participation (Currie, 2006). In the specific context of Medicaid, the ability
of eligible individuals to wait and enroll when needed – so called conditional coverage – is another
potential factor contributing to incomplete formal enrollment at any given point in time (Cutler and
Gruber, 1996). Recent work has identified informational and transactional barriers to take up for
Medicaid (Aizer, 2003; Wright et al., 2017), the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
(Finkelstein and Notowidigdo, 2019; Homonoff and Somerville, 2019), the Earned Income Tax
Credit (Bhargava and Manoli, 2015), and Disability Insurance (Deshpande and Li, 2019). Our
empirical finding of a contemporaneous increase in adult and child enrollment due to winning the
lottery is likewise consistent with both limited information on eligibility and the transaction costs of
enrolling as barriers to children’s Medicaid take up.
Finally, our findings also contribute to the literature that has used the random assignment of
adult Medicaid eligibility from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment to study the impact of
expanding Medicaid eligibility. Prior work has examined effects on adult health care use, health,
financial outcomes, and voter participation over the first two years. (Baicker et al., 2014, 2013;
Baicker and Finkelstein, 2019; Finkelstein et al., 2012, 2016; Taubman et al., 2014). It found that, for
the adult lottery participants, Medicaid increased health care use across a wide range of settings,
reduced out-of-pocket medical spending and the prevalence of unpaid medical debt, reduced
depression and improved self-reported health, had no detectable impact on employment, earnings or
several measures of physical health, and had a short-lived impact on increased voter turnout. The
current paper expands the scope of the analysis of the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment to
consider potential indirect effects on individuals not directly subject to the experiment, namely the
children of participating adults.

5

The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the institutional setting and
the possible mechanisms by which winning the lottery for adult Medicaid eligibility might affect
already-eligible children’s Medicaid enrollment. Section 3 describes the empirical framework and
data. Section 4 presents the results. A final section concludes.
2. Setting
2.1 Medicaid in Oregon
Oregon’s Medicaid program – the Oregon Health Plan (OHP) – consists of two distinct
programs: OHP Plus and OHP Standard. The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment was a lottery
for adults for coverage through OHP Standard; children of lottery participants were eligible for
Medicaid coverage through OHP Plus and remained eligible regardless of whether their parents
won.
At the time of the Oregon experiment, OHP Plus served the categorically eligible Medicaid
population, including older adults, adults with disabilities, pregnant women, people eligible for
TANF, and foster children, with coverage in each category available up to certain income limits.
Children age 0-5 below 133% of the federal poverty line and children age 6-18 below 100% of the
poverty line were eligible for OHP Plus; children between these limits and 185% of the federal
poverty line were eligible for health coverage through the Children’s Health Insurance Program or
CHIP (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2019; National Academy for State Health Policy, n.d.).
OHP Standard, the program subject to the 2008 lottery, covered uninsured adults age 19-64
under the federal poverty line who did not otherwise qualify for OHP Plus. By construction
therefore, the child of any adult eligible via lottery for OHP Standard (i.e. below 100% of the federal
poverty line) would be eligible for OHP Plus. OHP Standard and Plus both provided
comprehensive insurance benefit packages without cost-sharing, though OHP Plus’s package was

6

broader and had no premiums for children while OHP Standard charged a premium of up to $20
per month (Berkobien, 2008; Oregon Department of Human Services, 2008a).
2.2 Lotteried Eligibility for OHP Standard
Enrollment in OHP Plus was continuously open and so children of adults eligible for OHP
Standard were continuously eligible to enroll in OHP Plus. However, enrollment in OHP Standard
had been closed to new enrollment since 2004 due to limited state budgets. In 2008, with a budget
sufficient to cover an estimated 10,000 additional individuals and anticipating significant excess
demand if enrollment were re-opened without restriction, the state received permission from federal
regulators to conduct a lottery.
For a five week period in January-February 2008, the state allowed anyone to sign up for the
list from which lottery draws would be taken, which was called the reservation list. When individuals
signed up for the lottery, they were told to list members of their household over the age of 19 whom
they wanted to add to the reservation list, and all these individuals were included on the list.
Extensive measures were taken to encourage sign-up: individuals could enroll by multiple means
(telephone, fax, in-person, snail mail, and online) and the form was only one page long to simplify
joining (see Appendix Figure A1). The state ran an intensive outreach campaign to solicit
submissions, including mailing all recipients of state programs for low-income beneficiaries. No
efforts were made to verify information contained in submissions, and 89,824 individuals joined the
reservation list.
Following the sign-up period, the state began conducting lottery draws from the reservation
list. Eight draws in total were conducted – roughly one a month – from the first draw on March 10,
2008 to the last draw on September 11, 2008. Although draws were conducted at the individual
level, the state considered all adults in the individual’s household to be selected by the lottery.

7

Ultimately, 35,169 individuals were selected in order to enroll 10,000 additional people in OHP
Standard.
Lottery selection conferred eligibility to apply for OHP Standard. Upon selection, the state
mailed the selected household an OHP enrollment form. From the date of mailing, the household
had 45 days to submit the relevant documentation to the state. The state sought to encourage
selected households to submit their forms by mailing them a reminder and calling them to offer
assistance. Upon receipt of the OHP enrollment form, the state verified eligibility for an OHP plan
and enrolled the participant with coverage retroactive to the weekday after the enrollment form was
mailed. We call this date the “adult eligibility date”.
Among those selected, about 60% applied for coverage. The incomplete rate of applying
could reflect inattention to the paperwork that was mailed, the burden of filling out the application
and providing supporting documentation, and/or a realization that they were unlikely to be eligible.
About half of those who applied were deemed eligible and enrolled in Medicaid. The main reason
for a rejected application was failure to meet the income requirement, which required the last
quarter’s income to correspond to an annual income below the poverty line.2 For more details on
the lottery and application process, see Finkelstein et al. (2012) and Finkelstein et al. (2010).
2.3 Enrolling in OHP Plus
At the time of the lottery, the state was continuously accepting new applications for OHP
Plus. To initiate an application, anyone could make a request online, by phone, by mail, or in person.
Those applying for OHP, whether they were selected off the reservation list or they requested an
application from the state, were sent the same 46-page packet. At a minimum, applicants were
required to fill out a 4-page section that requested information about themselves and their

As noted, income limits for children extended higher, to 185% of the poverty line, mostly due to CHIP eligibility.
Thus, spillovers could occur even for lottery list adults who were or would have been rejected due to high income. In
practice, as discussed below, we found no evidence of spillovers onto CHIP enrollment.
2

8

household. Applicants were all also required to provide proof of address, citizenship (if they were
U.S. citizens), and income. Depending on the household’s circumstances vis-à-vis eligibility, an
applicant could be required to fill out any of an additional nine sections in the packet, typically 1-2
pages each.
While all children of adults eligible for OHP Standard were eligible for OHP Plus regardless
of the lottery outcome, a parent’s winning the lottery might increase the chances of their children
enrolling in OHP Plus by reducing the transaction costs of enrolling them or addressing information
barriers about their eligibility. The OHP Standard application form asked the applicant to “list
yourself and everyone living with you” and included a checkbox next to each name to request
benefits for that person (see Appendix Figure A2). The form therefore gave parents an opportunity
to request benefits even if they were not aware of the eligibility rules. In addition, staff who validated
OHP Standard applications were instructed to “check to see if the applicant qualifie[d] for any other
medical programs” (Oregon Department of Human Services, 2008b). Staff may have interpreted this
directive as encouraging them to check on the eligibility of children in the same households as
applicants. Finally, when participants applied in-person, case workers may have encouraged them to
check the box on the application to enroll their children in coverage.
3. Empirical Framework and Data.
3.1. Empirical Framework
Our analytic framework closely follows the standard approach used in prior analyses of the
Oregon Health Insurance Experiment (see e.g. Finkelstein et al., 2012). However, unlike the prior
studies, our unit of analysis is the household rather than the individual. As we describe above, the
household is the level of treatment (i.e. lottery selection conferred eligibility for all household
adults). We compare Medicaid enrollment for households selected by the lottery (the treatment
group) to households who signed up for the lottery but were not selected (the control group). We
9

look separately at adult Medicaid enrollment (which in prior work was considered the “first stage” of
the experiment) and children’s Medicaid enrollment, the focus of our current analysis.
The basic estimating equation is:
!" = $% + $' ()**+,-" + ." $/ + 0" $1 + 2"

(1)

The outcomes (!" ) vary across analyses but are always some measure of household ℎ’s Medicaid
enrollment. We examine Medicaid enrollment for children and adults separately and at various time
periods after the lottery. Our main outcome variable is the number of children (or adults) enrolled at
a given point in time relative to the adult eligibility date for the lottery draw – the weekday after the
enrollment form was sent to winners of that lottery draw. We also examine indicator variables for
whether any children (or any adults) in the household are enrolled, as well as the number of child (or
adult) member-months enrolled over a given time period.
The indicator variable ()**+,-" takes the value of 1 if the household was selected by the
lottery and 0 if the household was on the reservation list but not selected by the lottery. The key
coefficient of interest is $' , which measures the impact of the household’s lottery selection on
enrollment.
We denote by ." the set of covariates that are correlated with treatment probability and thus
must be controlled for so that $' produces an unbiased estimate of the impact of winning the
lottery. Specifically, probability of treatment (i.e. winning the lottery) varied based on the number of
adults in the household that were listed on the lottery sign-up form (hereafter “household size”).
Although the state randomly sampled from individuals on the list, the entire household of any
selected individual was considered selected and eligible to apply for insurance. As a result, selected
(treatment) individuals are disproportionately drawn from households of larger household size. We
therefore include indicator variables for the household size; 87% of households listed 1 member on
the reservation list, 13% had 2 members, and less than 0.1% had 3 members. Lottery selection was
10

random conditional on household size. For more detail on how the lottery was conducted – as well
as verification that randomization was conducted as described – see Finkelstein et al. (2012).
We denote by 0" a second set of covariates that can be included to potentially raise statistical
power because they are predictive of outcomes. These covariates are not needed for $' to give an
unbiased causal estimate of the effect of lottery selection as they are independent of treatment status
due to randomization, but they may improve the precision of the estimates. In our baseline analyses,
we include indicators for lottery draw as well as four pre-lottery Medicaid enrollment measures
(from January 15, 2008): number of reservation list adults enrolled, any reservation list adult
enrolled, number of children enrolled, and any child enrolled. We show in robustness analyses below
that results are similar but, as expected, less precise when pre-lottery enrollment measures are
omitted.
For control households, we follow the approach of Finkelstein et al., (2012) and randomly
assign each household a lottery draw, stratified by household size; specifically, for each household
size, lottery draw assignment was randomly assigned to controls in proportion to the distribution of
treatment households of that household size across lottery draws. This approach allows us to
measure outcomes relative to each household’s “lottery draw” adult eligibility date and to control for
“lottery draw” for both treatment and control households.
3.2. Data sources and variable construction
We analyze two primary data sets, both of which we obtained from the State of Oregon.
First, we use the state-provided reservation list, which includes the information each individual
provided at sign-up, as well as whether they were selected by the lottery, and if so, in which lottery
draw. The self-reported sign-up information consists of name, address, sex, and birthdate of the
individual signing up as well as anyone else in the household 19 or older whom the individual
wanted to add to the reservation list. All individuals on the reservation list are 19-64; there are no
11

children on the reservation list. To test treatment-control balance, we additionally use prerandomization measures of hospitalizations derived from a linkage to hospital discharge data (see
Finkelstein et al. 2012 for more details).
Second, we use data on Medicaid enrollment for all Oregon Medicaid enrollees in 2008,
2009, and 2010. These are spell-level data which include the beginning and end date (if any) of the
spell, the enrollee’s name, date of birth and sex; the data also include address information with start
and end dates for each location during the enrollment spell. We use these data to construct our
outcome variables (Medicaid enrollment over particular periods of time). Our main analyses focus
on enrollment within the first year post-lottery; in supplemental analyses, we show outcomes up to
720 days, the longest time period we can study before a new lottery for OHP Standard essentially
treats the entire control group (see Finkelstein et al., 2016). The data contain both Medicaid and
CHIP enrollment records. For our analysis, we count CHIP enrollment as a form of Medicaid
enrollment.3
We use the address information to match the reservation list to the Medicaid enrollment data
in order to measure the number of children and adults in each household who were enrolled in
Medicaid at various points in time. Appendix A provides more detail on this matching exercise.
Briefly, we use ArcGIS to geocode addresses in both data sets; this returns a latitude-longitude
coordinate pair for each address (accurate to 1.1 meters). We are able to geocode 80 percent of all
addresses on the reservation list (or 91 percent once we removed the 12 percent of addresses that
listed a PO Box and therefore could not be geocoded) and 87 percent of the addresses in the

Because everyone who was eligible for the OHP Standard expansion had family income below 100% FPL, we expect
reservation list children of ‘complier’ adults (who gain, or would gain, coverage due to winning the lottery) to all be
eligible for traditional Medicaid and not CHIP. And in practice, we did not detect changes in CHIP enrollment due to
winning the lottery. However, we included CHIP in the analysis because the state did not verify eligibility of reservation
list households unless they won the lottery and applied for coverage. Thus, higher income households could have
entered and won the lottery; households may also have experienced income shocks between entering the lottery and
winning. These households would not be able to enroll adults in OHP Standard, but could end up having children
covered under OHP Plus or CHIP.
3

12

Medicaid enrollment data. We also extract and standardize apartment and unit numbers when they
are available. We then match the geocoded addresses in the two data sets. For each reservation list
household, we define the number of children enrolled in Medicaid as the number of individuals
under age 19 enrolled at the address the household provided when signing up for the reservation list.
We require that children be under 19 one year after the adult eligibility date for the last lottery draw
(October 8, 2009) to ensure that they are children under Medicaid rules for the entire analysis
period. We define the number of adults enrolled in Medicaid as the number of reservation list
members in the household who were enrolled at the address; to count as a reservation list match, the
record must have the same birthdate and sex in both datasets.
Addresses on the lottery list were self-reported by households at the time of lottery sign-up,
while addresses in the Medicaid data reflect the most recent address that Medicaid has on file. These
addresses may differ. A potential threat to our research design would occur if the addresses of
previously enrolled children were updated as a result of their parents winning the lottery, enrolling in
Medicaid, and updating the addresses on file for the entire family. This scenario could spuriously
lead us to find more children enrolled in Medicaid among lottery winners than lottery losers even if
there was no woodwork effect. To alleviate this concern, if a Medicaid enrollee has multiple
addresses, we define the baseline address in the enrollment data as the first address on file starting
from January 1, 2008, and only use this baseline address for matching the reservation list households
to Medicaid enrollment. We later show in robustness analyses that our findings are similar if we
instead use contemporaneous addresses.
We expect our outcome variables – counts of children and adults enrolled at reservation list
households – to have measurement error arising from the imperfect matching of Medicaid enrollees
to households on the reservation list using the address information in each data set. This
measurement error may include both false positives (the reservation list household matches to
13

enrollment of other households) and false negatives (the reservation list household has some
members enrolled in Medicaid that we fail to match). Under the null hypothesis that winning the
lottery has no spillover effect on child enrollment, false positives and false negatives are expected to
be balanced between treatment and control households due to random assignment of treatment
status. However, under the alternative hypothesis that Medicaid eligibility for adults does have
(positive) spillover effects onto the enrollment of children, false negative matches will
disproportionately occur in treatment households because we will fail to match some of the marginal
enrollees. We thus expect attenuation bias in $' , the estimated impact of lottery selection on
enrollment, for our primary outcome, the number of children enrolled in Medicaid in the
household.4 Below, we use an alternative and arguably more precise measure of adult enrollment to
estimate the extent of measurement error in our adult enrollment measures; under the assumption
that the extent of mis-measurement is the same for children and adult enrollment, we show that
adjusting for this measurement error has little quantitative impact.
3.3. Sample Definition and Summary Statistics.
We define our study sample based on households on the reservation list. Following
Finkelstein et al. (2012), we exclude individuals and households that were not eligible for OHP
Standard because they gave an address outside of Oregon, were not in the right age range, died prior
to the lottery, had institutional addresses, were signed up by third parties, would have been eligible
for Medicare by the end of our study period, or were inadvertently included on the original list
multiple times by the state. This leaves us with the 74,922 individuals that formed the analysis
sample of Finkelstein et al. (2012). These individuals represent 66,210 households, our unit of
analysis.

We study two other enrollment measures. The first is member-months of enrollment, where we expect attenuation bias
under woodwork effects for the same reason as described above. The other is a binary indicator for any child
enrollment; with this nonlinear transformation of the enrollment count, the bias in $' is of indeterminate sign.
4

14

We further restrict to the 53,147 (80.3%) of these households that have reservation list
addresses that we successfully geocoded. Finally, to remove outlier observations for which
enrollment is likely measured with substantial error, we exclude the 274 households above the 99th
percentile of pre-lottery number of children enrolled in Medicaid (measured on January 15, 2008).
The 99th percentile among households with a successfully geocoded address is five children enrolled.
This exclusion is designed to alleviate the concern that a reservation list household inadvertently
matched to a large number of children outside that household; for example, a household in an
apartment complex that failed to provide a unit number on the reservation list would match to all
children in the building without a unit number in their Medicaid addresses. We explore robustness
to our handling of outliers below.
These criteria result in a final analysis sample size of 52,873 households. Table 2 shows
descriptive statistics of variables measured pre-randomized for control group households, as well as
treatment-control differences. Panel A shows variables derived from the self-reported information
provided on the reservation list and Panel B shows four measures of baseline Medicaid enrollment
(as of January 15, 2008). Column 1 indicates that in our analysis sample, the average age of the
household member who signed up was 40, 58% were women, and 93% listed English as their
preferred language; the median income in the household’s ZIP code was, on average, $39,774. Prior
to randomization, 22 percent of households in our sample had at least one child enrolled in
Medicaid and, conditional on enrollment, 1.9 children were enrolled. Consistent with prior work
(Finkelstein et al. 2012), only a small fraction (3%) of households had a reservation list adult enrolled
before randomization. Columns 2 and 3 look at the treatment-control balance of these variables.
Only one of the 11 measures – sex – is imbalanced between treatment and control (as it was in the
sample analyzed in Finkelstein et al. 2012). The fact that baseline Medicaid enrollment is statistically
indistinguishable between treatment and control (panel B) helps to verify that children gaining
15

coverage did not receive it retroactive to before the date on which we measure baseline enrollment.
This is consistent with documentation from the state that coverage for adults was retroactive to a
later date – the weekday after the enrollment form was sent to the household, which we have called
the adult eligibility date in this manuscript – and supports our use of these covariates to raise
statistical power, although we will also show robustness to omitting them.5
Finally, to estimate the number of children “at risk” of gaining coverage through the
woodwork effect, we draw on additional data from a mail survey administered around the time of
the lottery drawings to a random 75 percent of our analysis subsample of 52,873 households;
Section VC of Finkelstein et al. (2012) provides more detail on this survey. In our analysis
subsample, the survey had a response rate of 46%. Among respondents, the average number of
children per household was 0.85. Using the Medicaid enrollment data prior to the lottery, we
estimate that on average, control group lottery participants had 0.42 children enrolled in Medicaid.
While these numbers come from different sources (survey responses among the subsample of
responders vs. matched administrative data for everyone)6 and cover slightly different time periods,
together they allow us to form a rough estimate of the size of the risk set: we estimate that there
were about 0.4 children who could potentially have come out of the woodwork per lottery
household.

The sample analyzed here differs from the one analyzed in Finkelstein et al. (2012) in two respects. First, it is limited to
households with addresses we could geocode; this meant, in particular, that we omitted the 12% of households on the
reservation list that provided P.O. boxes for their address because they could not be geocoded. Second, we analyze
outcomes at the household level rather than the individual level. For completeness, Appendix Table A1 shows all of the
variables in Table 1 – as well as pre-randomization measures of hospital utilization – for our household-level analysis
sample (column 1), the full household-level analysis sample based on the analysis sample in Finkelstein et al. (2012)
(column 2), and the individual-level analysis sample analyzed in Finkelstein et al. (2012) (column 3). Appendix Table A2
then shows balance tests for each of these three samples and for each of the three sets of variables (where feasible) as
well as omnibus tests of balance across all the available sets of variables. We are unable to reject the null hypothesis that
the covariates are balanced across treatment and control for all 10 of these tests.
6 We suspect non-respondents have similar average numbers of children because, prior to the lottery, we estimate the
average number of children enrolled in Medicaid to be 0.42 for control households who responded to the survey and
0.41 for control households who did not.
5

16

4. Results
4.1. Spillover estimates
Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the time path of effects of winning the lottery on children’s
enrollment and on adult enrollment. Both graphs plot treatment effects on the number of children
or adults enrolled at varying times relative to the date of adult eligibility – the date that coverage
would begin for adults who enrolled due to the lottery draw; the adult eligibility date is denoted with
a dashed vertical line. We plot the estimated effects every 30 days, from 30 days prior to adult
eligibility to 360 days after, which corresponds to our analysis period of 1 year post adult eligibility.
Figure 1 shows the impact of lottery selection on the enrollment of the household’s children.
As expected, the estimates of effects prior to the adult eligibility date are statistically insignificant.
There is a large, concentrated increase in children’s coverage immediately after adult eligibility.
Figure 2 shows that the timing of the increase in children’s enrollment mirrors the timing of the
increase in enrollment for adults; this is consistent with children and adults applying for OHP
together and the state enrolling them with roughly the same start dates. Both the child and adult
enrollment effects peak around 90 days and decline after that.
Table 2 presents point estimates of the coverage effects measured at 90 days after adult
eligibility. Winning the lottery increases the expected number of children enrolled by 0.024. This
represents about one child for every 41 winning households, or about a 3 percentage point increase
relative to the 0.85 children per household that we estimated from the survey data. We find a
significant effect on the extensive margin of any child enrollment: winning the lottery increases the
probability a household enrolls at least one child by 1.3 percentage points. We also consider
member-months, i.e. the total months of enrollment for all children in the household during the 90
days following adult eligibility. Winning the lottery raises child member-months by 0.07. All of these
effects are statistically significant at the <0.01% level.
17

We provide several ways to benchmark our baseline estimate of an increase in children’s
enrollment of 0.024 per winning household. One is to contrast it with the estimate in Table 2 of the
0.22 increase from winning the lottery on the number of enrolled adults. The ratio of the spillover
effect on children to the direct effect on adults is 0.11, indicating that one child was enrolled in
Medicaid for every 9 adults who took up coverage due to the lottery. Another informative
benchmark is to note that the woodwork effect of 0.024 children gaining coverage represents only
about 5 percent of the approximately 0.4 average number of children not enrolled in Medicaid prelottery in reservation list households – our estimate in Section 3.3 of the number that could
potentially have gained coverage when adults applied. Thus the woodwork effect we estimate, while
statistically significant, is only a fraction of its potential size.
The initial Medicaid coverage period for children (or adults) was the 6 months after
enrollment began, excluding the first calendar month. To retain coverage past this point, the state
required both adults and children to reapply and demonstrate that they were still eligible (Oregon
Department of Human Services, 2008c). Figure 1 shows that a decline in the treatment effects on
the number of children covered occurs roughly 180-210 days after adult eligibility. The timing
suggests that some of the children who gained coverage through woodwork effects did not recertify
their eligibility.
Table 3 quantifies how the woodwork and direct effects decline over time. At one year,
woodwork effects are one-third the magnitude of the 90 day estimate and are no longer statistically
significant. Effects for adults also decline, but at a somewhat slower rate. As a result, whereas at 90
days nine adults gain coverage for every child, at one year the ratio rises to 17 covered adults per
covered child.
To better understand the sources of attenuating treatment effects, Figure 3 plots the
predicted mean number of children enrolled in the treatment and control groups from the
18

regression in equation (1) at various 30 day intervals from the adult eligibility date; for comparison,
Figure 4 plots the analogous estimates for adult enrollment. For both groups, the figures show that
two factors contribute to the attenuation of the treatment effects: a drop off in the enrollment of the
treatment group when recertification is required (180-210 days from adult eligibility), and a secular
increase in enrollment in the control group. For children (Figure 3), the latter effect appears
quantitatively much more important, suggesting that the woodwork effect often acts to hasten the
enrollment of eligible children who would otherwise have gained coverage within the year. For
adults (Figure 4), the decline in treatment group enrollment around the recertification period appears
to be the main driver of the attenuation; the only way control group adults (who lost the lottery)
could enroll in Medicaid is if they became categorically eligible for OHP Plus.
In the appendix, we extend the analysis of the treatment effects out to 720 days for both
children and adults (Appendix Figures A3 and A4). The estimates become somewhat noisier as they
extend past the one year mark because we must increasingly up-weight a portion of the study
population to adjust for a new lottery for OHP Standard that the state conducted beginning in fall
2009 (see Baicker et al., 2013 and Finkelstein et al., 2016 for more detail). Regardless, our finding of
economically small and statistically insignificant woodwork effects at one year continues to hold
over this longer horizon; adult enrollment effects continue to decline in this period.
4.2. Heterogeneity in spillover effects
Table 4 explores two dimensions of potential heterogeneity in spillover effects. Panel A
examines the extent to which the spillover effects reflect previously unenrolled children gaining
coverage rather than previously enrolled children being more likely to retain their coverage.
Specifically, we redefine the outcome to either only count children who were not enrolled in
Medicaid prior to randomization (left side) or to only count children who were enrolled previously
(right side). Effects are statistically significant on both outcomes, but the gains are concentrated in
19

previously unenrolled children, where the point estimate amounts to about three-fourths of the total
enrollment effect. This result suggests that woodwork effects mostly operate by bringing new
children into coverage, with smaller effects on the retention of the previously enrolled.
Panel B explores the extent to which the woodwork effect is concentrated in the threequarters of households that did not already have a child enrolled in Medicaid as compared to the one
quarter that had some ex ante child enrollment. For households without prior enrollment, effects are
similar in magnitude to the full sample and highly statistically significant. Effects for households
with prior enrollment are also similar in magnitude but are measured more imprecisely, at least partly
reflecting the smaller sample. The estimates suggest that effects may be similar for both household
types.
4.3. Sensitivity analysis
As noted earlier, mismeasurement of addresses – specifically false negatives – may attenuate
our estimates of woodwork effects. To gauge the potential magnitude of this attention bias, we make
use of an alternative – and arguably more accurate – measure of adult Medicaid enrollment
produced by the state Division of Medical Assistance Programs (DMAP) and used in prior Oregon
study analyses.7 We estimate a “correction factor” (4) as the ratio of treatment effects on adult
enrollment (i.e. $' ) estimated using the address-based measure of adult enrollment and the DMAPbased measure. Appendix Table A3 presents these two estimates as well as the correction factor (i.e.
their ratio), which ranges from about 0.71 to 0.73 depending on the time frame; in other words, the
address-based matching yields estimated treatment effects for adult enrollment that are 27 to 29

To examine the two different measures of adult Medicaid enrollment, we studied their agreement for the 52,873
reservation list household heads in the analysis sample in December 2008. The results are consistent with a lower rate of
false negatives for the DMAP measure. Specifically, both yielded the same enrollment status for the vast majority of
adults (92%), but when they disagreed, it was largely because the DMAP measure detected enrollment when the addressbased measure did not (7%) rather than vice versa (1%).
7

20

percent lower than the DMAP-based matching approach. Under the assumption that the rate at
which we fail to capture Medicaid enrollment is the same for reservation list adults and for their
children, we can then apply the same correction factor to the estimated treatment effects for
children. The last column of Table A3 shows the results. The estimated impact on the number of
children enrolled at 90 days increases from 0.024 to 0.034. Of course, to the extent that even the
DMAP-based matching has measurement error, the correction factor (for both adults and children)
may be itself an under-estimate.
Appendix Table A4 explores additional robustness exercises. Column 1 replicates the
baseline results from Table 2. Subsequent columns show sensitivity to specific alternatives, with
results that are generally similar to baseline. Column 2 omits controls for pre-randomization
Medicaid enrollment – we control only for household size and lottery draw. As expected given the
use of these controls to raise power, treatment effects are similar but measured more imprecisely.
Column 3 uses contemporaneous addresses rather than the first observed address to match
reservation list households to Medicaid enrollment data. Using contemporaneous addresses is
appealing because it is possible that the initial addresses in the enrollment data could be out of date,
leading to mis-measurement when we match the reservation list to enrollment. However, this
approach could lead to upwardly biased estimates if, for example, the state updates children’s
addresses when their parents enroll in Medicaid. Compared to the baseline specification, effects are
slightly larger using the contemporaneous address approach.
Columns 4 and 5 explore alternative approaches to handling outliers. In column 4, we take a
more draconian approach, further omitting households above the 95th percentile (more than 3
enrolled children) rather than our baseline approach of omitting households above the 99th
percentile (more than 5 enrolled children); the estimates are quite similar, showing that lesser outliers
do not drive our findings. In column 5, we make no outlier exclusion, adding back the 275 outlier
21

households representing just 0.5% of the overall sample. This change shrinks estimates of the effect
on the number children enrolled by about 40 percent and more than doubles the standard error, so
that the woodwork effect is no longer statistically significant. We suspect that results including
outliers are substantially contaminated by measurement error: the outlier households have a median
pre-randomization enrollment of 7 children and a mean of 11; some are (implausibly) matched to
hundreds of enrolled children. Not surprisingly, the estimates of the woodwork effect on whether a
household has any children enrolled are essentially unaffected by the treatment of outliers.
5. Conclusion
We use the 2008 randomized expansion of adult Medicaid eligibility in Oregon to better
understand the magnitude and duration of woodwork, or spillover, effects of Medicaid eligibility
expansions onto populations that were already Medicaid-eligible. We find clear evidence of
woodwork effects: for every 9 adults who gained coverage from the expansion, so did one alreadyeligible child. While statistically significant, the increase in the number of eligible children who
enrolled in Medicaid represents only about 5 percent of our estimated number of children of lottery
list adults who could have enrolled. Both the direct effect on adult enrollment and the spillover
effect on children’s enrollment fade over the subsequent year. While the decline in direct effects is
mostly driven by disenrollment of adults due to recertification rules, the decline in spillover effects is
largely the result of children in control households enrolling in Medicaid; this pattern is consistent
with adult Medicaid eligibility driving earlier enrollment of already-eligible children who otherwise
would have enrolled soon thereafter.
In the last decade, the U.S. has moved closer to universal insurance eligibility by making
both Medicaid and subsidized private health insurance available to a much broader population. Our
findings, estimated from an earlier and smaller Medicaid eligibility expansion to a group similar to
those covered by more recent Medicaid expansions, shed light on the determinants of incomplete
22

take-up of Medicaid. The time pattern of the spillover effects – occurring contemporaneously with
the direct enrollment effects – is consistent with both information frictions and application costs
limiting take-up. That said, the magnitude of the effects we estimate cast some doubt on the
potential for large spillovers from expanding Medicaid eligibility for adults on Medicaid enrollment
of their already-eligible children. Taken together, the findings highlight the continuing challenges
that policymakers will face in translating increases in Medicaid eligibility into increases in Medicaid
enrollment.

23

References
Aizer, A., 2003. Low Take-Up in Medicaid: Does Outreach Matter and for Whom? American
Economic Review 93, 238–241. https://doi.org/10.1257/000282803321947119
Aizer, A., Grogger, J., 2003. Parental Medicaid Expansions and Health Insurance Coverage (No.
w9907). National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w9907
Angier, H., Gold, R., Crawford, C., P. O’Malley, J., J. Tillotson, C., Marino, M., DeVoe, J.E., 2014.
Linkage Methods for Connecting Children with Parents in Electronic Health Record and State
Public Health Insurance Data. Matern Child Health J 18, 2025–2033.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10995-014-1453-8
Baicker, K., Finkelstein, A., 2019. The Impact of Medicaid Expansion on Voter Participation:
Evidence from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment 14, 383–400.
https://doi.org/10.1561/100.00019026
Baicker, K., Finkelstein, A., Song, J., Taubman, S., 2014. The Impact of Medicaid on Labor Market
Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment.
American Economic Review 104, 322–328. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.104.5.322
Baicker, K., Taubman, S.L., Allen, H.L., Bernstein, M., Gruber, J.H., Newhouse, J.P., Schneider,
E.C., Wright, B.J., Zaslavsky, A.M., Finkelstein, A.N., 2013. The Oregon Experiment — Effects
of Medicaid on Clinical Outcomes. N Engl J Med 368, 1713–1722.
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa1212321
Berkobien, R., 2008. Background Brief on Oregon Health Plan, Background Brief - Legislative
Committee Services.
Bhargava, S., Manoli, D., 2015. Psychological Frictions and the Incomplete Take-Up of Social
Benefits: Evidence from an IRS Field Experiment. American Economic Review 105, 3489–
3529. https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20121493
Blumberg, L.J., Holahan, J., Karpman, M., Elmendorf, C., 2018. Characteristics of the Remaining
Uninsured: An Update, U.S. Health Reform—Monitoring and Impact.
Currie, J., 2006. The Take-Up of Social Benefits, in: Public Policy and the Income Distribution.
Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 80–148.
Cutler, D.M., Gruber, J., 1996. Does Public Insurance Crowd out Private Insurance? The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 111, 391–430. https://doi.org/10.2307/2946683
Deshpande, M., Li, Y., 2019. Who Is Screened Out? Application Costs and the Targeting of
Disability Programs. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
DeVoe, J.E., Marino, M., Angier, H., O’Malley, J.P., Crawford, C., Nelson, C., Tillotson, C.J., Bailey,
S.R., Gallia, C., Gold, R., 2015a. Effect of Expanding Medicaid for Parents on Children’s Health
Insurance Coverage: Lessons From the Oregon Experiment. JAMA Pediatr 169, e143145.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2014.3145
DeVoe, J.E., Marino, M., Gold, R., Hoopes, M.J., Cowburn, S., O’Malley, J.P., Heintzman, J., Gallia,
C., McConnell, K.J., Nelson, C.A., Huguet, N., Bailey, S.R., 2015b. Community Health Center
Use After Oregon’s Randomized Medicaid Experiment. The Annals of Family Medicine 13,
312–320. https://doi.org/10.1370/afm.1812
Dubay, L., Kenney, G., 2003. Expanding Public Health Insurance to Parents: Effects on Children’s
Coverage under Medicaid. Health Serv Res 38, 1283–1302. https://doi.org/10.1111/14756773.00177
Finkelstein, A., Notowidigdo, M., 2019. Take-up and Targeting: Experimental Evidence from
SNAP. Quarterly Journal of Economics.
24

Finkelstein, A., Taubman, S., Allen, H., Gruber, J., Newhouse, J.P., Wright, B., Oregon Health Study
Group, 2010. Oregon Health Insurance Experiment Analysis Plan: Evidence from the First
Year.
Finkelstein, A., Taubman, S., Wright, B., Bernstein, M., Gruber, J., Newhouse, J.P., Allen, H.,
Baicker, K., Oregon Health Study Group, 2012. The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment:
Evidence from the First Year*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1057–1106.
https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjs020
Finkelstein, A.N., Taubman, S.L., Allen, H.L., Wright, B.J., Baicker, K., 2016. Effect of Medicaid
Coverage on ED Use — Further Evidence from Oregon’s Experiment. N Engl J Med 375,
1505–1507. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1609533
Frean, M., Gruber, J., Sommers, B.D., 2017. Premium subsidies, the mandate, and Medicaid
expansion: Coverage effects of the Affordable Care Act. Journal of Health Economics 53, 72–
86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhealeco.2017.02.004
Hamersma, S., Kim, M., Timpe, B., 2019. The Effect of Parental Medicaid Expansions on Children’s
Health Insurance Coverage: Parental Medicaid & Child Insurance. Contemp Econ Policy 37,
297–311. https://doi.org/10.1111/coep.12392
Homonoff, T., Somerville, J., 2019. Program Recertification Costs: Evidence from SNAP.
Hudson, J.L., Moriya, A.S., 2017. Medicaid Expansion For Adults Had Measurable ‘Welcome Mat’
Effects On Their Children. Health Affairs 36, 1643–1651.
https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2017.0347
Kaiser Family Foundation, 2019. Trends in Medicaid Income Eligibility Limits [WWW Document].
URL https://www.kff.org/data-collection/trends-in-medicaid-income-eligibility-limits/
(accessed 8.12.19).
Murray, S., 2009. States Resist Medicaid Growth; Governors Fear For Their Budgets. The
Washington Post A01.
National Academy for State Health Policy, n.d. State CHIP Fact Sheets—2008: Oregon.
Norman, J., Ferguson, E., 2009. Republican Governors Protest Medicaid “Unfunded Mandate” in
Baucus Bill. Congressional Quarterly HealthBeat.
Oregon Department of Human Services, 2008a. Oregon Health Plan Annual Report.
Oregon Department of Human Services, 2008b. OHP Standard Reservation List: Application
Progress Report (No. DMAP-IM-08-091).
Oregon Department of Human Services, 2008c. OHP Client FAQs, eligibility & enrollment [WWW
Document]. URL
https://web.archive.org/web/20081205123307/http://www.oregon.gov/DHS/healthplan/dat
a_pubs/faqs/faqclientenroll.shtml#1 (accessed 9.11.19).
Sommers, B.D., Chua, K.-P., Kenney, G.M., Long, S.K., McMorrow, S., 2016. California’s Early
Coverage Expansion under the Affordable Care Act: A County-Level Analysis. Health Serv Res
51, 825–845. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6773.12397
Sommers, B.D., Epstein, A.M., 2011. Why States Are So Miffed about Medicaid — Economics,
Politics, and the “Woodwork Effect.” N Engl J Med 365, 100–102.
https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1104948
Sonier, J., Boudreaux, M.H., Blewett, L.A., 2013. Medicaid ‘Welcome-Mat’ Effect Of Affordable
Care Act Implementation Could Be Substantial. Health Affairs 32, 1319–1325.
https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2013.0360
Taubman, S.L., Allen, H.L., Wright, B.J., Baicker, K., Finkelstein, A.N., 2014. Medicaid Increases
Emergency-Department Use: Evidence from Oregon’s Health Insurance Experiment. Science
343, 263–268. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1246183
25

Wright, B.J., Garcia-Alexander, G., Weller, M.A., Baicker, K., 2017. Low-Cost Behavioral Nudges
Increase Medicaid Take-Up Among Eligible Residents Of Oregon. Health Affairs 36, 838–845.
https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2016.1325

26

Figures

Effect of Winning the Lottery on Number of Children Enrolled
0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

-0.01
0

100
200
Days Since Adult Eligibility

300

Notes: This figure presents estimates of the effect of a household winning the lottery on the
number of children in the household enrolled in Medicaid. Specifically, it plots estimates of
$' (the coefficient on an indicator for the household winning the lottery) from equation (1);
the outcome variables are the number of children enrolled at different 30-day durations
(from -30 to 360) relative to the adult eligibility date. All regressions also control for
household size indicators, lottery draw indicators, and the measures of baseline Medicaid
enrollment. The shaded area indicates the 95% confidence interval for the effect estimates,
based on robust standard errors.
Figure 1

27

Effect of Winning the Lottery on Number of Adults and Children Enrolled
0.24

0.20
Adults
0.16

0.12

0.08
Children

0.04

0.00
0

100
200
Days Since Adult Eligibility

300

Notes: This figure presents estimates of the effect of a household winning the lottery on the
number of reservation list adults in the household enrolled in Medicaid (blue dashed line),
and the number of children in the household enrolled in Medicaid (maroon solid line).
Specifically, it plots estimates of $' (the coefficient on an indicator for the household
winning the lottery) from equation (1); the outcome variables are the number of children (or
number of adults) enrolled at different 30-day durations (from -30 to 360) relative to the
adult eligibility date. All regressions also control for household size indicators, lottery draw
indicators, and the measures of baseline Medicaid enrollment. The shaded areas indicate the
95% confidence interval for the effect estimates, based on robust standard errors.
Figure 2

28

Expected Number of Children Enrolled in Treated and Control Households
Treated Households

0.52

0.50

0.48
Control Households

0.46
0

100
200
Days Since Adult Eligibility

300

Notes: This figure presents the predicted number of children in treatment households and
the predicted number of children in control households who would be enrolled in Medicaid
at different 30-day durations (from -30 to 360) relative to the adult eligibility date. The
predictions are made using the estimates from equation (1). The ‘treated households’
prediction is made assuming all households in the analysis sample were treated while the
‘control households’ prediction is the prediction assuming all households were not treated.
The shaded areas indicate 95% confidence intervals for the predictions.
Figure 3

29

Expected Number of Adults Enrolled in Treated and Control Households
0.30
Treated Households
0.25

0.20

0.15
Control Households
0.10

0.05

0.00

0

100
200
Days Since Adult Eligibility

300

Notes: This figure presents the predicted number of adults on the reservation list in
treatment households and the predicted number of adults on the reservation list in control
households who would be enrolled in Medicaid at different 30-day durations (from -30 to
360) relative to the adult eligibility date. The predictions are made using the estimates from
equation (1). The ‘treated households’ prediction is made assuming all households in the
analysis sample were treated while the ‘control households’ prediction is the prediction
assuming all households were not treated. The shaded areas indicate 95% confidence
intervals for the predictions.
Figure 4

30

Tables

Table 1. Treatment-Control Balance
Variable
A. Lottery list variables
Year of birth
Female
English as preferred language
Signed up first day of lottery
Gave phone number
In MSA
Zip code median household income
B. Baseline enrollment variables
Number children enrolled
Any children enrolled
Number reservation list adults enrolled
Any reservation list adults enrolled

(1)
Control
Mean

(2)
Treat - Control
Difference

(3)

1968.4
0.577
0.927
0.093
0.863
0.821
39,774.1

0.132 (0.112)
-0.011 (0.004)
0.001 (0.002)
0.001 (0.003)
-0.005 (0.003)
-0.002 (0.004)
8.825 (77.785)

0.236
0.017
0.599
0.661
0.094
0.524
0.910

0.416
0.218
0.027
0.026

0.007 (0.009)
0.003 (0.004)
0.001 (0.002)
0.001 (0.002)

0.439
0.399
0.491
0.498

p-value

N=52,873. Notes: This table presents balance tests for two sets of variables. Specifically, we regress
the given variable on an indicator for household lottery win as well as household size indicators and
report estimates of the coefficient on the lottery win indicator. Robust standard errors in
parentheses.
Column (1) reports the average control group outcome. Column (2) presents the estimated
regression coefficient and its standard error, which is the treatment-control difference. Column (3)
reports the p-value from the test that the regression coefficient equals zero.
Block A, which reports the lottery list variables, contains demographics of individuals who signed
up for the lottery, which were provided by participants or could be derived from this information.
Block B, which reports the baseline enrollment variables, contains the four measures of child and
adult enrollment on January 15, 2008 at the household level derived from our linkage to Medicaid
enrollment data. See Appendix Table A1 for balance tests for additional variables and comparisons
to balance in prior work.

Table 1 – Treatment-Control Balance

31

Table 2. Effects on Child and Adult Medicaid Enrollment at 90 Days
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Control Mean
(Children)

Treatment
Effect
(Children)

Treatment
Effect
(Adults)

Effect Ratio
Child:Adult

Number Enrolled

0.457

0.024
(0.005)

0.223
(0.004)

0.110

Any Enrolled

0.234

0.013
(0.003)

0.205
(0.003)

0.062

Member-Months

1.372

0.074
(0.015)

0.667
(0.011)

0.110

Outcome

N=52,873. Notes: This table presents estimates of the effect of a household winning the lottery on
child and reservation list adult Medicaid enrollment outcomes 90 days after the adult eligibility date.
Specifically, it reports estimates of β 1 (the coefficient on an indicator for the household winning the
lottery) from equation (1); all regressions also control for household size indicators, lottery draw
indicators, and the measures of baseline Medicaid enrollment. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. Column (1) reports the average control group child enrollment outcome. Columns (2)
and (3) present treatment effect estimates on child and adult enrollment, respectively. Column (4)
reports the ratio of child to adult treatment effects. The rows report results from three different
dependent variables. "Number enrolled" is the count of members enrolled in Medicaid at 90 days
after adult eligibility. "Any enrolled" is an indicator for number enrolled > 0. "Member-months" is
the total months of enrollment at the household during the 90 day period following adult eligibility.

Table 2 – Effects on Child and Adult Medicaid Enrollment at 90 Days

32

Table 3. Effects on Medicaid Enrollment at Varying Durations
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Control Mean
(Children)

Treatment
Effect
(Children)

Treatment
Effect
(Adults)

Effect Ratio
Child:Adult

30 days after adult eligibility

0.455

0.023
(0.005)

0.224
(0.004)

0.103

90 days after adult eligibility

0.457

0.024
(0.005)

0.223
(0.004)

0.110

180 days after adult eligibility

0.462

0.020
(0.006)

0.211
(0.004)

0.093

270 days after adult eligibility

0.472

0.010
(0.006)

0.152
(0.003)

0.068

365 days after adult eligibility

0.484

0.008
(0.006)

0.141
(0.003)

0.059

Outcome: Number
Enrolled

N=52,873. Notes: This table presents estimates of the effect of a household winning the lottery on
child and reservation list adult Medicaid enrollment outcomes at varying durations after the adult
eligibility date. Specifically, it reports estimates of β 1 (the coefficient on an indicator for the
household winning the lottery) from equation (1); all regressions also control for household size
indicators, lottery draw indicators, and the measures of baseline Medicaid enrollment. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. Outcomes are the number of children or adults enrolled in Medicaid
at the specified number of days after the adult eligibility date. Column (1) reports the average
control group child enrollment outcome. Columns (2) and (3) present treatment effect estimates on
child and adult enrollment, respectively. Column (4) reports the ratio of child to adult treatment
effects.

Table 3 – Effects at Time Horizons

33

Table 4. Heterogeneity in Effects on Child Enrollment

Outcome

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Panel A: Outcome Measure Only Counts Children:
Not Enrolled Ex Ante
Enrolled Ex Ante
Treatment
Treatment
Control Mean
Effect
Control Mean
Effect

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
Panel B: Sample Restricted to Households with:
No Child Enrolled Ex Ante
≥1 Child Enrolled Ex Ante
Control
Treatment
Control
Treatment
Mean
Effect
Mean
Effect

Number Enrolled

0.111

0.018
(0.004)

0.346

0.007
(0.003)

0.096

0.023
(0.005)

1.750

0.032
(0.017)

Any Enrolled

0.073

0.012
(0.002)

0.185

0.002
(0.002)

0.059

0.014
(0.003)

0.859

0.010
(0.006)

Member-Months

0.303

0.057
(0.012)

1.069

0.016
(0.008)

0.261

0.074
(0.014)

5.352

0.076
(0.044)

N

52,873

52,873

40,856

12,017

Notes: This table presents estimates of the effect of a household winning the lottery on child Medicaid enrollment outcomes 90 days after the adult
eligibility date. Specifically, it reports estimates of β 1 (the coefficient on an indicator for the household winning the lottery) from equation (1); all
regressions also control for household size indicators, lottery draw indicators, and the measures of baseline Medicaid enrollment. Robust standard errors
in parentheses. The rows report results from three different dependent variables. "Number enrolled" is the count of members enrolled in Medicaid at 90
days after adult eligibility. "Any enrolled" is an indicator for number enrolled > 0. "Member-months" is the total months of enrollment at the household
during the 90 day period following adult eligibility. In Panel A, the outcome measures are defined as in Table 2 but only count children who were not
enrolled ex ante (on January 15, 2008) on the left side and only count children who were enrolled ex ante on the right side. In Panel B, the outcome
measures are defined identically to those in Table 2 but the sample is split into households with no ex ante child enrollment (on January 15, 2008) on the
left side and households with ex ante child enrollment on the right side.

Table 4 – Heterogeneity in Effects on Child Enrollment

34

Appendix A
In this appendix we describe in greater detail our processing of the Oregon reservation list
data and the Medicaid enrollment data, including our approach to geocoding addresses in both files.
A.1. Processing addresses
Processing address data was performed on a secure, non-networked computer. We use
ArcGIS software to convert text addresses to latitude-longitude pairs, a process called geocoding.
Initially, we extracted all addresses from the reservation list as well as all addresses from the location
spell records in the 2008, 2009, and 2010 Medicaid enrollment data. In the extremely rare case that a
member had two overlapping address spells, we truncate the earlier address spell to end on the day
before the later spell begins.
Before the data was run through ArcGIS, we took several steps to pre-process it. For
addresses in both datasets, we drop addresses that are not in Oregon, since the lottery requires
eligible participants to have an Oregon address. We also remove addresses that could clearly not be
geocoded: P.O. Boxes, addresses with all text and no number (e.g. “In Care Of John Smith”),
addresses that are entirely numbers (e.g. “315”), and addresses with no street number or street
identifier (e.g. no “St”, “Rd”, etc.; examples include “PMB 15”, “SUITE 6A”). This pass to exclude
non-geocodable addresses removed 12.11% of unique addresses in the reservation list and 8.57% of
unique addresses in the Medicaid enrollment file.
Many reservation list members and Medicaid beneficiaries live at addresses with many units,
and the reservation list and Medicaid enrollment file both allow individuals to specify a second
address line to indicate the apartment, room, floor, or other detail about their unit (e.g. “Apt 3A”).
However, ArcGIS does not extract this information. Given the importance of accurately linking
reservation list households in buildings with multiple units, we extracted the second address line
from both the reservation list and the Medicaid enrollment data and used it later in merging.
35

We parse the second address line using a series of regular expressions. Conceptually, we
divide the second address line into two components: a designator (e.g. “Apt”) and level (e.g. “3A”);
when we later merge between the reservation list and the enrollment file, we use only the level and
ignore the designator. We standardize the level by removing the number prefix (e.g. “NO” from
“NO 3”), any symbols (e.g. “#” from “#3A”), and any spaces within (e.g. “3 A” becomes “3A”).
Among unique addresses in each dataset, we are able to identify and parse out a second address line
for 25.7% of the reservation list addresses and 33.3% of the enrollment file addresses.
A.2. Geocoding addresses
After pre-processing the addresses, we next loaded them into ArcGIS running on the same
secure, non-networked computer. For each address, ArcGIS attempts to identify its location and, if
successful, produces a latitude-longitude pair. We use ArcGIS to take advantage of its powerful
geocoding engine, which includes algorithms to resolve addresses written with abbreviations,
different positions of address components (e.g. “3 Broadway NE” vs. “3 NE Broadway”), different
names for address elements (e.g. “3 Main Ave” vs. “3 Main St”), and slight spelling errors. This
flexibility is crucial for linking the reservation list to the Medicaid enrollment file because individuals
might write the same address differently when joining the reservation list and enrolling in Medicaid.
For each address text imported to ArcGIS, ArcGIS looks for candidate addresses –
addresses with the same or similar text as the input address – in its address locator database. For this
work, we used the Street_Address_US address locator, a database of all US street addresses as well
as their coordinates, to geocode (we note that this address locator will only geocode addresses with a
house number).
For each candidate address, ArcGIS assigns a score based on the similarity between the
input address and candidate address. The scores range from 0 to 100, with 100 being a perfect
match. If no candidate address is found, or all candidate addresses have scores below the minimum
36

threshold score, ArcGIS returns the status “unmatched”. Otherwise, ArcGIS will return the status
“matched” along with the latitude-longitude coordinates and standardized address text of the
candidate address with the highest match score.
The minimum match score, a user-adjustable parameter in ArcGIS, is the minimum score
the best candidate address has to have in order for ArcGIS to return that address. We set the score
to 85, the default score in ArcGIS (between 0 and 100). Lowering the minimum match score will
result in more geocoded addresses, but the marginal geocoded address is expected to be mismeasured with greater probability. We found little documentation from ArcGIS on how the score
measures match quality and thus opted to use the default threshold. We also note another user-set
parameter for matching: the spelling sensitivity, which can be set from 0 and 100, with higher values
requiring the spelling of the input address and the candidate address to match more closely. Again
we found little documentation on the underlying spelling match algorithm, other than a note that
reducing the sensitivity would yield more matches. Thus we again opted to use the default score,
which was 80.
Besides “matched” and “unmatched”, ArcGIS returns the status “tied” if it finds multiple
candidate addresses with the top match score (and this score is higher than the minimum match
score threshold). Ties occur for fewer than 1 percent of addresses on the reservation list. We spot
checked the ties and noted two reasons they occurred. First, the address locator can have more than
one latitude-longitude pair for one address. In the spot check, this reason for a tie was quite rare,
although we did observe it occurring. Second, if the input address is missing certain information (e.g.
“2345 Orchard” without specifying “Street” or “Road”), it could match to “Orchard Street” and
“Orchard Road”, with both having the same score and clearing the minimum threshold. For both of
the two reasons, it was not possible to clearly identify the proper geocoded address even with
manual inspection of addresses with ties. In turn, we treat tied addresses as unmatched in the study.
37

Ultimately, we remove all unmatched addresses, limiting the sample to addresses that could
be successfully geocoded to one clear address with a sufficiently high match score.
A.3. Measuring enrollment
We now describe how we process Medicaid enrollment spell records to measure adult and
child enrollment for reservation list households. We use enrollment spell records for Oregon
Medicaid calendar years 2008, 2009, and 2010 (these records also include CHIP enrollment). The
spell-level data include, for each spell, the begin and end date, the enrollee’s name, Medicaid ID,
date of birth, sex, and the Program Eligibility Resource Code (PERC).
The PERC field indicates the eligibility category of each enrollee. This field allows us to
distinguish between OHP Standard, OHP Plus, and CHIP enrollment. For our analysis sample, we
include enrollment spells for all Medicaid eligibility categories and CHIP categories. We exclude only
the small fraction of spells indicating eligibility for secondary coverage for Medicare beneficiaries;
this coverage is not well measured in our data and is also not the focus of this study.
A.4. Validity checks on address-based enrollment measures
After we used the geocoded addresses to link the reservation list and the Medicaid
enrollment data, we sought to cross-validate our approach. As noted in the main text, the Medicaid
enrollment data contains children and adults, and so in addition to observing children enrolled at
each reservation list household, we also track enrollment of adults who were listed on the
reservation list. To do so, we link the reservation list adults to their Medicaid enrollment spells using
geocoded address (as described), birth date, and sex. Then, we bring in alternative data on
enrollment to validate the geocoding approach.
In Finkelstein et al. (2012), the authors obtained Medicaid enrollment data for reservation list
individuals from the state of Oregon produced by the state Division of Medical Assistance Programs
(DMAP). These enrollment records provide a potential “gold standard” for assessing the validity of
38

our match on address. We compare the Medicaid enrollment status of reservation list adults under
our address-based match to their enrollment status under the DMAP match.
The two data sources largely agree. Among 52,873 reservation list household heads in the
analysis sample (see main text), in December 2008, 92.0% had the same enrollment status in both
datasets (11.5% were enrolled in both, and 80.5% were not enrolled in both). Treating the DMAP
data as the gold standard, we also note a meaningful rate of apparent false negatives, consistent with
failed address matches: 7.2% were enrolled in Medicaid in the DMAP data but not in our data. We
also note some apparent “false positives” where the address-based match detected enrollment but
the DMAP match did not – 0.8% among all household heads in the analysis sample. These findings
are as expected given the inaccuracy that inevitably occurs when matching across administrative data
from address text that must be geocoded. It is also possible that the DMAP match could mismeasure enrollment, i.e. what we call false positives may be properly measured enrollment.
Regardless, the ability to observe a high quality measure of enrollment for reservation list adults
informs our measurement error correction for children’s enrollment (see Section 4.3 in the main
text).

39

Appendix Figures

OHP Standard reservation list request
You can give us your reservation request in any of the following ways:
n Electronically – Use the link on www.oregon.gov/DHS/open to give us your information.
n Mail – Mail this form to OHP Standard, PO Box 14520, Salem, OR 97309-5044.
n Fax – Fax this form to: 503-373-7866 or 503-378-6295.
n In person – Drop this form off at any DHS field office (call 800-699-9075 for locations).
n Phone – Call 800-699-9075 or 503-378-7800 (TTY), Mon-Fri, 7a.m. - 7p.m. PST.
The call will take 10-20 minutes.
1

2

Your name (Last, First, M.I.)

Maiden or other names used

Phone Number
(
)

Message Number
(
)

Home Address

City

State

ZIP

Mailing Address (if different)

City

State

ZIP

List anyone 19 or older in your household you want to add to the reservation list.
Name (Last, First, M.I.)

Relation to you Gender Date of Birth

Self

c
c
c
c

(voluntary)
* Social Security Number

M
F
M
F

* Providing a Social Security Number (SSN) is voluntary for the OHP Standard Reservation
List request. DHS is allowed to ask for SSNs by OAR 461-135-1125(5) to help identify
people to prevent duplicate reservations. DHS will not deny a request to be placed on the
OHP Standard Reservation List if you do not provide an SSN.
3

If you need materials in a language other than English, check the appropriate box.
c Russian
c Vietnamese
c Other: _____________________
Spanish

c

4

If you want written materials in a different format, check the box that applies:
Braille – information is printed in Braille.
c Audio tape – information is recorded on an audiocassette tape.
c Large print – materials are printed in this size.
c Computer disk – information is saved as “plain text” on a 3.5-inch floppy disk.
c Spoken – information is read by a DHS employee in person or over the telephone.
c

I understand that this request is not an application for medical assistance.
Signature

Date
OHP 3203 (10/25/07)

Appendix Figure A1 – Excerpt of Reservation List Request Form

40

Date of Request

Date Received by Branch

Program

Branch

Case Number

Worker ID

Case Name

Route to:

Prime Number

SSN

App Status

Ofﬁce use only

Oregon Health Plan Application (OHP 7210)
If you need help ﬁlling this out, call 800-699-9075 or TTY 800-735-2900
Name (Last, First, M.I.)

1

Maiden or other names used

Telephone number

(

Message number

)

(

)

Home address – proof required, see YELLOW sheet

City

State

ZIP

Mailing address (if different)

City

State

ZIP

List yourself and everyone living with you. To list more than four people, use the OHP 7226 form, found in the
PINK packet.

2

Social Security numbers (SSNs)* – If you don’t have an SSN, write in “none.”
Ethnicity/Racial Heritage – Write in all the codes that apply. Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 allows us to
ask for this information. You can choose not to give this information. It will not affect your eligibility for beneﬁts.
Ethnicity
H – Hispanic or Latino
N – Not Hispanic or Latino

Name
(Last, First, M.I.)

Racial Heritage
A – Asian
B – Black or African American
I – American Indian/Alaska Native

Relation
to you Sex

a.

Date and
city/state of birth

Applying
for
beneﬁts

P – Native Hawaiian or Other Paciﬁc
Islander
W – White
* Social
Security
Number

* U.S citizen?
Proof required,
see YELLOW sheet

M
F

Yes
No

Yes
No, non-citizen#
______________

b.

M
F

Yes
No

Yes
No, non-citizen#
______________

c.

M
F

Yes
No

Yes
No, non-citizen#
______________

d.

M
F

Yes
No

Yes
No, non-citizen#
______________

Self

Ethnicity
Racial
Heritage

* Only required for people who are applying for beneﬁts.
OHP 7210 (Rev 04/08)

Appendix Figure A2 – Excerpt of Oregon Health Plan Application Form

41

Effect of Winning the Lottery on Number of Children Enrolled, up to 720 days
0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

-0.01

0

100

200

300
400
500
Days Since Adult Eligibility

600

700

Notes: This figure presents estimates of the effect of a household winning the lottery on the
number of children in the household enrolled in Medicaid. Specifically, it plots estimates of
!" (the coefficient on an indicator for the household winning the lottery) from equation (1);
the outcome variables are the number of children enrolled at different 30-day durations
(from -30 to 720) relative to the adult eligibility date. For estimates beyond one year, we use
a reweighting approach (described in more detail in Finkelstein et al., 2016) to adjust for a
new lottery for OHP Standard which the state conducted beginning in the fall of 2009. All
regressions also control for household size indicators, lottery draw indicators, and the
measures of baseline Medicaid enrollment. The shaded area indicates the 95% confidence
interval for the effect estimates, based on robust standard errors.
Appendix Figure A3

42

Effect of Winning the Lottery on Number of Adults and Children Enrolled,
up to 720 days
0.24

0.20
Adults
0.16

0.12

0.08
Children

0.04

0.00
0

100

200

300
400
500
Days Since Adult Eligibility

600

700

Notes: This figure presents estimates of the effect of a household winning the lottery on the
number of reservation list adults (blue dashed line) or children (maroon solid line) enrolled
in Medicaid. Specifically, it plots estimates of !" (the coefficient on an indicator for the
household winning the lottery) from equation (1); the outcome variables are the number of
children enrolled at different 30-day durations (from -30 to 720) relative to the date of adult
eligibility. For estimates beyond one year, we use a reweighting approach (described in more
detail in Finkelstein et al., 2016) to adjust for a new lottery for OHP Standard which the state
conducted beginning in the fall of 2009. All regressions also control for household size
indicators, lottery draw indicators, and the measures of baseline Medicaid enrollment. The
shaded areas indicate the 95% confidence interval for the effect estimates, based on robust
standard errors.
Appendix Figure A4

43

Appendix Tables
Table A1. Variable by Variable Balance
Sample and Level

Variable
A. Lottery list variables
Year of birth
Female
English as preferred language
Signed up self
Signed up first day of lottery
Gave phone number
Address a PO Box
In MSA
Zip code median household income
B. Pre-randomization hospital utilization
Any hospital admission
Any hospital admission (not thru ED)
Any hospital admission (thru ED)
Hospital days
Hospital procedures
Hospital charges
Hospital days (not thru ED)
Hospital procedures (not thru ED)
Hospital charges (not thru ED)
Hospital days (thru ED)
Hospital procedures (thru ED)
Hospital charges (thru ED)
C. Baseline enrollment variables
Number children enrolled
Any children enrolled
Number reservation list adults enrolled
Any reservation list adults enrolled

(1)
Analysis Sample
Household Level

(2)
Finkelstein et al. (2012)
Household Level

(3)
Finkelstein et al. (2012)
Individual Level

Control Mean Treatment (SD)
Control Diff

Control Mean Treatment (SD)
Control Diff

Control Mean Treatment (SD)
Control Diff

1968.4
(12.329)
0.577
(0.494)
0.927
(0.260)
1
(0)
0.093
(0.290)
0.863
(0.344)
0
(0)
0.821
(0.384)
39774.1
(8436.936)

0.132
(0.112)
-0.011
(0.004)
0.001
(0.002)
0
(0)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.005
(0.003)
0
(0)
-0.002
(0.004)
8.825
(77.785)

1968.0
(12.342)
0.573
(0.495)
0.932
(0.252)
1
(0)
0.092
(0.289)
0.858
(0.349)
0.116
(0.321)
0.777
(0.417)
39256.0
(8472.162)

0.162
(0.100)
-0.008
(0.004)
0.002
(0.002)
0
(0)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.003)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.003
(0.003)
48.373
(70.155)

1968.0
(12.255)
0.557
(0.497)
0.922
(0.268)
0.918
(0.274)
0.093
(0.290)
0.862
(0.345)
0.117
(0.321)
0.773
(0.419)
39265.4
(8463.542)

0.162
(0.100)
-0.007
(0.003)
0.002
(0.003)
0.000
(0.000)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.003
(0.003)
0.000
(0.003)
-0.002
(0.004)
44.891
(72.887)

0.037
(0.189)
0.014
(0.118)
0.027
(0.161)
0.244
(2.227)
0.069
(0.605)
1150.820
(11508.577)
0.088
(1.315)
0.030
(0.370)
451.770
(8737.394)
0.156
(1.602)
0.039
(0.452)
699.049
(6973.385)

0.000
(0.002)
0.000
(0.001)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.008
(0.021)
0.000
(0.006)
-23.965
(113.548)
0.014
(0.015)
0.003
(0.004)
67.207
(93.584)
-0.022
(0.013)
-0.003
(0.004)
-91.172
(59.395)

0.038
(0.192)
0.015
(0.121)
0.027
(0.162)
0.245
(2.185)
0.072
(0.664)
1169.554
(11384.938)
0.090
(1.292)
0.031
(0.388)
464.310
(8356.679)
0.155
(1.581)
0.041
(0.502)
705.244
(7188.949)

-0.001
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.006
(0.019)
-0.002
(0.005)
-20.597
(101.309)
0.007
(0.013)
0.002
(0.003)
38.183
(77.992)
-0.012
(0.013)
-0.004
(0.004)
-58.780
(60.525)

0.035
(0.184)
0.014
(0.117)
0.025
(0.156)
0.225
(2.095)
0.066
(0.636)
1075.539
(10915.704)
0.083
(1.238)
0.029
(0.371)
426.628
(8006.786)
0.142
(1.516)
0.037
(0.481)
648.910
(6894.160)

-0.001
(0.001)
0.000
(0.001)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.005
(0.017)
-0.002
(0.005)
-19.722
(88.912)
0.006
(0.011)
0.002
(0.003)
33.968
(68.440)
-0.011
(0.011)
-0.004
(0.003)
-53.690
(53.114)

0.416
(0.927)
0.218
(0.413)
0.027
(0.168)
0.026
(0.161)

0.007
(0.009)
0.003
(0.004)
0.001
(0.002)
0.001
(0.002)

Notes: This table presents variable-by-variable balance tests for three samples (across the columns) and three sets of variables (across the
rows). Specifically, we regress the given variable on an indicator for household lottery win as well as household size indicators and report
estimates of the coefficient on the lottery win indicator. Regressions in Block B also control for lottery draw indicators. Robust standard
errors in parentheses.
Column (1) is the analysis sample of this study of 52,873 households; it is the subset of column (2) that was successfully geocoded and did
not have an outlier level of pre-randomization child enrollment (see text for details). Column (2) is a household-level version of the analysis
sample used in Finkelstein et al. (2012) of 66,210 households (when households have multiple individuals, in Block A we take the lottery list
variables of the household head; in Block B we produce the pre-randomization outcome variables by aggregating over the household
members). Column (3) is the analysis sample of 74,922 individuals used in Finkelstein et al. (2012).
Block A, which reports the lottery list variables, contains demographics that were provided by participants when they signed up for the
lottery or could be derived from this information. Block B, which reports the pre-randomization outcomes, contains measures of hospital
utilization from January 1 through the notification date (i.e. pre-randomization) that are derived from a linkage to hospital discharge data.
Block C, which reports the baseline enrollment variables, contains the four measures of child and adult enrollment on January 15, 2008
derived from our linkage to Medicaid enrollment data.

44

Appendix Table A1 – Expanded Balance A

Table A2. Treatment - Control Balance, F-tests
(1)
Analysis Sample
Household Level

(2)
Finkelstein et al.
(2012)
Household Level

(3)
Finkelstein et al.
(2012)
Individual Level

1.524
[0.154]

1.395
[0.193]

1.286
[0.239]

B. Pre-randomization hospital utilization
0.766
F-statistic
[0.648]
[p-value]

0.505
[0.872]

0.543
[0.844]

0.922
[0.547]

0.915
[0.560]

Variable Set \ Sample and
Level
A. Lottery list variables
F-statistic
[p-value]

C. Baseline enrollment variables
F-statistic
[p-value]

0.264
[0.901]

D. All of the above
F-statistic
[p-value]

0.950
[0.522]

Notes: This table presents omnibus balance tests for three samples (across the columns) and four sets
of variables (across the rows). For a set of variables, we regress each component variable on an
indicator for household lottery win as well as household size indicators. Regressions in Block B also
control for lottery draw indicators. We use robust standard errors and cluster at the household level in
all individual-level regressions. We report the F-statistic and p-value from the joint test that all lottery
win effect estimates were zero.
Column (1) is the analysis sample of this study of 52,873 households; it is the subset of column (2)
that was successfully geocoded and did not have an outlier level of pre-randomization child
enrollment (see text for details). Column (2) is a household-level version of the analysis sample used in
Finkelstein et al. (2012) of 66,210 households (when households have multiple individuals, in Block A
we take the lottery list variables of the household head; in Block B we produce the pre-randomization
outcome variables by aggregating over the household members). Column (3) is the analysis sample of
74,922 individuals used in Finkelstein et al. (2012).
Block A, which reports the lottery list variables, contains demographics that were provided by
participants when they signed up for the lottery or could be derived from this information. Block B,
which reports the pre-randomization outcomes, contains measures of hospital utilization from January
1 through the notification date (i.e. pre-randomization) that are derived from a linkage to hospital
discharge data. Block C, which reports the baseline enrollment variables, contains the four measures
of child and adult enrollment on January 15, 2008 derived from our linkage to Medicaid enrollment
data. Block D tests all of the variables in the above blocks, with baseline enrollment variables only
included for column (3). The component variables are presented in Appendix Table A1.

ppendix Table A2 – F-test able
45

Table A3. Effects on Enrollment Corrected for Attenuation Bias
(1)
(2)
Treatment Effect for Adults
Address Data
DMAP Data
Number Enrolled
30 days after adult eligibility
90 days after adult eligibility
180 days after adult eligibility
270 days after adult eligibility
365 days after adult eligibility
Member-Months
90 days after adult eligibility

(3)
Correction
Factor

(4)
(5)
Treatment Effect for Children
Address Data
Corrected

0.224
(0.004)
0.223
(0.004)
0.211
(0.004)
0.152
(0.003)
0.141
(0.003)

0.313
(0.004)
0.312
(0.004)
0.295
(0.004)
0.211
(0.004)
0.192
(0.004)

0.715
(0.008)
0.714
(0.008)
0.714
(0.009)
0.718
(0.012)
0.733
(0.013)

0.023
(0.005)
0.024
(0.005)
0.020
(0.006)
0.010
(0.006)
0.008
(0.007)

0.032
(0.007)
0.034
(0.008)
0.028
(0.008)
0.014
(0.009)
0.011
(0.009)

0.667
(0.011)

0.934
(0.012)

0.714
(0.008)

0.074
(0.015)

0.103
(0.021)

N=52,873. Notes: This table presents estimates of the effect of the effect of a household winning the lottery on child
Medicaid enrollment correcting for potential attenuation bias due to mis-measurement of addresses. Robust standard
errors in parentheses.
Columns (1)-(3) show the calculation of the correction factor. In columns (1) and (4) we repeat estimates of the effect of
winning the lottery on adult enrollment and child enrollment, respectively, using the address match (see Table 3). In
column (2), we instead calculate the effect on adult enrollment using the "gold standard" measure of adult enrollment
provided by the Oregon Division of Medical Assistance Programs (DMAP); this measure is what was used in prior work
on the Oregon Health Study. Column (3) reports the ratio of the address-based and DMAP-based treatment effects.
Column (5) reports the corrected estimates on child enromment by dividing the estimate in (4) by the correction factor in
(3). The estimates in columns (3) and (5) involve nonlinear transformations of coefficients from multiple regressions; for
these columns, we use seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) and the delta method to produce robust standard errors.
Number enrolled is the count of members enrolled in Medicaid at the specified number of days after adult eligibility.
Member-months is the total months of enrollment at the household during the specified period following adult eligibility.

Appendix Table A3 – Effect Estimates Corrected for Measurement Error

46

Table A4. Sensitivity and Robustness of Effect Estimates

Alternative
Outcome
Number Enrolled
Any Enrolled
Member-Months
N

(1)
Baseline
specification
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
0.457
0.024
(0.005)
0.234
0.013
(0.003)
1.372
0.074
(0.015)
52,873

(2)
Omit baseline
enrollment controls
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
0.457
0.030
(0.009)
0.234
0.015
(0.004)
1.372
0.091
(0.027)
52,873

(3)
Contemporaneous
address approach
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
0.450
0.027
(0.006)
0.231
0.014
(0.003)
1.361
0.079
(0.016)
52,873

(4)
Remove outliers
down to p95
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
0.387
0.020
(0.005)
0.220
0.012
(0.003)
1.159
0.066
(0.014)
51,762

(5)
Don't remove
outliers
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
0.500
0.015
(0.011)
0.237
0.013
(0.003)
1.508
0.053
(0.028)
53,147

Notes: This table presents alternative estimates of the effect of a household winning the lottery on child and reservation list adult Medicaid
enrollment outcomes 90 days after the adult eligibility date. Specifically, it reports estimates of β 1 (the coefficient on an indicator for the
household winning the lottery) from equation (1); all regressions control for household size indicators and lottery draw indicators. Except for
column (2), regressions also control for four measures of baseline enrollment on January 15, 2008. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
Column (1) repeats estimates from the baseline specification (see Table 2). Column (2) runs the same analyses omitting the four measures of
baseline enrollment from the regression. Column (3) does not fix Medicaid enrollees at their baseline (i.e. first) address on file and instead allows
locations to evolve according to subsequent spells. Column (4) omits households above the 95th percentile of pre-randomization child Medicaid
enrollment (3 children) rather than the baseline cutoff of the 99th percentile (5 children). Column (5) makes no outlier restriction.
Number enrolled is the count of members enrolled in Medicaid at 90 days after adult eligibility. Any enrolled is an indicator for number enrolled
> 0. Member-months is the total months of enrollment at the household during the 90 day period following adult eligibility. See text for more
details.

Appendix Table A4 – Sensitivity Analyses

47

