NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

U.S. TAX LAWS AND CAPITAL FLIGHT FROM LATIN AMERICA

Charles E. McLure,

Jr.

Working Paper No. 2687

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1988

This research is part of NBER's research program in Taxation.
Any opinions
expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper 2687
August 1988
U.S. TAX LAWS AND CAPITAL FLIGHT FROM LATIN AMERICA
AESTRACT

The

interplay

between

the

tax

laws

of

the

United

States

and those

of the

countries of Latin America creates inducements for capital flight. Most Latin
American countries tax only income originating within their boundaries. If
other countries tax income of foreigners originating within their boundaries as
countries
heavily, there is no tax advantage to capital flight. Latin American
thus depend on other countries for the prevention of tax—induced capital flight
and the loss of public revenues, investment funds, and equity it implies.
Income from a U.S. trade or business conducted by foreigners, including
real estate and divcapital gains, is subject to U.S. tax. Capital gains on
to
reduce
those taxes subit
be
but
possible
idends are generally taxed,
may

The United States does not tax most other capital gains realized
from
by foreigners. Most interest income paid to foreigners is also exempt
from
Latin
America.
attract
Thus U.S. tax laws help
capital
U.S. tax.
A solution to this problem does not seem likely. The United States seems
from adoption of a
unlikely to reverse its policies. Little is to be gained
stantially.

residence-based approach by Latin American countries. A more radical approach
taxthat might be more effective would be a switch to consumption-based direct
a deduction. This
ation in which interest income is neither taxed nor allowed as
U.S.
tax
treatment
by making equally
would reduce the attraction of favorable
attractive treatment available at home, but raises troublesome issues of equity,
the treatment of foreign investment, and transition.

Charles E. McLure, Jr.
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305

U.S. Tax Laws and

Capital

Flight from Latin iuerica

by
charles E. McLure, Jr.*
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, California 94305

I.

Introduction
Most countries of Latin America attempt to tax

only

income deemed to

have its source within their boundaries; they do not attempt to tax
income of their residents (or citizens) deemed to originate in the rest
of the world.
system

That is, they employ a territorial (or source—based)

of taxation, and

do not attempt to implement worldwide (or

taxation.1 To the extent that residents of nations
relying on source—based taxation invest their capital in other countries,
they can avoid taxation in their home country. Even when Latin American
residence—based)

nations attempt

to implement worldwide taxation, success in this endeavor

is likely to be difficult for administrative reasons. Taxpayers in most
Latin American countries that employ the residence principle who are
willing to coimnit fraud are generally able to evade tax on foreign—source
income with relative impunity.
The direct result of the failure or inability of such countries to
tax foreign—source income is loss of tax revenues potentially available
on such income.

A

more serious threat is the loss of capital that

productively be invested at home

and

the further diminution of the tax

loss of equity it implies. Of course, to the extent
countries tax all income deemed to originate within their

base and the
other

boundaries

could

that

at rates at or above those levied in Latin American countries,

there is no tax advantage to capital flight, regardless of the tax
1

treatment (residence or source) in the hone country.2

In

a sense then,

the countries of Latin America that do not tax (or cannot effectively
tax) income earned abroad are dependent to some degree on other countries
for the prevention of tax—induced capital flight and the loss of
public
revenues, investment funds, and equity it implies.3
Income from a U.S. trade or business conducted by foreigners is
subject to tax in the U.S. on the same basis as a business conducted by
residents of the U.S.

But this is probably much less relevant for the

present discussion of capital flight induced by favorable U.S. taxation
than the tax treatment of income earned on passive investments.
The United States does not tax most capital gains realized by
foreigners, except those on real estate and those effectively connected
with a trade

foreigners

or business. Most interest income paid to unrelated

is exempt from

institutions or by others.

U.S.

tax,

whether

paid by financial

Dividends on corporate shares and

capital

real estate are generally subject to tax, but in the case of
dividends it nay be possible to reduce taxes substantially through the
use of nominee accounts in treaty partners of the U.S. Thus the United
States acts as an enormous magnet poised to attract capital from Latin
gains

on

especially debt funds.
This paper examines the inducements to capital flight produced by
the interplay between the tax laws of the United States and those of the
countries of Latin America. Complicating this interaction is the
possibility of channeling investments through tax haven countries with
which the United States has tax treaties. Fortunately for the countries
of Latin America, there are relatively few such countries. While the
United States has moved in recent years to reduce the opportunities to
America,

2

use "treaty shopping" to reduce taxes, it has followed domestic tax
policies that aggravate the problem of capital flight from Latin America.
Section II describes the general principles that govern the taxation
of income from capital moving across national boundaries, including
relevant provisions of major model treaties for the prevention of double
taxation.

This description is provided to set the stage for the
It includes a limited discussion of

discussion of the rest of the paper.
the

background and

such

apparent

rationale for the existing tax

treatment

of

income in order to serve as background for the discussion in the

final section of potential remedies to the problem of capital flight from
Latin America induced by generous treatment of certain forms of income
earned in the United States by foreigners.
Section III focuses briefly on the tax systems
countries.

tax

The purpose is to indicate how problems

avoidance and evasion

created by the U.S.

of Latin

American

of capital flight and

tax law are aggravated by

of capital income typically found in these countries.
Besides noting that most countries of Latin America do not attempt to tax
foreign—source income, it indicates why it is difficult for the few that
the

tax

treatment

attempt to impose tax
This description

on a worldwide basis to

do so

effectively.

of tax systems employed in Latin ?imerica is quite

brief for several reasons. Most obviously, it is difficult to go beyond
the basic characterization of a system as being based on either source or
residence, without becoming embroiled in minute details.

More important,

little would be gained from a detailed examination of the tax laws of
Latin American countries.

A

basic premise of this paper is that every

tax system in Latin America is in effect likely to resemble a
source—based system, especially in its taxation of passive income, even
3

if the tax

law

Section

states that worldwide

IV describes how

the

income received by foreigners:

income

is to be

taxed.

United States taxes five kinds of

income from the conduct of a trade or

business, interest on bank deposits, interest earned on portfolio
investments in debt, income (including capital gains) from other
portfolio investment, and capital gains from investment in real estate.
Attention focuses on the last four items of non—business income, as they
appear to be the forms in which income is most likely to be earned by
Latin Americans wishing to invest in the United States without leaving
their home countries.
Section

V

discusses potential solutions to the problem of capital

flight induced by attractive U.S. tax treatment of income earned by
foreigners. Approaches considered include both changes in the tax system

the United States and changes in the tax systems of Latin American
countries Many of the current provisions of U.S law can be traced to
the perceived need to respond to eonetitive pressures from foreign
countries arid to abuses of international tax treaties with the United
States; as a result, resolution of the problem based on changes in U.S.
of

law

might require cooperation by other developed countries, including

tax haven countries.
That this is true indicates clearly that there is not nuich room for
optimism thtt a solution to the problem addressed here based on U.S.
treaty partn5rs of the United States, and various

action will quickly be

found

and

adopted.

said above, it is clear that most Latin American
countri'.' wnid gain little benefit from adoption of a residence—based
approach. A more effective approach, but one that is ITruch more radical,
tch to a consumption—based system of direct taxation in
From what has been

4

which interest income is neither taxed nor allowed as a deduction.
would reduce the attraction of favorable U.S. tax
equally attractive treatment available at home.

This

treatment by making

It does, however, raise

troublesome issues of equity, the treatment of foreign investment, and
transition.

It may be appropriate to state clearly, before proceeding, that the
discussion that follows is not based on a naive view that taxes are the

determinant of international capital flows, or even the most
important determinant. Clearly much more important than taxes as reasons

only

for capital flight from developing countries are such concerns as
political instability and fears of economic crises and currency
fluctuations. Similarly, any tax advantages of investment in the United
States

are likely to be dwarfed, inter alia, by the attraction of

political stability.

Yet, all things

, the

tax treatment of various

items of U.S. source income in the United States and elsewhere almost
certainly does exert an influence on investment decisions at the margin.
The purpose of this paper is to describe some of the most important

the

of

features of U.S. tax law that may have this effect, especially those

that result from liberal U.S. tax treatment of income earned in the
United States by foreigners.
No attempt is made to quantify either the attraction offered by
these tax benefits, relative to other forms of attraction (e.g.,
differences in political stability) or the amount of capital that may be
drawn into the United States by them. Attempting to answer either of
these questions would be a hopeless task; the difficulty in the second
case of holding all other influences constant is compounded by the lack
of reliable data.
S

Finally, attention focuses on U.S. tax policy as an attraction to
capital; no effort is made to provide either a detailed description of
the tax laws of Latin merican countries or a comparison of U.S. law with
tax provisions found in the laws of other countries, especially those of
.7apan arid the developed countries of Europe.

Of course, to the extent

that foreign investors are treated generously in other countries,
comparably generous U.S. treatment may, at least in part, merely divert
investment from them, rather than inducing additional capital flows from
Latin America.

If generous taxation of the income of foreigners

continues elsewhere, the tax—induced attraction of funds from Latin
American countries way not be reduced much by a unilateral tightening of
U.S. taxation of such income.

II.

Principles of International Taxation
There are two basic approaches to the taxation of income flowing

between countries, Under the source principle all income originating in
a given lurisdiction is taxed, but that originating elsewhere is not.
This is sometimes also called

a

territorial approach.

The residence or

worldwide approach, by comparison, taxes all the income of residents of
the taxing jurisdiction, wherever earned.3 Many countries, including the
United

States, employ both

originating within their

wherever

they tax both income
borders and all the income of residents,
approaches.

That is,

earned.

the following primary
advantages. First, residence—based taxation does not discriminate
between income flows, depending on their country of source; that is,
income is taxed the same, whether earned in the United States or in a
Advocates

of the

residence principle cite

6

foreign country (and

regardless which foreign country). This feature of

residence—based taxation is sometimes called "capital—export neutrality."
If employed effectively by all nations, residence—based taxation would
not interfere with the allocation of economic resources among nations; in
principle, it would lead to the allocation of the world's capital to the
most productive uses.

By comparison, source—based taxation (if not

matched by benefits of public spending)

discourages investment in

high—tax jurisdictions and encourages investment in law—tax
jurisdictions.4
Second,

implementation of

the ability—to—pay principle

of taxation

requires that residents of a country pay tax on their entire income under
the personalized system prevailing there, rather than having it taxed at
the rates applied in the countries where it is earned.
also achieved by residence—based taxation.

This objective is

Finally, capital—exporting

countries support residence—based taxation because they want the revenue
at stake.5

of source—based taxation argue, in part, that the source
entitled to capture for its public coffers part of the income

Advocates
country is

originating within its borders.6
taxation is inevitably difficult
developing country.7

Moreover, they argue, residence—based
to administer, especially in a

These difficulties are examined further in the next

section. To the extent that worldwide taxation cannot be administered
effectively, capital flight (from the countries with inadequate
administration) is encouraged and the theoretical advantages of
capital—export neutrality are not actually achieved.8
Double taxation would result from the application of both source and
residence—based taxation to a particular international flow of income.
7

Countries employing the residence principle corsnonly

defer

to the fiscal

claims of source countries. In the United States this is achieved
unilaterally by allowing credit against domestic tax

liability

for income

taxes paid to foreign governments, up to the average rate of taxation
paid in the United States.9 As long as the foreign tax rate does

not

exceed the domestic tax rate, capital—export neutrality is achieved. As
an alternative, a taxpayer can, at its option, take a deduction for
foreign taxes, rather than

u.s. tax treaties also regulate

of income flowing between treaty parthers.
problem, then is to establish norms for taxation by countries
the

tax

a credit)0

treatment

The
of

source
In deciding both whether to utilize source or residence—based
taxation and whether the tax system of the source or residence nation
should be given precedence in international tax conventions,
face conflicting objectives.

nations

For example, a capital—importing nation

might like to enact heavy source—based taxes, in order to capture tax

where

for

its treasury.

the other hand, it may fear the adverse
effects source—based taxation that is not offset by foreign tax credits
in capital—exporting countries would have on foreign investment in the
country. Indeed, a decision may be made by the source country to forgo
tax revenues in order to attract capital. This is especially likely
revenue

On

potential foreign investors reside in

cannot tax

countries that do not or

foreign—source income,

a capital—exporting country can be expected to
prefer residence—based taxation. This pattern is exemplified in the tax
For

revenue reasons,

of the United States and,
many other developed countries.
laws

sometimes

Long
8

(but

to a lesser degree, in those of
no

longer) the premier example

of a capital—exporting nation, the United States employs residence—based
taxation. Whereas it unilaterally extends priority in taxation to the
source country through its foreign tax credit, it attempts to protect its
in its foreign
position as a capital exporter by pressing for provisions
tax treaties that reduce source—country taxation of interest, dividends,
and various other forms of payments to its residents. Capital—importing
countries can be expected to favor an international system in which
source—based taxes on these types of income are higher than proposed by
capital—exporting
foreign

countries and

tax credits

in which

the latter

for source—based taxes.

countries provide

Such a situation allows them

to raise revenue from foreign multinational corporations with little fear
of adverse economic consequences, as long as the tax rates applied to
these forms of income by the source country do not exceed those in home
countries allowing foreign tax credits.
These contrary pressures of conflicting objectives can be seen by
Convention
comparing the United Nations (U.N.) Model Double Taxation
between Developed and Developing Countries with the Draft Double Taxation
Convention on Income and on Capital published by the Organisation for
Economic Cooperation and Developoent

(OE).

The latter draft convention

is relevant primarily for fiscal relations between developed countries.
Since capital flows aiing such countries can be expected to be roughly in
balance (at least multilaterally over the long run), the distinction
between capital—importing and capital—exporting countries may be have
little significance.

Thus the

OE draft treaty, reflecting the

calls for
preference of these countries for the residence principle,
10 percent of the gross amount
limiting withholding taxes on interest to
of interest.
9

By comparison, the U.N. model convention involves both developing
countries that are generally capital importers and developed ones that
export capital.

It leaves the limitation on the tax rate on interest

unstated, to be the subject of bilateral negotiations between the
contracting parties.

This difference reflects the conflict between "the

strong view on the part of members from developing countries that those
countries should have the exclusive, or at least the primary right to tax
interestu and the view of the representatives of developed countries that
the home country of investors should have the primary or even exclusive
right to tax such income.12 Analogous ambiguity and latitude for
negotiations characterizes the U.N. guidelines on withholding rates on
dividends, in contrast to the definite limits stated in the OECD model
convention,
Foreign tax treaties of the United States conmnly give the country
of residence an increased secondary claim in the taxation of certain
types of income (e.g., interest, dividends, and capital gains) by
providing reduced taxation by the source country. Besides capturing tax
revenues on income from U.S. capital invested abroad for the U.S.

treaty parthers and the
United States, such treaties are subject to abuse; the most connon forms
of abuse are described in section IV. Moreover, for certain types of
income earned in the U.S. by foreigners the United States does not
attempt to impose source—based taxation as a matter of domestic tax
Treasury

and encouraging capital flows between

policy.
III.

Latin
Most

American Practice

countries of Latin America attempt to tax most income from

10

business and capital earned within their borders by both residents and
non—residents.13 The top tax rates applied to individual income range
from 30 percent in Bolivia, Colombia, and Paraguay, to 55 percent or
above in Chile, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Mexico, Nicaragua,
and Panama.

lower.

Corporate rates are generally similar, but commonly somewhat

(See Table 1.)

Of course, the actual burden on domestic source

income depends on the details of the tax law of various countries. But
one thing is certain. Unless income earned abroad by

residents is also

either by the home country or by the country in which capital is
invested, there are tax—induced incentives for capital flight.
The countries of Latin America have traditionally been strong
proponents of the source principle of taxation.'4 This is reflected in
taxed,

the pattern

of jurisdictional standards reported in Table 1.

Of the 18

countries covered, only five attempt to tax the worldwide income of
corporations and only seven do so for individuals. Although several of
the more advanced countries of Latin America do attempt to tax on a
worldwide basis (e.g., Brazil, but only for individuals, Chile, Colombia,
and Mexico), several others do not (e.g. Argentina and Venezuela), and
several of the countries attempting worldwide taxation are not highly
advanced (e.g., El Salvador, but only for individuals, Honduras, and
Peru).

With few exceptions (Honduras and Brazil, which allows credit

only as permitted by treaty) the countries that follow the worldwide
approach

allow foreign tax credit for taxes paid to source countries.

the exception of Argentina (eight treaties) and Brazil (fifteen),
Latin American countries are parthers to few tax treaties other than the
Andean Pact between Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela. No
Latin American country has a foreign tax treaty with the United States.
With

11

Even the figures in Table 1 almost certainly greatly overstate
effective reliance on residence—based taxation.

Major domestic Latin

Pmerican corporations operating abroad, whether through subsidiaries or
branches, can be expected to report income to their home countries,
though perhaps not with total accuracy)5 The accuracy of reporting is
likely to depend, inter alia, on the existence and effectiveness of
exchange controls, on the availability of (and limitations on) the

tax

the extent of exchange of
information between fiscal authorities of the source country and the home
country, and on the feasibility of structuring intercorporate relations
in such a way as to circumvent such exchanges of information and other
administrative controls of the home country. But this does not seem to
be of primary importance for the purpose at hand, both because (as is
documented further below) income from the conduct of a trade or business
foreign

in the U.S.

credit

in the

home country, on

is subject to tax, even if it is earned by

a

foreign person,

and because this type of foreign investment (investment in a trade or
business)

by

zatin ?dnericans does not seem to be the essential problem of

tax—induced capital flight.'6
The real potential for tax—induced capital flight would appear to
involve investment in interest—bearing securities and bank accounts,

estate in the United States. The U.S. does
not tax ist interest paid to unrelated foreigners, and capital gains on
assets other than real estate realized by foreigners are exempt from u.s.
tax. It may also be possible to reduce substantially U.S. taxes on
corporate

shares, and

real

corporate dividends (and with greater risk and less flexibility those on
capital gains on real estate). Provisions of U.S. law dealing with these
types

of income are

discussed in the next section. The question to be
12

addressed briefly in the remainder of this section is whether a Latin
American country that attempts to impose taxation on a worldwide basis
can effectively do so on these types of income from passive investment.

It appears that a negative answer is virtually inevitable.
Exceptions would be likely to occur only in the simplest cases.

For

example, someone might repatriate funds through legal channels to a
country with strong exchange controls and not be able to prove that the
funds do not constitute income.

In fact, one would not ordinarily expect

that passive income earned abroad on which neither foreign nor domestic
tax had been paid would be repatriated through legal channels. Moreover,
since no country in Latin America, including those employing the
worldwide approach, has a double taxation treaty with the United States,
the exchange of tax information with the United States is nonexistent.
Even if there were such a treaty, it would be simple and relatively safe
to give the bank or other payor of interest a false address of
convenience, for example, in another Latin American country that employs
the territorial system or in a tax haven country that has a treaty with
the U.S.

In the case of bank

interest, even this is not necessary.

Since financial institutions are not required to report payments of
interest to foreign investors to the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, an
exchange of information agreement would serve little purpose; under U.S.

law there would be no information to exchange.
Given the difficulties the United States has in preventing its own
citizens from evading taxes on domestic—source interest and dividend
income (through means to be described in section V), there is little
reason to believe that any Latin American country can effectively apply a
worldwide system of taxation to non—business income earned in the United
13

States by its residents, either with or without cooperation from the
United States,

Of course, under current U.S. law and

in

the absence of

treaties there is little such cooperation.

IV.

U.S. Law:

Principles and Facts

The United States has traditionally been a strong advocate of the
principle of residence—based taxation. Even so, it is also coomonly said

apply source—based taxation to income originating within the country,
as well as to the foreign income of U.S. persons. In fact, aside from
income earned in a trade or business, interest paid to affiliates, and
to

capital gains on real

United States
cart

be taxed

United

A.

estate, much

income

from

capital originating in

is legally exempt from tax if earned
by foreigners)'7

at

low rates if channelled through treaty partners

the

More

of the

States.

Income from a Trade or Business
Income

received by

foreigners from the conduct of a trade or

business in the United States has long been

The Foreign Investors Tax Act
that restrict the scope

capital

subject to U.S. taxation.

(FITh) of 1966 made two important changes

of taxation in this area in ways that encourage

flight from other countries to the United States to avoid taxes.

provided that investment income (conmionly termed "fixed
determinable annual or periodical," or FDAP income) received by
First, it

or

foreigners also engaged in business in the United States would be
included in the taxable income from the conduct of a trade or business
only

if

most

important items of

"effectively connected" with such a trade or business.18
FDAP

are

interest,

14

dividends, rents and

(The

royalties.

Gains on the sale of capital assets may also be characterized

as effectively connected.) By comparison, the "force of attraction"
doctrine of prior law had provided that investment income earned by

a

foreign corporation or individual engaged in a trade or business would
automatically be included in the taxable income of that trade or
business.
This distinction is important, because investment income

(FDA.P)

was

subject to tax at a fixed rate, cometonly 30 percent unless reduced by
treaty,

on the gross amount.

By comparison, income deemed to be derived

from pursuit of a trade or business (including that drawn by the force of
attraction) was subject to progressive rates reaching as high as 70
percent, though only on net income after deductions.'9

to clarify that
holding securities for investment purposes did not constitute a trade or
business, even if an agent resident in the United States was granted
The

second important change made by

authority to use

the

FITP was

discretion in managing a portfolio. Together these two

provisions reduced substantially the

likelihood that investment income

be subject to tax as income from a trade or business.20

would

Initially

they implied primarily that such investment income would be subject to
the 30 percent withholding rate (or lower rate, as provided by treaty);
with the increased use of treaty shopping and the eventual repeal of 30
percent withholding on portfolio interest these provisions have assumed
even greater importance; see parts

C

and D of this section.

The FITh was passed in response to concern about the balance of
payments problems the United States was experiencing in the early l960s.
That the purpose was to

was

made

attract foreign capital into the United States

quite explicit in

the report of a task force appointed by
15

President Kennedy in 1963 that transmitted its report to President
Johnson in April 1964.

The task force report stated, "revision of U.S.

of foreign investors is one of the most ixmnediate and productive
to increase the flow of foreign capital to this country." With this

taxation
ways

purpose
engaged

mind,

rates only on
B.

it

"that a nonresident alien individual
in trade or business within the United States be taxed at regular
in

recolx!nended,

income connected with such trade or business."2'

Bank Interest

taxation
when paid to foreigners. This exemption (which was implemented by the
construction of attributing such income to foreign sources prior to
rationalization via an explicit exemption in the 1986 Tax Reform Act) is
Interest

on bank accounts has long been

exempt

from U.S.

justified as responding to competitive pressures from abroad; it is
argued that without such an exemption U.S. banks would be unable to
compete for funds in international capital markets.22
U.S. financial institutions paying interest to a foreign recipient
are under no obligation to report the payments to the U.S. Internal
Revenue Service.

As indicated more fully in part F of this Section, some

U.S. residents probably use this exemption, as well as that for interest
on debt securities and the reduced rates provided by treaties, to avoid
U.S. taxes.

This is relevant because it indicates just how difficult it

would be for Latin
tax U.S. source

C.

American

countries employing the worldwide approach to

inc of these types.

Portfolio Interest
until 1984 interest on portfolio investment in debt securities
16

issued in the U.S. was subject to 30 percent withholding (or lower rates,
as provided by treaty).

It was, however, a relatively

conuiion

(though far

from simple) matter for a U.S. corporation to avoid paying this tax by

a finance subsidiary incorporated in the Netherlands Antilles, with
which the U.S. had a quite favorable treaty.
using

The following

is a

simple example of this abuse of the treaty

process. The finance subsidiary of a U.S. corporation chartered in the
Netherlands Antilles (N.A.) would float a public issue in the Eurodollar
bond market and loan the proceeds to

its U.S. parent.

parent would
obtain a deduction for interest paid to the finance subsidiary, but the
interest payments made by the U.S. parent to its finance subsidiary would
be exempt from U.S. withholding taxation under the terms of the treaty
between the Netherlands and the United States, as extended to the
Netherlands Antilles. The finance subsidiary would be subject to tax on

interest

The

income in the Netherlands Antilles only to the extent of the

spread between the

interest paid and

approximately one percentage point.

interest received, consnonly
Interest payments made by the

finance subsidiary to bond holders would be exempt from taxation in both

the United
certain

States and the Netherlands Antilles. Moreover, subject to

limitations, the income tax

paid to the Netherlands Antilles

could be used to offset dollar for dollar the U.S. parent's U.S. income
tax liability via the foreign tax credit.23
The Tax Reform of 1984 repealed the 30 percent tax on interest paid
to foreigners for portfolio obligations issued after July 18, 1984, the
date of enactment.

Several justifications can be given for the repeal of

30 percent withholding on portfolio interest. First, repeal increased
tax equity and

the

efficiency of international transactions by extending
17

to all borrowers and

available

lenders the

tax treatment that had previously been

only to those able (perhaps because of size) to take advantage

of the type of "treaty shopping'

manipulation

described above.24

It was

inadvisable simply to attempt to close the treaty shopping
loophole, since to do so would place U.S. borrowers at a disadvantage in

deemed

Eurodollar markets, since lenders cormonly insisted upon
enough

to compensate for the U.S. withholding tax.25

a

return high

Of course, repeal

of 30 percent withholding increased the attraction of U.S. investments
for those from all countries with mobile capital.26 As a result it
facilitated financing the large deficits in the U.S. balance of payments.
Second, it would enable the U.S. government to reduce interest outlays
necessary to finance the large and rapidly growing debt of the federal
government.
Following years of debate and negotiations the

U.S.

government

announced on June 30, 1987 the termination of its tax treaty with the
Netherlands antilles, effective January 1, 1988.

Because of the outcry

from world financial markets, the termination was eventually rescinded
for interest payments, leaving them eligible for benefits of the
treaty.27

The repeal of 30 percent withholding makes this largely

academic, except for interest on existing debt.

While repeal of the

Netherlands antilles treaty will eliminate the most egregious opportunity
for treaty shopping, it

will not

totally eliminate the problem posed by

third—country use of treaties especially for non—interest payments.

nre

on

this,

see

context, section

D.

Other

the next part

of this section and, in a different

V below.)

Portfolio Income
18

(For

Capital gains on assets other than
irtunediately below)

U.S. tax.

Such

realized

real

estate (to be considered

by foreign persons are generally exempt from

gains are subject to tax

only

if they are "effectively

connected' with a U.S. trade or business (see part

A of

this section),

or, in the case of an individual, if the owner was present in the U.S.
for more than 182 days during the year of disposition.

Dividends, royalties, and other forms of portfolio income paid to
foreigners and not yet discussed are subject to 30 percent withholding,
except as reduced by treaties.28 As with interest income under pre—1984
law, there are opportunities for residents of nations having no treaty
with the United States (as well as U.S. citizens) to channel funds
through treaty countries in order to benefit from the reduced withholding
rates provided by treaty.
Abuse of the treaty mechanism is relatively straightforward. Under
U.S. law the recipient of U.S.—source dividends need only provide an
address in a treaty country to the payor of dividends in order to benefit
from the reduced rate of withholding provided by treaty.

Unless the

withholding agent has knowledge that the recipient of dividends is not
actually a resident of the treaty country, it is allowed under U.S. law
to apply the reduced withholding rates specified in the treaty with the
relevant country.

Though slightly different, the withholding

requirements for non—dividend income are equally lax; it is a simple
matter to obtain reduced withholding rates by certifying residence in a
treaty country.

Since U.S. regulations do not require that payors of

portfolio income determine the identity and residence of the beneficial
owners of nominee accounts, such accounts held in treaty countries can be
used to evade U.S. withholding tax on such income.29
19

E.

Capital Gains on Real Property
Before passage of the Foreign Investment in Real Property Tax Act of

1980 (FIRPTP), a foreign investor could easily invest in real property in
the United States and incur no U.S. tax liability on gains realized on
disposition of the property.

A

simple way to achieve this result would

be to hold the real property through a U.S. or foreign corporation and
then sell the corporation's stock.3°
FIRPTP changes this situation dramatically. Under FIRPTP tax is
imposed on gains realized after June 18, 1980 by a foreign person upon
the disposition of a 'United States real property interest'

(USRPI).

This effect is achieved through the formal mechanism of deeming all gains
and losses from dispositions of USRPIs as effectively connected with a
U.S. trade or business.31

(FIBPTh does not, however, change the basic

rule that mere ownership of U.S. real property does not cause a foreign
person to be deemed to be engaged in U.S. trade or business, in the
absence of active management or the exercise of an option to be treated
in this way.)

In so doing it over—rides foreign tax treaties that

allowed the taxpayer the
losses would

be

option

of choosing annually whether gains and

deemed to be from a trade or business.32

In addition to direct fee—simple ownership of property, such
arrangements as leaseholds and options to acquire property interests are
included in the scope of the definition of a USRPI.
interest in

a

Noreover, an

U.S. corporation (other than simply as a creditor), half of

whose assets are U.S. property (a United States real property holding
corporation or USRPHC) is also a USRPI.33

For purpose of FIRPTh real

property is defined broadly, and includes interests in cooperative
apartments, residential dwellings, plants and factories, rental property
20

and

hotels,

that

and interests in mineral,

timber,

and

oil

and

gas

properties.

The passage of FIRPTP seems to have been motivated both

by

foreign investors were

farm

and by

the view that

bidding up the price of American

concern
land

it was unfair that foreigners could profit from

investment in U.S. real estate without paying any

U.S.

tax,

while

Americans could not.34

As

originally passed, FIRPT imposed extensive reporting

requirements on U.S. nonpublic corporations, partherships, trusts, and
estates which had a foreign investor whose pro—rata share of the entity's

in a trade
that figure in

any foreign person not engaged

USRPI exceeded $50,000 and on

or business in the United States owning a USRPI exceeding
value and not otherwise required to file an information return.35

security deposit for the payment of federal income taxes
could be furnished in lieu of filing certain of the information reports

Alternatively,
described

a

above.

These requirements for information reporting were extremely complex
and ambiguous, as well as intrusive. They were strongly resisted. It

generally felt that many foreign persons and U.S. entities through
which foreign persons hold tJSRPIs would be unwilling or unable to comply
was

with

the reporting and/or security requirements of the law.

the tax reform

act passed in

As a result

1984 substituted a system of withholding for

the system based on reporting and

security

deposits.36

In general the

transferee of a USRPI is required to withhold 10 percent of the amount

realized from the disposition of a USRPI. Under certain circumstawes
the withholding requirements are placed on corporations, partherships,
and trusts. In addition a foreign corporation that distributes a tJSRPI
to its shareholders (whether foreign or domestic) in
21

a

transaction in

which gain is taxable under FIRPTP must withhold 34 percent of such gain.
These obligations can

be avoided

if the transferor of the USRPI certifies

that the transferor is not a foreign person and provides the U.S.
taxpayer identification number of the transferor.37
There has been some concern that

FIRPT might

be having less impact

than originally envisaged, in part because it has been interpreted quite
narrowly

and

the repeal of 30 percent withholding has been given an

overly broad interpretation. Regulations indicate that the 1984 tax act

repealed

withholding on interest payments on certain private placements,

as well as for portfolio investments in publicly traded securities.

It

has been unclear whether under FIRPTA it would be possible to structure
an interest in real estate as a creditor having strong elements of equity
participation in such a way that it would not constitute a USRPI. If so,
investments with the economic features of an equity investment but the
legal features
If

a

of debt could be used

to circumvent the purpose of FIRPTA.

foreign creditor were given fixed interest bonds with additional

contingent on appreciation of property, a USRPI would almost
certainly be found to exist. Actual transactions would generally be much

payments

more complicated than this, so that
would be less transparent. The tax

interest/equitykickers based

on

the economic nature of the matter
treatment of debt with contingent

net operating profits, appreciation of

certain. The
U.S. Treasury Department has, however, warned taxpayers that it will
interpret debt with "equity kickers" as USRPI5 subject to FIBPT
other potential gap in FIBPTA results from the fact that it may be
possible to structure ownership arrangements in such a way as to avoid a
property,

or gain on the

sale of property is somewhat less

taxable disposition under U.S.

tax

law.
22

For example, a USRPI might be

held by a foreign corporation; the ownership of the foreign entity could
change without triggering U.S. taxation under FIRPTP.
foreign corporation can be characterized as

an

Even though a

RPHC, disposition of its

stock by a foreign person is not subject to U.S. tax under FIRPTP. Of
course,

this is likely to be a quite clumsy investment vehicle,

since the buyer assumes the corporation's "tax history" in
such a case. It can be assumed, moreover, that the purchaser of stock in

particularly

such a corporation would reduce the

such stock to reflect

paid upon liquidation; since the buyer (through the
corporation) retains the seller's basis in the real property, tax can be
the

tax

price paid for

that

must be

deferred indefinitely, but it cannot be avoided completely.

On balance,

the most appropriate conclusion is probably that the taxation of capital
gains on U.S. real estate realized by foreigners has been tightened
substantially, though some gains may escape tax or may be deferred for
long periods.

F. Suxmtary Assessment
Recent years have seen a pattern in the evolution of the U.S.
taxation of income from capital earned by foreigners.

First, income

from the conduct of a trade or business in the United States remains

to be no inclination to lighten the tax
burden of foreigners doing business in the United States; indeed, it was
increased in relative terms by the Tax Reform Act of 1986, especially by
the provisions pertaining to the branch profit tax. Moreover, gains
from the sale of U.S. real estate are now subject to income tax, and
withholding is applied to the gross proceeds from such sales in many
fully taxable.

cases.

There

seems

This change was

made

explicitly to forestall foreign investment
23

in U.S. real estate and to equalize tax treatment of American and
foreign investors in real estate.

By comparison, portfolio interest has joined interest paid by
financial institutions in being exempt from withholding tax.

extnt

To a large

this simply ratified the status quo, since many large

corporations had come to use financing subsidiaries chartered in the
Netherlands Antilles to circumvent the previously existing withholding
requirements.

It is noteworthy, however, that this problem was attacked

by exempting portfolio interest, rather than by simply abrogating the
Netherlands Antilles treaty, because of the express desire to avoid
putting American borrowers at a disadvantage relative to their foreign
competitors, who are said to have ready access to financial markets
abroad

without the requirement to pay withholding

Other

to

forms

taxes.

of portfolio income received by foreigners remain

tax, but

substantially
the United States
by channeling
has tax treaties. Residents of non—treaty countries, as well as U.S.
residents, can use these techniques to avoid U.S. withholding taxes on
payments to residents of non—treaty nations. It is thus not surprising
that in 1978 almost ninety percent of investment income sent from the
United States to foreign countries flowed to countries having tax
treaties with the United States. Even more telling is the fact that
subject

withholding

these taxes can be reduced

investments through countries with which

approximately
paid

one—half of dividends

and one—third of non—bank interest

to foreign addressees (at that time

still

subject to withholding

tax) went to only three countries, Switzerland, the Netherlands, arid the

Netherlands Antilles, nations that are notorious for their use by those

interested

in "treaty shopping."38
24

V.

Potential Solutions
Faced with the situation just described, Latin xnerican countries

that are concerned about the possibility that generous tax treatment in
the United States may induce capital flight have three basic options.
This section examines these options.

It concludes that none of the

three approaches is likely to be effective in eliminating tax—induced
incentives for capital flight
First, they can attempt to adapt to the international tax
environment in order to minimize the damage to their economies.

This

would imply adoption of the worldwide principle and negotiation of
foreign tax treaties with the United States; presumably such treaties
must contain exchange of information agreements if they are to be
effective.

This approach is unlikely to be effective.

Second, they can attempt to change the external environment by
persuading the United States and other developed countries to alter
their tax treatment of income earned by foreigners.

In essence this

means convincing the U.S. and other developed countries to reverse their
long—standing preference for residence—based taxation

— or at least

actually to apply source—based taxation to income originating within
their jurisdictions in order to avoid attracting funds from Latin
Mterica.

A

The outlook for this strategy is also not bright.

third and far more extreme option would be to adopt a

fundamentally different system of direct taxation that exempts capital
income from domestic investment. Such an approach would place
domestic—source income from business and capital on even terms with
income from foreign investment. chile this approach would produce a

nre

nearly level playing field, it has certain obvious probleu.
25

A.

Switch to Residence Principle
At a superficial level it might appear that the problem addressed

in this paper could be eliminated if Latin American countries now using
the territorial principle would adopt worldwide taxation of the income
of residents. In fact, such an attempted solution would probably be
largely ineffectual, for reasons suggested in section III.

By

i,

elf,

simply requiring that residents pay tax on worldwide income would have

liotie effect,

except on those who comply with tax laws as a matter of

moral principle. It is true that failing to pay tax involves fraud and
the psychological cost of fearing the consequences of detection.

Even

more rigorous tax administration is unlikely to have a major effort in
inducing compliance with the tax law, since the receipt of
foreign—source income is extremely difficult to detect.

In the absence

of exchange of information agreements between the United States and
Latin American countries, there would be little possibility that tax
could be collected on capital income earned in the United States by
residents of those countries.
Even if exchange of information agreements would be completely
effective, but could be obtained only as part of a comprehensive tax
treaty with the United States, it is not obvious that pursuing such
agreements would be in the interest of most Latin American countries.
It can be expected
rates

on

that the United States would require

low

interest and dividends as part of any such treaty.

withholding
The revenue

loss that would result from accession to such U.S. demands might be too
great a price to pay.

This issue, while important, cannot be pursued

here.
In fact, exchange of information agreements would stop only the
26

simplest forms of abuse, those in which the Latin American investor
accurately reports his or her name and
interest,

dividends, etc.

A

address

to the U.S. payor of

relatively simple way to circumvent the

fiscal authorities would be to provide false information to the payor.
For example, a resident of Colombia might give a Venezuelan address, if
the U.S. had an exchange of information agreement with Colombia, but not

with

Venezuela.
To prevent this form of abuse it would be necessary for the United

States

arid

the home country of the investor to detect the use of

addresses of convenience in countries imposing no tax on such income.
In order to understand the difficulty of relying on exchange of
information agreements to assist Latin American countries in the
implementation of worldwide taxation of the income of their residents,
it is instructive to contemplate the opportunities for tax evasion on
U.S.—source income that are open even to residents of the United States
created by the combination of liberal U.S. treatment of income
ostensibly paid to foreigners and lax administrative procedures.39
Even before passage of the 1984 legislation that eliminated
withholding on portfolio interest paid to foreigners, the following
assessment was made of the ease with which U.S. residents could evade
tax on interest received from domestic financial institutions:
Evidence is mounting that some United States residents are
posing as foreign persons, establishing interest—bearing
savings and checking accounts at United States banks and
savings and loam institutions, directing that the interest
income be sent to them at an address

f

convenience in a

foreign country, and omitting that interest as income on
27

their United States tax returns. The failure of a United
States resident to report this interest.
willful tax evasion.

(Karzon,

1983,

.

. constitutes

pp. 764—65)

Nor is the cause of this growing source of evasion difficult to ident—

i.

Krzon

(1983) writes:

The scheme appears to succeed only because many barriers impede tax
officials from detecting the transaction. At the United States end
of the transaction the financial institution paying the bank
interest is not required to withhold tax or report the
transaction...

[Al survey of the practices of representative

ban ing institutions has indicated that many payors rely solely

upon the foreign address submitted by the depositor and have little
or no internal safeguards to verify a depositor's true residency.
(Karzon,

1983, p. 765,766)

one can only assume that similar abuses will result from the exemption
of portfolio interest paid to foreigners, despite the safeguards
contained in the 1984 law.4°
The implications for Latin xnerican countries
worldwide income of their residents is obvious:

wishing to tax

the

If the government of

the United States takes so little pains to prevent this type of

evasion

by its own residents, there is little reason to expect it to provide
much U.S. assistance in helping Latin american countries prevent evasion
of worldwide taxes on their residents. It is unrealistic to expect the
United States, through its fiscal authorities, to do for other countries
what it cannot

— or will not — do for itself.

Aggravating the problem just described is the increased secrecy
being provided by certain countries as part of an attempt to attract
28

intermediation of international capital movements.41 Such secrecy laws
"conceal the transaction and the identity of the taxpayer, and

block

United States authorities from gaining the information necessary to
trace and prove the fraud." (Karzon, 1983, p. 779)42 Needless to say,
problems of this type would be compounded if Latin American countries
attempting to implement worldwide taxation tried to penetrate the
shield of secrecy or asked the United States to assist them in doing
43
so.
Before the 1984 law exempting portfolio interest was passed, both
Americans and foreigners could resort to the use of nominee accounts in
countries having favorable tax treaties with the United States to evade
completely or partially withholding taxes on portfolio income, including
interest and dividends. While this technique is no longer necessary in
the case of portfolio interest, its use remains a possibility (for both

other countries) in the case of other forms of
portfolio income. Again, it does not appear that cooperation between
the United States and a Latin American country, without the help of the

Americans

and those from

U.S. treaty partner,
But

is likely to reduce this

problem

significantly.

relying on U.S. treaty partners is truly likely to be an

futility.44

exercise in

While the United States has an interest in persuading it

treaty partners not to allow U.S. residents to use this device to evade
U.S. taxes, neither it nor the treaty partners has much interest in
preventing its use by residents of third countries. It seems quite
unlikely that the United States will expend much more of its scarce
political capital in convincing its treaty partners to cooperate with
Latin American countries to protect their fiscal resources45
There is also an interesting question of whether a switch to
29

residence—based taxation would constitute sound
this,

public

policy.

were to attempt,
suppose that a Latin american country

unsuccessfully,

to implement taxation on

a worldwide basis.

To see

if

even

ny

repatriating funds from abroad would irrnuediately face several
of
questions: whether the repatriation represented a return flow
on income earned
capital or taxable income; whether tax had been paid
taxpayer

abroad in
abrrad.

thirgs

invested
previous years; if such funds were subsequently

would they be presumed

to earn

income

subject to tax?

All

considered, a risk—averse taxpayer might be well—advised not to

make the repatriation or to hide it.

B. Changing the International Tax Environment
As an alternative to the futile attempt to implement
residence—based taxation,

the countries of Latin american might try

countries that
again to convince the United States and other developed
and should increase
they are wrong to favor residence—based taxation
their source—based taxes. At this point it is appropriate to quote at
to the residence
length from a recent paper that blames allegiance
the
principle for the increase in tax evasion by U.S. citizens using

of ruses described earlier in this paper:
Responsibility for the burgeoning tax evasion by United States
residents does not lie solely on the doorsteps of the many nations
accused of being tax or secrecy havens. The fault also lies in the

types

historical United

States insistence on a treaty policy which

fosters international tax evasion by favoring residency basis
taxation over source basis taxation for portfolio income... .The
tilt in treaty policy from source—based to residency—based taxation
30

of portfolio income has widened the opening for tax evasion.

It is

most difficult for a residence country, such as the United States,
to detect all portfolio income earned abroad by the United States
residents and all United States—sourced portfolio income and bank
interest received abroad by United States residents masquerading as
foreigners. with false foreign addresses....The treaty policy

orientation toward residency country taxation of portfolio income
should be reappraised, and a return to source country taxation
should be reconsidered.. . .The merit
in its

of administration

simplicity

collection.

..

.

of source

In

country

and certainty

taxation

lies

of tax

view of the sizeable amount of United

States—owned, foreicri—sourced portfolio income, this shift might
enhance rapport with developing countries, long advocates of source
taxation.

(Karzon,

1983,

pp. 827—31;

emphasis added)

If the United States would actually implement the source principle
that ostensibly underlies its tax treatment of income earned in the
United States by foreigners, the problems described in this paper would
be much less importanL

(They would not be eliminated as long as other

developed countries continued generous treatment of such income.
return
much

to this

point

below.)

We

It seems unlikely, however, that there is

reason to expect that this approach will soon be fruitful.
As indicated in section IV, current U. S. practice in this area

seems to reflect certain objectives.

business
avoid

operated by

a

Income

from

a U.S. trade or

foreign person is taxed in full, in order to

conferring a competitive advantage on such persons, relative to

americans.

Gains on the sale of real estate are now

31

considered

t be

derived from a trade or business, and thus subject to tax.

Again, there

was a desire to equalize the tax treatment of U.S. and foreign investors
in real estate and reduce what were seen to be inappropriate incentives
for foreign investment in U.S. real estate.

y comparison, interest from bank accounts and

interest earned on

portfolio investments is exempt from U.S. tax, as long as it is not
"effectively" connected with a U.S. trade of business.

These

execQtions—which are totally inconsistent with source—based taxation of
income originating in the United States—are provided in part in order
to attract foreign capital into the United States and in part to avoid
putting American financial institutions and non—financial borrowers at a
competitive disadvantage, relative to their counterparts in other
developed countries. Contrary to the situation with income from a trade
or business and capital gains on real estate, there is no offsetting
concern that foreigners have an unfair competitive advantage over
Americans because of more favorable tax treatment. Dividends (and other
forms of 'fixed or determinable or periodical" income) continue to be
subject to withholding, but this tax can be reduced by routing
investment funds through a treaty partner of the United States.
Given the recent repeal of 30 percent withholding on portfolio
interest and the explicit expression of the sentiments described
previously as a reason for that legislation, it seems highly unlikely
that the United States will soon reverse this policy.

Certainly it

seems unlikely that the United States will follow such a policy if other
developed countries do not follow suit.

American opponents of taxation

of interest income earned by foreigners would point to the continued
availability of debt instruments in Europe on which there is no
32

withholding as justification for continuation of the exemption.
?'loreover,

as long as such instruments continue to be available in other

countries, taxation of interest by the

United States would not be

totally effective in solving the problem of tax—induced capital flight
from Latin America, in any event,
oppose

changes of

this type

Of course, powerful political forces

in Europe.

The strongest impetus for a change of this type in the

States

United

is likely to be convincing evidence that Americans are evading

substantial amounts of U.S. income tax by such illegal means as
channelling investments through foreign nominee accounts and buying
bonds of F'merican issuers that are targeted to foreign lenders. While
there is good reason to believe both that abuses of this type existed
before repeal of 30 percent withholding on portfolio interest and that
they

have beert

aggravated by repeal of 30 percent withholding, there

presently does no

seem

to be uch

sentiment in Congress to attempt to

anything about the problem. Further impetus could come from the need
for deficit reduction. Additional federal revenues could be raised by
do

curtailing
Even

the exemption of interest

going to foreign addresses.

if the United States could be convinced to tax interest income

earned by foreigners

the problem examined in this paper probably would

not be eliminated, as long as reduced rates are applied to interest
earned by residents of countries with which the United States has tax
treaties. As indicated earlier, funds of Latin American investors could

through selected tax haven" treaty countries in order to
benefit from such reduced withholding rates. This giimnick would
be channelled

presumably
any

be

available

on

both

interest

and dividends (and,

indeed,

on

payment for which reduced withholding taxes are provided by -reaty).
33

It seems quite unlikely that the developed countries of the world,
traditionally advocates of residence—based taxation, will reverse the
historical trend of using treaties to reduce source—country taxation of
these income flows, especially if the primary justification is to assist
the

developing countries in avoiding capital flight.

(Developed

countries might be somewhat more sympathetic to an appeal from LDCs

the need for assistance in implementing their income taxes. Of
course, such an appeal has little force as long as the developing
countries continue to employ the territorial principle.)
based

on

A

less ambitious approach would be for developing countries to

appeal to the developed countries for assistance in preventing their
residents from using treaty shopping to avoid payment of source—based
taxes in other developed countries. In this effort they might have as
allies those developed nations who believe their own residents are
engaging in similar abuses.

Of course, this approach will have no

effect, except for income subject to withholding. As long as interest

largely untaxed when paid to foreigners, it is the use of such
devices as false addresses of convenience and nominee accounts by
remains

residents of countries employing the residence principle that poses the
problem.

Again, there does not seem to be much reason to believe this

approach will be fruitful.

C.

A More

Radical Ppproach

The discussion to this point has been conducted in the context of a
traditional income tax in which interest is a deductible expense and in
which interest income is subject to tax, unless explicitly exempted, as
in the case of foreign—source interest income earned by residents of a
34

country with a territorial system.

As indicated above, there seems to

be little reason to expect that the tax—induced incentives for capital
flight from Latin Anerica will be reduced in such an income—based tax
system.

It is possible, however, that a more extreme reform offers

somewhat more hope.

The remainder of this section examines this

possibility.

An alternative to

the traditional income tax that has gained favor

among some academic observers provides tax treatment for interest and
dividends that is very different from that under the income tax laws of
most countries.46 In particular, no deduction is allowed for interest
expense, and interest income is not subject to tax.

In addition,

dividends are not taxable in the hands of the recipient, and as under
the income taxes of most countries, they are not a deductible expense.
Thus interest and dividends are placed on equal footing from a tax point
of view, thereby eliminating the bias against equity finance found in
the tax systems of most countries.47 Irmnediate deduction is allowed for
all business purchases, including those of capital goods; thus there is
no need for either depreciation allowances or special accounting for
48
inventories.
The base of sucn a tax can be shown to be consumption,
•

rather than income.9
The extreme simplification of tax law that this alternative would
make possible has led some observerss to suggest that it should be given
serious consideration by developing countries for that reason alone.50
But for the present discussion another aspect of this tax is more
relevant. This approach essentially combats the problem of capital
flight from LDC5 created by the tax exemption of certain income in its
country of source by also exempting much domestic—source income
35

fm

business and

1. LDC

capital.51

Policy

Predicting the full implications of adoption of a system such as
this for the problem of tax—induced capital flight is quite difficult.
If only a single developing country were to adopt the system, interest
and

dividends

income

would

earned on domestic investment would be exempt

arid

be subject to a zero marginal effective tax rate;

business
of

under most income tax systems that are administered reasonably
well (and have adequate provisions for withholding on interest) this
course

benefit is
abroad

now generally

available only for income on capital invested

(under either the territorial system or an ineffectively

administered

worldwide system). This change would appear to reduce the

tax incentives for capital flight.

But interest paid by domestic

businesses would no longer be a deductible expense.

Depending on the

relation between the marginal tax rates currently applied to interest
income and to the net income of business, the net effect of such a
change might be either to increase or reduce the total taxation applied
to domestic interest flows.

Given

cortnnonly

observed patterns of asset

ownership, marginal tax rates, and evasion of tax on interest income, a
small net increase in the taxation of interest paid by business might be
expected.

By comparison, there would be no offset to the exemption of

interest on public debt.

Total taxation of domestic—source dividends

would clearly drop, except in cases where substantial relief from double
taxation of dividends already exists.
But this is only part of the story.

The immediate expensing of all

business purchases, including capital goods and items added to
36

inventory, would further reduce the taxation of business income from
equity investment in most countries. This would be true especially
where neither rapid depreciation (or other generous investment
allowances) nor inflation adjustment of depreciable basis is allowed.
The net effect of these changes would be too country—specific to allow
easy generalization.

For example, some countries might allow such rapid

depreciation that expensing would provide little additional benefit.
Similarly, in a country that adjusts interest expense for inflation the
total disallowance of deductions for interest expense and the exclusion
of interest income from the tax base may be relatively unimportant.

But

movement from full deduction of nominal interest to no deduction would
be dramatic. Though capital flight might be either worsened or reduced
as the net effect of a change such as this, a reduction seems most
likely fcr most countries that do not allow either inflation adjustment
of depreciable basis or generous capithi consumption allowances.
Of course, this is still only part of the story.

The taxation of

income from foreign capital invested in the country would also be
affected by a change as far—reaching as this.

As for domestic firms,

interest expense would no longer be deducrlble, but immediate expensing
would be allowed,

Net effects would again be very country specific (or

even industry of firm specific), but it appears that taxation would
conaonly be reduced. Revenues from

foreign investors might,

however, be

recouped through increased remittance taxes on interest and dividends.
Further

complicating matters

is uncartainty about how

capital

exporting countries that provide foreign tax credits for source-'untry
taxes on net moons would treat such a tax and an increased rerttanc

taxes that

might

eccompany it.

Since no deduction
37

is allowed

interest expense, there is some risk that such a tax would not be
allowed as a credit against home—country taxes.52

Of

course,

to the

extent that the tax—saving benefits of expensing outweigh the
tax—increasing costs of the loss of the interest deduction, tax
liabilities would fall and there would be less of a problem than loss of
the foreign

tax credit

under an income tax.

But the problem would

resurface if higher remittance taxes were used to prevent a drop in

rewtue from income on investments from foreigners.
It is difficult to know how capital—exporting countries would treat
this tax.53

The United States has traditionally been zealous in its

denial of foreign tax credits for any taxes other than those on net
income, in order to prevent the credit being taken for gross receipts
taxes, severance taxes, disguised state royalties, etc., especially
those paid on the exploitation of natural resources. This focus on net
income is evidenced by the insistence that deductions be allowed for all
expenses of earning income.
Of course, the disallowance of interest deductions under the tax
being considered here is quite different from the failure to allow
deductions for expenses under a gross receipts tax.

The interest

disallowance is an integral part of a direct tax system based on
consummtion, rather than income.

— or more

Noreover, it may typically be offset

offset — by the allowance of expensing of all
purchases.'4 This is potentially quite important under U.S. law, which
provides

than

that a tax can be creditable even if it does not allow

deductions for all expenses, provided a compensatory benefit of at least
equal value is allowed.

On balance, it appears that there is at least

some chance that the tax in question would be creditable, at least in
38

the United States.

If it is (is not) creditable, then the withholding

tax on foreign remittances would almost certainly (not) be
creditable,
since its creditability would probably depend on the creditability of
the underlying consumption—based tax.

A
issue.

final word

on

creditability is appropriate before leaving that

The U.S. foreign tax

average U.S. tax

rate

credit

is, in rough terms, limited to the

on foreign—source income.

!'loreover,

this limit is

calculated on an "overall" (worldwide) basis, rather than on a
country—by—country basis.
U.S. rate result in "excess

foreign taxes in excess of
foreign tax credits." Recent

Any

the average
changes in

U.S. law, including rules for the determination of the source of income,
as well as rate reduction, make it more likely than before that American
firms will be in an excess foreign tax credit position. To the extent
this is true it may make relatively little practical difference whether
the tax under consideration in this section is credited. As long a the
firm is in an excess credit position in the aggregate, additional taxes
on foreign income cannot be credited,

even if, in principle, they are

creditable,
2. Advanced Country Policy
Widespread adoption of this approach by the developed countries
could do much to elitainate the present tax advantages for foreigners to
invest in such countrios, Under curLert law interest paid to these
investors benefits from the combination of the interest deduction and
the exclusion of interest income from withholding tax; in effect the
combined (payor cum payee) marginal tax rate applied to such inccne in

n: tx benefit
being eqval in
interest flow and the tax rate applied

the country of source is negative, the
magnitude to the product of the

39

to business income.

(For present purposes we can

assume

that such

income is not effectively taxed by the country of residence.)

Under the

simplified alternative being examined here, the combined marginal tax

rate on

such income would rise to zero, since the deduction for interest

expense would be eliminated. This would essentially eliminate the tax

advantages of

capital flight examined in this paper, even if LDCS did

nothing, at least for debt capital.
Perhaps as important, the possibility of abusing this system
through the use of foreign nominee accounts,

addresses of convenience,

and treaty shopping would be eliminated. Tax would, in effect, be
collected through the disallowance of interest deductions, rather than
withholding, and withholding taxes could be eliminated.55

A
fix.'

switch to a system of this type clearly does not offer a "quick
Its adoption would run counter to decades of develonent of the

tax on net income.

There are also important concerns about equity and

transition that must be addressed satisfactorily. Moreover, under this
approach taxation of capital income is, in effect, placed on a source
basis, rather than a residence basis.

Thus the entire system of

international conventions dealing with flows of income between nations
would need to be rethought.56
In particular, the developed countries that have fought so
diligently for residence—based taxation would need to reverse that
stance.

Given the worldwide proclivity to adopt "beggar —

policies

— even by developed countries in their dealings with LDCs,

thy

neighbor"

quick action of this type seem unlikely. It is likely to come about
only if LDC5 bind together in insisting that present international tax
conventions do not function satisfactorily and push for reconsideration
40

of existing conventiorls.07
fiscal order may
begin

the

be a

Though the road to a new international

long one, some observers believe

journey.58

41

it worthwhile

to

