                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       UNDERSTANDING CROSS-COUNTRY DIFFERENCES IN HEALTH STATUS
                          AND EXPENDITURES

                                        Raquel Fonseca
                                        François Langot
                                      Pierre-Carl Michaud
                                      Thepthida Sopraseuth

                                       Working Paper 26876
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26876


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 2020




We thank Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, Josep Pijoan-Mas and Pascal St-Amour for
helpful comments as well as seminar and conference participants at ASFE annual conference,
GATE workshop on "Heterogeneity and Health", CEMFI, SCSE, LACEA, CIRANO, UQAM,
Cergy University and Evry University. This research was supported by the National Institute on
Aging, under grant R01AG030824, PANORisk Regional grant (Pays de la Loire, France), and
Institut Universitaire de France. This research is also part of the program of the Research Chair in
Intergenerational Economics. Errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Raquel Fonseca, François Langot, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Thepthida Sopraseuth.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Understanding Cross-country Differences in Health Status and Expenditures
Raquel Fonseca, François Langot, Pierre-Carl Michaud, and Thepthida Sopraseuth
NBER Working Paper No. 26876
March 2020
JEL No. E21,H51,I10

                                         ABSTRACT

Using a general equilibrium heterogeneous agent model featuring health production, we quantify
the relative contribution of price distortions in the health market, TFP and other health risks in
explaining cross-country differences in health expenditure (as a share of GDP) and health status.
Estimated parameters reveal a substantial price wedge that explains at most 20% of the difference
in health spending (as a share of GDP) and 30% of the difference in health status between Europe
and the U.S. We estimate a one percentage point negative impact on the life-time cost-of-living of
Americans from higher prices due to inefficiencies.


Raquel Fonseca                                  Pierre-Carl Michaud
ESG UQAM                                        HEC Montréal
320, rue Sainte-Catherine Est                   3000 Côte-Sainte-Catherine Road
Montréal (Québec) H2X 3X2                       Montréal (Québec), Canada H3T 2A7
Canada                                          and NBER
and CIRANO                                      pierre-carl.michaud@hec.ca
rfonseca.benito@gmail.com
                                                Thepthida Sopraseuth
François Langot                                 CY Cergy-Paris University, Thema
Le Mans University                              33 boulevard du Port
Paris School of Economics                       95011 Cergy-Pontoise
Avenue Olivier Messiaen                         France
72085 Le Mans cedex 9                           thepthida.sopraseuth@u-cergy.fr
France
Francois.Langot@univ-lemans.fr
1        Introduction

Large differences in health expenditures are observed across countries. In 2018, the U.S. spent 17%

of its GDP on health while Germany spent 11.2% and Italy 8.8% (Health Statistics, OECD 2018).1

This increasing share of resources devoted to health care is thus one of the largest fiscal challenges

facing many OECD countries, and in particular, the United States. One could argue that these

differences in health expenditures are the result of differences in wealth and that health is a luxury

good: as Americans are richer, they devote a larger share of their wealth to healthcare services. Yet,

the aggregate level of health expenditures does not appear to be strongly associated with health

outcomes despite compelling evidence that healthcare services improve health. Americans have

been repeatedly found to be in worse health than Europeans (Banks et al., 2006) and experiment

higher incidence rates for various diseases (Solé-Auró et al., 2015). In this paper, we will argue

that the cross-country relationship between health expenditures and health status does identify

the marginal return of health services given that prices and quantities of healthcare services vary

substantially across countries. Hence, an analysis of understanding why health care spending and

health is different across countries needs to account for these differences.

        There is compelling evidence of substantial cross-country variation in prices for the same ser-

vices, a health services wedge.2 For example, there is evidence showing that the cost of medical

interventions, the price of drugs and physician compensation are significantly larger in the U.S.

than European countries (Anderson et al., 2003, Danzon, 2018, Laugesen and Glied, 2011). Cutler

and Ly (2011) argue that much of these differences in costs come from the administrative burden

of managing a complex reimbursement system while the relationship between providers and payers

(insurers) may lead to important wedges due to asymmetric information. At a macro level, Horen-

stein and Santos (2018) show that the large part of the U.S. gaps of health expenditures as a share

of GDP may be driven by the markup increases in the U.S. health care sector. Hence, higher prices

due to inefficiencies have the potential of leading to a higher share of income devoted to health,

without improving health outcomes.

        The quantity of health services may also vary across countries. First, due to higher prices
    1
     https://www.oecd.org/health/health-statistics.htm
    2
     The idea to use structural model in order to identify wedges to the efficient allocation has already been used by
e.g. Ohanian et al. (2008) who explain cross-country differences in long-term changes in hours worked.



                                                          2
resulting from the health service wedge, even if evidence on the price elasticity of health services

suggest a relatively inelastic demand curve (see Manning et al. (1987)). Second, differences in

total factor productivity (TFP), an efficiency wedge3 , may explain differences in quantity of

health services. The earlier literature on differences in health expenditures has identified income as

a key source of differences. Nevertheless, Gerdtham and Jonsson (2000) conclude that the income

elasticity of health expenditures is close to one which would suggest, as Newhouse (1992) points out,

that income differences cannot explain large variation of the income share of health expenditures.

However, Hall and Jones (2007) estimate life-cycle models yielding much higher income elasticities,

which partially explains the rise in health expenditures in the U.S. These authors suggest that

income elasticity may have been underestimated in previous studies.

       As far as we know, there is no general equilibrium model recognizing the endogeneity of health

expenditures, health and economic resources that allows to quantify heterogeneous wedges (health

services and efficiency) across countries. Indeed, a vast majority of the literature has dealt with

the impact of financial incentives on health expenditures or the role of rising income on these

expenditures, while the impact of inefficiencies induced by health providers’ behavior has received

less attention. In order to separately identify health services and efficiency wedges, we build on the

framework developed by Aiyagari (1994), augmented with health production as in Grossman (1972).

This heterogeneous framework accounts for the well-known within country relationship between

income/wealth and health (Avendano et al., 2009, Smith, 1999). We estimate structural parameters

and the two wedges (the health services and efficiency wedges) using a Method of Simulated Moments

(MSM), thereby exploiting cross-country disparity in economic resources, health expenditures and

health outcomes as well as within country variation (the income-health gradient). Our estimation

is performed on 8 countries (the U.S., Sweden, Denmark, the Netherlands, Germany, France, Italy,

and Spain). Within this framework, we estimate welfare costs of these wedges using a new measure

which can be interpreted as a life-time cost of living index which accounts for the immediate and

long-run benefits of investing in health as well as general equilibrium effects.

       We find that the U.S. are characterized by the highest health service wedge (ie. the highest

price of health services), while its efficiency wedge is one of the lowest (ie. the highest TFP). Our
   3
    Chari et al. (2007) build a macroeconomic model to show that this efficiency wedge can be generated by frictions
that cause factor inputs to be used inefficiently. This inefficient factor utilization maps into efficiency wedges and
thus a lower TFP.


                                                          3
estimation shows that the U.S. price of health services is 15% larger than the average price in

European countries. In addition, we find that efficiency wedge cannot account for cross-country

differences in health expenditures and health. Using counterfactuals, we show that, when health

price distortions in the U.S. have the same order of magnitude as in Europe, the gap in health

expenditures would be reduced by 20% while the gap in terms of health status would be reduced by

30%. Differences in terms of health dynamics, which could be the result of differences in underlying

risk factors (obesity, smoking, etc) account for a large share of the difference in health spending and

health outcomes across countries. Other differences, such as co-insurance rate or the income risks,

can not explained the cross-country differences in health status and expenditures. Overall, given

that health accounts for less than 15% of resources and Americans substitute away from health due

to higher prices which leads to both partial and general equilibrium effects, we find that the extra-

cost of living that Americans bear is equivalent to one percentage point in life-time expenditures.

As for health inequalities, we show that health service wedge i) increases the income-health gradient

by 30% and ii) makes high-income Americans bear the largest additional cost-of-living.

    The paper is structured as follows. In section 2, we document substantial differences in health

services prices across countries and discuss other sources of variation that can explain differences

in health expenditures and health services across countries. In section 3, we present the general

equilibrium model that will be used to fit the data. In section 4, we present the data and estimation

method we use and report estimates of the model and its predictive performance. In section 5,

counterfactual simulations allows us to decompose the cross-country differences in health indicators

between the size of the wedges and the elasticities of aggregate to these wedges. We then explore

welfare impacts (section 6). Finally, section 7 concludes.



2    Price and Quantity Differences Across Countries

Separating price and quantity and in particular constructing a comparable price index for health

services is a difficult task. Information systems are different across countries and price information

is not always available, in particular in health systems that do not impute all cost to episodes of

care. One would also want to compare the same services or the same quantity of services. This

is possible for some services but not for others. Finally, different countries use a different mix of


                                                  4
inputs to produce the same output. In Table 1, we report various price estimates that we have

been able to gather from studies attempting to compare prices across countries. The International

Federation of Health Plans (IFHP, 2013) collects data from private health insurance plans on cost

for various procedures and drugs. An angiogram costs 914 dollars in the U.S. compared to 264 in

France and 125 in Spain. Hence, the cost in Spain was 13.6% that of the same procedure in the

U.S. and 28.8% for France. Similar numbers are obtained for a scan of the abdomen or a bypass

surgery. Canada Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (2016) construct a price index for patented

drugs in OECD countries (weighted by Canadian sales). The price index reveals substantially lower

prices in European countries relative to the U.S. Laugesen and Glied (2011) report information on

physician compensation for primary care and for hip replacement. Again, evidence points to higher

prices in the U.S. compared to European countries. From OECD Statistics Health data, we find

that hospital spending per discharge is also lower in Europe compared to the U.S. (from 27% to

73% of U.S. spending). All this evidence, although imperfect, suggest that prices in the U.S. appear

to be larger than in Europe.

   Cutler and Ly (2011) investigate administrative costs, given that the U.S. has a distinctive

health care system: providers and insurers are typically distinct economic agents. In Figure 1 we

report the share of administrative costs in health expenditures (OECD, 2013). In the European

countries we consider, we observe lower administrative health care costs than in the U.S.

   Price differences reflect both quality or quantity differences in health care services. If so, Amer-

icans would be in much better health than their European counterparts. In fact, some evidence

suggest that this is unlikely to be the case. In Table 1, we report a measure of efficiency of health

services by looking at 5-year cancer survival rates for 4 common cancers: colon, cervical, breast and

leukemia. Relative to the U.S., the dispersion in cancer survival rates is very low. Most countries

use best treatments and practices with limited dispersion in outcomes. For some cancers, survival

rates are lower in Europe while for others, they are higher. On some measures, Americans are

using less the health care system (Anderson et al., 2003) while, on others, it appears that the use

of medical care is much more intensive in the U.S. (Cutler and Ly, 2011). However, the impact of

this intense use of health care in terms of better health remains unclear.

   Other factors can explain cross-country differences in health and health expenditures. First, the

health insurance system can transfer health services from the richest to the poorest, thus improving

                                                  5
aggregate health status. Second, while higher expenditures may lead to better health, the causality

may also run in the opposite direction. The rapid growth of obesity in the U.S. relative to other

countries may also explain part of the differences in health expenditures across countries (Thorpe

et al., 2004, 2007). According to Cutler et al. (2003), part of the differences in obesity between

the U.S. and Europe could originate from differences in food production technology and regulation,

which leads to higher relative price of less healthy food choices. Third, it is well known that the U.S.

earning risks is larger in European labor markets. This risk has an ambiguous impact on health. A

large earning risk may evict health expenditure because agents need to insure themselves against

consumption fluctuations (using precautionary savings). However, at the aggregate level, capital

accumulation increases output and thus average earnings, which affects the demand for health

services and health expenditures as a share of GDP. Hence, in order to estimate the magnitude

of health service and efficiency wedges from these observed cross country differences, our model

will take into account country-specific co-insurance rate, health behaviors, income process and

technology. Hence, we propose a parsimoneous heterogeneous agent general equilibrium model that

accounts for these factors.



3       General Equilibrium Model

3.1     Households

Agents are heterogeneous with respect to their productivity level e ∈ E, health status h ∈ H and

asset holding a ∈ A. Let us denote et and ht the histories of respectively productivity levels and

                                                             e(e0 |e), π
health status up and until time t.4 A Markov process {e ∈ E, π                         e(e0 |e) is the
                                                                       e0 (e0 )} where π

productivity’s transition matrix, and π
                                      e0 (e0 ) its initial value. This Markov process induces distri-

        et (et ) over time-t histories et and another Markov process {h ∈ H, π(h0 |h, m), π0 (h0 , m0 )}
butions π

induces distributions πt (ht , mt ) over time-t histories ht for an optimal choice for health service, mt .

The probability π(h0 = 1|h, m) of being in good health (h0 = 1) next period, given the current health
    4
    It is well known that health expenditures are related to age: older agents spend more on health services. However,
in our sample of countries, the age structure cannot be at the heart of the explanation of health outcomes and health
expenditures cross-country differences. Indeed, the U.S. have the lowest dependency ratio with the highest share of
health expenditures, and Italy the largest dependency ratio, with the smallest GDP share of health expenditures. This
leads us to build a parsimonious model that discard life-cycle features, unlike French and Jones (2011), Hugonnier
et al. (2013) or De Nardi et al. (2016).




                                                          6
status h, depends on the choice of health services m. It can be interpreted as a health production

function and probabilities are therefore endogenous. The probability of being in bad health is given

by π(h0 = 0|h, m) = 1 − π(h0 = 1|h, m), ∀h, m.


Preferences. Households value both their consumption and their health status. Households’

preferences can be described by the following standard expected discounted utility

                                    ∞
                                    X          XX
                                          βt             et (et )πt (ht , mt )u(ct , ht )
                                                         π                                                      (1)
                                    t=0        et   ht


where 0 < β < 1 is the time discount factor, c ≥ 0 is consumption. As in De Nardi et al. (2010),

health can be either good (h = 1) or bad (h = 0), therefore H = {0, 1}. We assume that the

instantaneous utility is additive in consumption c and health h:

                                                              c1−σ
                                               u(c, h) =           + φh.                                        (2)
                                                              1−σ

with φ > 0 the utility benefit of good health, and σ is averse risk parameter.5


From health service expenditures to health status. Each agent can spend his resources on

consumption c and health services m. Health services m improve the probability of being in good

health next period. Next period’s variables are denoted with a prime. In addition, we assume that

the function that maps health services in health status is


                                 π(h0 = 1|h, m) = 1 − exp(−(α0 m + α1h )).                                      (3)


Parameters α10 and α11 are exogeneous and govern both the level and persistence of health, condi-

tional on m, while α0 captures the productivity of m.


Resource Constraint. Labor income is affected by an idiosyncratic stochastic process e that

determines the value of efficient labor.6 e is the sum of an AR(1) permanent shock with parameters
   5
     We pick an additive specification as in Hall and Jones (2007).
   6
     Unlike Grossman (1972)’s model, health status does not affect agents’ earnings in our model. Indeed, there are
different views on the link between wage and health. Grossman favors the view that good health improves productivity
and thus wages, but Rosen (1974) underlines that wages must be adjusted upwards to compensate for high health
risks (compensating wage differential model). We chose here to be neutral.


                                                              7
(ρe , σe ). Market incompleteness prevents agents from insuring against the idiosyncratic risk. In

addition to labor income, agents collect capital income from asset holding a, with interest rate r.

Next period’s asset a0 is then


                                 a0 = (1 + r)a + we(1 − τ ) − c − µpm.                            (4)


Labor income is taxed at a flat-tax rate τ which will be used to finance public health expenditures.

After-tax income and assets are allocated between consumption c, health services m and saving for

next period. The relative price of health services with respect to consumption is denoted p while

the co-insurance rate (the fraction of private expenditures in total health expenditures) is denoted

µ. In addition, assets have to satisfy a borrowing constraint


                                                a0 ≥ 0.                                           (5)


Demand for Health Services and Savings. For the agent, the state variables are the realiza-

tions of the stock of wealth, a, health status h, and the household-specific shock, e. The dynamic

program solved by an agent in state (a, h, e) is
                                                                                       
                    c1−σ                          0              0  0        0
                                               π(h = 1|h, m)V (a , h = 1, e )
                                                                                         
                                                                                          
                                   X
                                         0
 V (a, h, e) = max        + φh + β    e(e |e) 
                                      π                                                     (6)
                                                                                         
                   1 − σ
                                                                                         
               m,c 
                                   e0           +(1 − π(h0 = 1|h, m))V (a0 , h0 = 0, e0 ) 
                                                                                          


subject to equations (4) and (5). V denotes the agent’s value function. The solution of this problem

is a set of decision rules that maps the individual state into choices for consumption and health

services. We denote these rules by {c(a, h, e), m(a, h, e)}.


3.2   The Supply of Health Services

The health sector consists of a provider and a payer. The provider (e.g. a hospital) buys inputs

from the good-producing firm in order to transform goods into health services, which are sold to a

payer (public and private insurers). The payer buys health services from the provider in order to sell

them to households. We focus on two key differences across countries which may explain differences




                                                   8
in prices as suggested by Cutler and Ly (2011): informational frictions and administrative costs.7

We formalize these differences in a simple framework.8

       The provider transforms inputs bh into health services though the production function b = zbh

where z is the productivity of health service producers. Administrative costs in the health system

are introduced through sunk costs (ιpp b ), with a fraction ι > 0 proportional to firm revenue pp b,

where pp is the provider’s price. For simplicity, assume that the output of the provider can have a

high or a low quality: q ∈ {0; 1}. When quality is high, the provider supplies the adequate service to

a patient and collects profit Πhb = pp (1 − ι)b − bh . When the quality is low (q = 0), the provider does

not provide the adequate service (shirks) but bills to the payer (only incurs administrative costs).

When the provider shirks, he collects profit Πsb = pp (1 − ι)b. The payer can detect shirking behavior

with probability ζ ∈ [0, 1]. To maximize profits, the payer will propose an incentive contract such
                 1     9,10
that pp =     ζ(1−ι)z .       In order to avoid the redistribution of the informational rent collected by

providers through financial market, we assume that providers support entry costs to enter this

market.11

       The quantity of health services supplied to households is m = q(pp )b. Using the equilibrium
                           1
price contract pp =     ζ(1−ι)z   that ensures that q = 1 at the equilibrium, we get m = q(pp )b = b. The

total revenue of the payer is pm, where p is the price of health care services paid by households.

We assume a competitive market for payers.

Property 1. The price of health services p increases with administrative costs and informational

frictions between providers and payers.

Proof. The zero profit condition leads to p =             1
                                                       ζ(1−ι)z   ≡ P(ζ, ι) with Pζ0 < 0 and Pι0 > 0.

       Property 1 shows that the gap between US price pU S and the European price pE increases from
   7
     The possibility that information frictions lead to misallocation in the health market was first recognized by Arrow
(1963).
   8
     For more detailed discussions on this point, see the surveys of Newhouse (1996), Dranove and Satterthwaite
(2000) and Gaynor and Vogt (2000), or Gaynor and Town (2012).
   9
     As usual in the contract theory, this equilibrium price pp is deduced from the equalization of the value of the
provider providing high quality services and the one who shirks.
  10
     Another way to generate a gap between the effective price and the reservation price z1 (the production cost), is to
introduce bargaining between the payer and the provider. The Nash product is then given by (p − pp )1−ζ (pp z − 1)ζ .
In this case, the equilibrium price is pp = ζp + (1 − ζ) z1 . The larger the provider’s bargaining power (ζ), the higher
the price. See Gowrisankaran et al. (2015) or Ho and Lee (2017) for a detailed discussion on the bargaining between
providers and payers, in a general framework where insurers bargain also with the consumers.
  11
     These costs are paid in goods and are proportional, at the equilibrium, to the size of these firms, measured by
their inputs quantities, ie. CI = cI bh leading to the restriction cI = 1−ζ
                                                                          ζ
                                                                            .


                                                           9
ζ ≈ 0 (the extreme case with infinite informational frictions) to ζ ≈ 1: the larger the providers’

informational rent, the higher the price in countries with informational frictions. The health wedge

increases with frictions.12,13 Moreover, when administrative costs increase, the price of health ser-

vices increases. This can be the case when the number of operators/intermediaries is uselessly large

in the market, perhaps due to the administrative burden of handling the insurance reimbursement

process. On the other hand, it is possible that providers in Europe, being in the public sector, are

less efficient at producing b (lower z) which would lead to higher prices. In our model, frictions on

the supply side of health services generate the health services wedge, implying a price differential

between countries.


3.3    Good-Producing Firm

Production Y is characterized by constant returns to scale using aggregate capital K and labor N

as inputs:

                                                 Y = AK α N 1−α                                                  (7)

A captures technological factor productivity (TFP) and 0 < α < 1 the capital share in GDP. The

firm operates under perfect competition such that profit maximization leads to

                                                               1−α
                                                            N
                                           r = αA           − δk                                                 (8)
                                                            K
                                                          α
                                                          K
                                           w = (1 − α) A                                                         (9)
                                                          N

with w the wage rate, r the interest rate, and δk capital annual depreciation rate.
  12
     We can interpret these informational frictions as the imperfectly observed physicians’ effort at work by the
hospital manager. Then, the larger the physicians’ informational rent, the higher the price. This can be consistent
with the findings of Cutler and Ly (2011) underlining that specialist U.S. physicians earn 5.8 times what the average
worker does, compared to the non-U.S. average of 4.3 times.
  13
     In the case where the markup price is determined by a bargaining between payers and providers, two cases can
arise: the US system where the provider’s bargaining power is large in a decentralized market, and the European case
where, in all countries, a public system reduces the provider’s bargaining power, by setting the price at its lowest
level.




                                                         10
3.4       Health Insurance System

Health insurance reimburses medical expenditures using proportional taxes on labor income:

                                                                XXX
                                 τ wN   = (1 − µ)p                             m(a, h, e)λ(a, h, e)                      (10)
                                                                e     h    a


where λ(a, h, e) is the stationary distribution of individuals across individual states (a, h, e). Given

the co-insurance rate µ, the tax rate τ must finance expenditures. Using equation (9), we get that

tax rate is proportional to the GDP share of health expenditures.


3.5       Definition of Equilibrium

A steady-state equilibrium for this economy is a household value function, V (a, h, e); a household

policy, {c(a, h, e), m(a, h, e)}; a health insurance system, τ ; a stationary probability measure of

households, λ; factor prices, (r, w); and macroeconomic aggregates, K, N , such that the following

conditions hold:

 (a.) Factor inputs, tax revenues, and transfers are obtained aggregating over households:

                                              XXX                                            X
                                      K =                            aλ(a, h, e),      N=          ej Nj
                                               e        h       a                             j



 (b). Given K, N , factor prices r and w are factor marginal productivity ((8) and (9)).

 (c.) Given r, w and τ , the household policy solves the households’ problem (6).

 (d.) Tax rate τ adjusts such that health insurance budget constraint (10) is satisfied.

                                              P P P
 (e.) The goods market clears: Y =                 e        h       a [c(a, h, e)   + pm(a, h, e)]λ(a, h, e) + δk K, where the

         equilibrium on health services market implies

                        XXX                                                                                   1−ζ
                                      pm(a, h, e)λ(a, h, e) = pb = (1 + cI )bh                    with cI =
                         e        a
                                                                                                               ζ
                             h


                                                          1
 (f.) The price of health services is p =              ζ(1−ι)z .     This sector does not generate profit.14
  14
       The zero-profit conditions on the health sector imply that only the consumption of health appears in Equation
(4).


                                                                     11
 (g.) The measure of households λ(a, h, e) is stationary.



4     Data and Estimation

We aim to estimate health services and efficiency wedges along with other parameters of the general

equilibrium model for countries g = 1, ..., G. We follow a two-step method of simulated moments

approach. In a first step, a set of common parameters (σ, φ, β, α0 ) and U.S. specific parameters

(α10 , α11 ) are estimated on U.S. data. In a second step, we estimate wedges (relative to the U.S.)

using this set of common parameters, for seven European countries: Sweden, Denmark, the Nether-

lands, Germany, France, Italy, and Spain. We allow for variation in parameters (α10 , α11 ) across

countries to capture unobserved differences in health status (obesity, smoking, etc) and estimate

them jointly with wedges. Finally, we allow for considerable heterogeneity in economic resources

(income risk (ρe , σe ) and the goods producing technology (α, δ)) as well as health insurance across

countries (µ).

    The assumption of common preferences is commonly made in macro models estimated across

countries (Chari et al., 2007, Ohanian et al., 2008). The assumption that α0 is also common across

countries deserves some discussion. Given information frictions for the supply of health services,

differences in the use of inputs (bh ) or productivity of medical care (z) is reflected in the price that

was required in order to induce the provider to provide high quality care. Hence, the assumption

that α0 is common to all countries implies that the ability of any m to produce h is the same across
                                                                                p
countries. The marginal cost of producing good health is given by           0 (h0 |h,m)
                                                                           πm             which is country

specific despite a common α0 . Evidence from Table 1 suggest that price dispersion is much larger

than dispersion in outcomes (at least for cancer) which is consistent with the assumption of a

common α0 but country-specific p.

    We first describe how auxiliary parameters are set using external information. Second, we use

a method of simulated moments to estimate remaining parameters.


4.1   Auxiliary Parameters

We use different sources of data to obtain auxiliary parameters. These auxiliary parameters are

country-specific.


                                                   12
Income Risk. Estimating income processes requires panel data. For the United States, we use

eight years of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) data (1990 to 1997). Data after 1997

is collected every two years, complicating the estimation of the income process. For European

countries, we use eight years of the European Community Household Panel (ECHP) from 1994 to

2001.15 We first net out the effect of age from income by regressing an household’s total after-tax

income on a flexible age polynomial and obtain residuals. We use after-tax household income as it

allows for differences across countries in social programs that may mitigate income risk. For the

error component, we assume the following process


                                 ηt = et + ut     with    et = ρe et−1 + νt


where νt is the innovation to the persistent component, distributed N (0, σe2 ), whereas the transitory

component ut is distributed N (0, σu2 ). Table 2 shows the estimates of the income process. Overall,

the variances of the transitory component are similar. As in French and Jones (2011), we assume

this transitory component reflects measurement error and fix it to zero in the model. The estimates

of the stationary variance of the permanent component are larger in the U.S. than in European

countries. We find considerable persistence in income, with autocorrelation coefficients ranging

from 0.9697 (Netherlands) to 0.9798 (Spain). The main source of the difference in income risk is

the scale of the innovation to permanent income. The variance of the permanent shock is roughly

twice as large in the U.S. compared to Europe.


Co-insurance rates. We use average aggregate data from OECD Health Data over the period

1995-2015 to compute the co-insurance rate µ across countries and over the period. We define

the co-insurance rate as private out-of-pocket household expenditures as a percentage of health

expenditures. Table 3 shows estimates of µ across countries. Spain and Italy have large share of

private (out-of pocket) over total health expenditures, while France and the Netherlands have the

smallest shares. The U.S. ranks in the middle.
  15
    Data for Sweden spans a few waves only. Hence, we assign Danish parameters to Sweden. The labor market and
the extent of social programs are similar in both countries.




                                                     13
Technology of the good-producing firms. We use Penn World Table (Feenstra et al., 2015)

in order to estimate the country-specific shares of capital (α) and the depreciation rates (δk ). The

values reported in Table 3 give the estimates for the period 1995-2015. The share of capital in

production (α) is between 0.36 (Denmark) to 0.47 (Italy), the value for the US being 0.384. In the

case of the depreciation rate (δk ), the estimates range between 0.038 (Spain) to 0.048 (US).


4.2   Method of Simulated Moments

We have three groups of structural parameters to estimate. The vector of preference parameters is

given by {β, σ, φ}. Preference parameters are assumed identical across countries. Then, we need

to estimate α0 , the parameter that governs the impact of health expenditures on the probability

to be in good health. Finally, we have four country-specific parameters, {Ag , pg , αg,10 , αg,11 } for

each country g, capturing efficiency wedges, measured by TFP gaps in producing goods (Ag ), health

services wedges, measured by price gaps of health services (pg ) and exogenous health risks, measured

the constants {αg,10 , αg,11 } in the health production function.

   The structural parameter vector to estimate is given by


                     Θ = β, σ, φ, α0 , {αg,10 }G             G          G          G
                        
                                               g=1 , {αg,11 }g=1 , {Ag }g=1 , {pg }g=1



Method. Denote the set of country specific auxiliary parameter estimated earlier χg and χ =

{χ1 , ..., χG }. For each country, consider a set of Mg simulated moments denoted

                                       
                        mg (Θg , χg ) = mg,1 (Θg , χg ), ..., mg,Mg (Θg , χg ) .                  (11)


while moments from the data are denoted mg,N . Denote Wg,N a positive definite weighting matrix

which depends on the data. We choose a diagonal matrix with elements equal to the inverse of

the variance of each moment as a weighting matrix. For moments involving microdata, we use the

bootstrap to find the variance while we use the time-series variation to compute the variance for

aggregate moments.

   We could stack moments of each country and estimate parameters jointly. This procedure is

numerically difficult and does not exploit the fact that many parameters are country specific. Since



                                                     14
our objective is to estimate wedges relative to the U.S., we first estimate common parameters

(β, σ, φ, α0 ), and (αU S,10 , αU S,11 ) using a set of U.S. targets:


            ΘU S = arg min [mU S (ΘU S , χU S ) − mU S,N ]0 WU S,N [mU S (ΘU S , χU S ) − mU S,N ]              (12)


We then estimate country specific wedges and health risks given these parameter estimates ΘU S ,


              Θg = arg min [mg (Θg , χg ) − mg,N ]0 Wg,N [mg (Θg , χg ) − mg,N ] ,               ∀g 6= U S.     (13)


where ΘU S = {β, σ, φ, α0 , αU S,10 , αU S,11 } and Θg6=U S = {αg,10 , αg,11 , Ag , pg }.

       Denote by Dg,N the matrix of derivatives of the moment vector relative to parameters for

country g. This can be obtained numerically at the estimated value of the parameters. When

using as weighting matrix the inverse of the covariance matrix of the data, the variance of estimates
                                                              0
collapses to (Cameron and Trivedi (2005), page 174): Vg,N = (Dg,N Wg,N Dg,N )−1 .16


Choice of the moments and identification. In order to identify structural parameters, we

combine a set of aggregate moments and moments derived from micro data. The vector of moments

for each country g is given by

                                             
                               mU S     =  C/Y, s, p̃1|0 , p̃1|1 , p2 , p3 , p4
                                          n                                                  o                  (14)
                             mg6=U S    =  Ỹg , sg , p̃1|0,g , p̃1|1,g , p2,g , p3,g , p4,g


where C/Y is the ratio of consumption to GDP, Ỹg the GDP per capita relative to US (this moment

is not included for the U.S.), sg the share of health expenditures as a fraction of GDP, p̃1|0,g and

p̃1|1,g the transition rates from bad to good and good to good heath status, p2,g , p3,g and p4,g the

relative probability of being in good health within income quartiles i = 2, 3, 4, using the first quartile

as a base. We define those below.

       In a first stage, we estimate the 5 parameters using 6 moments on US data. 3 of them, namely

{σ, φ, α0 }, are assumed to be the same across countries. Given that it is notoriously difficult to

identify β from σ in an heterogeneous agent model, we calibrate the discount factor β using U.S.

data provided by Gomme et al. (2011): if we approximate β as 1/(1 + r/(1 − τk )) with the after-tax
  16
       We have abstracted from first-step noise introduced by the estimation of common parameters in the U.S.


                                                             15
returns r ≈ 5.16% and the tax rate on capital τk ≈ 40.4%, we obtain β = 0.92.

      The parameter σ is pinned down by targeting C/Y . Transition rates by health status, p̃1|0,U S and

p̃1|1,U S , help pin down αU S,10 and αU S,11 . Parameters (φ, α0 ) are pinned down by the share of health

expenditures in GDP and health transition rates. Consider a simplified static version of the agent’s

problem to focus on identification of these two parameters: m = arg max {log(y − pm) + φh} s.t.

h = 1 − e−α0 m . Consider two moments, namely {s, h} respectively the share of health expenditures
                                                                                      p
in income and the fraction in good health. The FOC of this problem,                 y−pm   = φα0 e−α0 m leads to
                                  α0
 1
1−s      α0 ye−eα0 sy with α
      = φe                 e0 ≡   p .   Therefore, one can obtain estimates for {φ, α
                                                                                    e0 } using the two

following restrictions: i) h = 1 − e−easy and ii)     1
                                                     1−s      aye−easy . Normalizing p = 1, we can solve
                                                           = φe

for {φ, α0 }. The same idea applies to the full model.

      In the second step, we use cross-country information to pin down relative efficiency, relative

health prices and exogenous country-specific health risks. The heath transition matrix allows to

identify (α10,g , α10,g ) in each country g. GDP per capita relative to US pins down Ag . As for

pg , the simplified static problem of the agent is mg = arg max {log(yg − pg mg ) + φhg } s.t. hg =
                                                                                    α
                                                                                − p 0 s g yg
1 − e−α0 mg . The FOC leads to the following restriction:     1
                                                             1−sg   = φ αpg0 yg e    g         , which can be solved

for pg provided sg and yg and estimated φ and α0 from the first-stage. Identification is similar

in the full dynamic model. Finally, the health-income gradient provides additional information for

identification and allows to check whether the model is able to replicate the variation in the gradient

across countries.


Data. We use the ratio of consumption to GDP (Cg /Yg ) and GDP per capita relative to US

(Ỹg = Yg /YU S ) from Penn World Table (Feenstra et al., 2015) over the years 1995 to 2015. We

use real consumption and real GDP per capita at 2011 level National prices (in millions, 2011 US,

PPP-adjusted US dollars) to compute C/Y over the same period. We use information from OECD
                                                                    pm
Health Data for the GDP share of health expenditures (s =            Y ).

      We use two longitudinal aging surveys to estimate health state transitions. For the U.S., we

use the Health and Retirement Study (HRS, waves 2004 and 2006) while for Europe we use the

Survey of Health, Ageing and Retirement in Europe (SHARE, waves 2004 and 2006). We focus

on middle age to elderly respondents (age 50 to 75). These surveys use very similar questionnaires

and sampling frames. We also use those data to estimate the gradient of health status by levels of


                                                    16
income. We use the existence of limitations with activities of daily living (ADL), which is asked

in both surveys. These limitations include whether someone has difficulty with dressing, bathing,

getting in and out of bed, eating and walking across a room. Of course, one could be interested in

considering multiple dimensions of health but the computational burden of doing this prohibits this

possibility. Limitations with activities of daily living is a reliable overall health measure predictive

of mortality and use of physician services. It is likely less affected by reporting scale bias than

self-reported health (reported from poor to excellent). The probability of not having any ADL is

given by p̃g where argument g denotes country g. Denote by p̃k|j,g the joint probability of being in

state j at time t and k at time t + 1.17

    To compute the health gradient, we use the distribution of net household income in 2005 PPP

adjusted U.S. dollars. We use the quartiles of the distribution within country. We compute the

fraction without ADL within each quartile, p̃q,g for q = 1, 2, 3, 4. We use as moments the fraction

relative to the first quartile as a base: pq,g = p̃q,g /p̃1,g for q = 2, 3, 4.


Estimated moments. We report in Figure 2 moments from the data. GDP per capita is in

general 10 to 35% lower in European countries relative to the U.S. (Ỹg ). The U.S. spends 14.7% of

GDP on health (sg ) while only two countries rise above 10% in Europe (France and Germany). In

terms of transition rates into good health, the U.S. ranks last in terms of transition rates to good

health irrespective of the origin state (good or bad). Finally, the health gradient by income quartile

is much steeper in the U.S. than in any European country.


4.3     Estimation Results

4.3.1    Structural Parameters

Estimation results are reported in Table 4. Three parameters are common to all countries {σ, φ, α0 }.

Other parameters, prices, TFP and exogenous health risks are country specific.

    The coefficient of relative risk aversion, σ, is estimated at 2.113 which lies within the range of

estimates found in the literature for precautionary saving models. Hall and Jones (2007) found

a very similar value in their study. The marginal utility of being in good health is found to be
   17
      Given that surveys measure health every two years, we recompute annual transition rates, solving Π̃2 = Π̃21 for
Π̃1 where Πq is the markov transition matrix for q year transitions.



                                                         17
0.834. Given the curvature of utility, it implies that health is very valuable. Indeed, the additional

utility of being in good health represents 80% of average consumption.18 The parameter governing

the marginal productivity of health investment α0 is found to be equal at 0.145. This implies an

elasticity of health transition from bad to bad health to medical expenditures of -0.5. This lies within

the range of micro studies on health production function (see e.g. Romley and Sood (2013)).19

       In order to gauge the plausibility of our parameter estimates, we compute elasticity of health

expenditures pm to the co-insurance µ generated by the model. For the U.S. this elasticity is -0.43

in partial equilibrium (wage, interest rate and taxation are kept constant). This estimate is slightly

larger than the elasticity found in the RAND Health Insurance Experiment (-0.2) (Manning et al.,

1987) but close to estimates reported by De Nardi et al. (2010) and Fonseca et al. (2020). Our

income elasticity estimate of health expenditures pm is 0.85 which is in the middle of the range of

elasticities reported in Gerdtham and Jonsson (2000). In particular, it is close to the value estimated

by Acemoglu et al. (2013) which is 0.7 but much lower than Hall and Jones (2007)’s finding (higher

than 2).20 Hence, our estimates do not suggest that health is a luxury good: higher income can not

lead to a higher GDP share of health expenditures.21

       We estimate strong state-dependence in health transition probabilities with the probability of

being in good health next period being much larger if one is already in good than in bad health

(α11 > 0 > α10 ). A similar picture is found across countries. To get an overall picture of the

health production function, Figure 3 reports transition probabilities as a function of m for each

country. The variation across countries is driven by exogenous health risks (α11 , α10 ) (see Table

5)   22 .   When in good health, the health production function estimates suggest that the U.S. has
  18
      We compute this number as follows: the expected utility in good health equals the expected utility in bad
health if consumption in good health is reduced by 75%. As consumption in good health 6.5% higher than average
consumption, we obtain that additional utility of being in good health is 80% of average consumption.
   19
      Large number of empirical studies report the impact of medical expenditures on survival rate. We assume that
the closest equivalent in our model is the health transition from bad to bad health.
   20
      We compute this income elasticity for a one percent change in the equilibrium wage.
   21
      With our model, a large GDP share of health expenditures can only be explained by health service wedge (b          p).
Indeed, simple decomposition of the GDP share of health expenditures s of the variation sources (income y or price
p) is sb = (y − 1)b             p, where x ≡ xU Sx−x
                    y + (1 − p )b                 US
                                                      EU
                                                         and x for x = y, p refers to the elasticity of health expenditures
to x. In the data, we observe sb > 0 and yb > 0. Given that the model estimates lead to pb > 0, y < 1 and p < 1, we
have sb > 0 iff pb > 0 when yb > 0.
   22
      In order to provide an economic interpretation to the estimated (α11 , α10 ), we compute the probability of being
in good health for the estimated model and for a counterfactual model in which heterogeneity in health risks is
removed (with (α11 , α10 ) set at the average European level). The gap between these probabilities captures the pure
effect of health risk heterogeneity. The Spearman correlation between this gap and per-capita alcohol consumption is
-0.43. The Spearman correlation between this gap and daily calories supply from OECD health data is -0.33. These
correlations have the correct sign providing suggestive evidence of a connection between the exogenous health risk


                                                            18
the lowest probabilities of remaining in good health, for any level of m. As for the probability

of transiting from bad to good health, the U.S. does better and countries such as Denmark do

worst. Those transition rates also reveal a kink in the production function. For too low levels of

m, transition probabilities would be negative (per the specification chosen) and so are constrained

to zero. At some level of m, which differs across countries, the marginal productivity of m becomes

positive.


4.3.2    Estimated wedges across countries

The estimation procedure allows to measure the cross-country inefficiencies in terms of health prices

and TFP (see Table 5): the health service and the efficiency wedges.

    In terms of health services wedges, some European countries have much lower prices than the

U.S. For example, Italy (0.641), Germany (0.770) and the Netherlands (0.772) have prices which

are more than 20% lower than in the U.S. France has prices which are 16.5% lower. Other countries

have prices which are quite close to the U.S., Denmark, Sweden and Spain have prices that are

statistically and economically similar to those in the U.S. Price differences are smaller than those

reported in Tables 1.23

    The efficiency wedge captures the heterogeneity in economic development across countries. Only

Denmark and Germany are statistically more productive (respectively 1.289 and 1.021) while the

Netherlands (0.999) appears as efficient as the U.S. The other European countries suffer from a

significant lack of efficiency but this gap is small (except for Italy, 0.710).24


4.3.3    Model fit

Figure 4 shows that the model succeeds in fitting the share of health expenditures (s = pm/y, the

Spearman correlation is 0.93). The model slightly overestimates the transition rate from good to

good health (p11 ). In the data, p11 is very similar across countries, which makes it more difficult

for the model to fit this dimension. The model still provides a satisfactory fit with a Spearman
and measures of health risky behaviors.
  23
     The Spearman correlation between our measure of price and OECD health price index is 0.31. If we exclude
Spain, the correlation goes up to 0.61. Indeed, ASPE (2018) reports that Spain displays the highest price within
a set of Medicare drugs in several instances, but Spain never appears as the country offering the cheapest price for
these drugs. The Spearman correlation excluding Spain is consistent with this view.
  24
     The Spearman correlation between our estimates of the efficiency wedge (relative TFP) with the estimates by
the Penn World Tables is 0.43, and goes up to 0.64 with Bergeaud et al. (2016)’s TFP.


                                                        19
correlation between the model’s p11 and its empirical counterpart of 0.69. The model also provides

a good fit of the transition from bad to good health (the Spearman correlation is 0.79 for p10 ). The

model matches the fact that the U.S. is the country where health inequalities are the largest, whereas

the Netherlands is the country where they are the lowest. The income-health gradient at quartile 4

is satisfactory (the Spearman correlation is 0.5). With respect to the other income-health gradients,

the data does not display enough heterogeneity, which makes it more difficult for the model to fit

this dimension. Finally, the GDP differences are well reproduced (the Spearman correlation is 0.97

for Y ).



5         Explaining Variation in Health Expenditures and Health Across

          Countries

The price of health services is approximately 15% larger in the U.S. than in Europe while techno-

logical efficiency is 5% higher in the U.S. than in Europe. Our estimation results also reveal that

heterogeneity in exogenous health risks is important.

         To quantify the effect of these differences, we focus on the GDP share of health expenditures

(s), the fraction of individuals in good health (p(h = 1)) and health inequalities (income-health

gradient) measured by the relative fraction of individuals in good health within the fourth income

quartile (p4 ). We simulate counterfactual general equilibrium scenarios where we neutralize each

of heterogeneity sources in turn. Table 6 reports results. We consider four scenarios: i) a baseline

scenario where all country specific heterogeneity is accounted for, ii) a scenario where we remove

price heterogeneity, setting the health price wedge equal to the European average, iii) a scenario

where efficiency heterogeneity is removed, setting the efficiency wedge equal to the European average,

iv) a scenario where exogenous health risks heterogeneity (α11 , α10 ) is removed, setting exogenous

health risks equals to their European averages.25 In order to highlight the U.S.-Europe differences,

we report the European averages of these indicators.

         The baseline differences (∆) between the U.S. and the E.U countries are 0.064 for s and -0.059
    25
    Given that the characteristics of the production function of the U.S. goods (α, δ), as well as the co-insurance
rate (µ), are close to the average of their European counterparts, they can not explain why our model can explain
the differences between the U.S. and the European countries. In addition, the experiment in which we remove
heterogeneity in income process (ρe ,σe ) yields results that are similar to the removal of heterogeneity in TFP. For
the sake of brevity, we will not report them below.


                                                         20
for p(h = 1). The U.S. spends more but has lower health. As for inequalities, they are also higher

than in Europe, with a difference in the health gradient (p4 ) equal to 0.212.


5.1   The impact of macroeconomic wedges: health service prices and efficiency

When heterogeneity in the health service wedge is removed ("price" scenario), the gap in expendi-

tures is reduced by 20.3%, going from 0.064 to 0.051, and the gap in the fraction of individual in

good health is reduced by 28.8%, going from 0.059 to 0.042. Beyond its estimated size, the health

service wedge has a quantitatively sizeable effect on health expenditures and health status differ-

ences across countries. This wedge has also a sizeable impact on health inequalities: by removing

this wedge, the gap in income-health gradient is reduced by 29.25%, going from 0.212 to 0.15.

   When the efficiency wedge heterogeneity is removed ("efficiency" scenario), the GDP share of

health expenditures increases marginally in the U.S. by 0.003. But, it also increases marginally in

European countries by 0.004. This last result is driven by the large decline in TFP in Denmark,

the only country where the TFP is higher than in the U.S. Without this country, the gap between

a high-TFP country (the U.S.) and a group of countries characterized by a low-TFP (all the E.U.

countries except Denmark) unambiguously increases. This result is in line with our result that

the income elasticity of health expenditures is below one. The GDP share of health spending is

declining in TFP. The U.S. is found in this study, but also in others (e.g. Ohanian et al. (2008)), to

have higher TFP (except for Denmark). Therefore, technological efficiency cannot explain why the

U.S. has a higher GDP share of health expenditures in this model. With a homogeneous efficiency

wedge, health inequality increase by 10%, from 0.212 to 0.233, suggesting that this wedge cannot

explain differences in health inequalities between the U.S. and Europe.


5.2   The impact of microeconomic risks: health

Worse health status in the U.S., for example due to higher prevalence of risky behaviors, could also

explain differences in expenditures and health status (Thorpe et al., 2004, 2007). For example, the

rapid growth of obesity in the U.S. relative to other countries could play a role (Cutler et al., 2003).

In the model, these are captured by exogenous health risks (α10 , α11 ). When the heterogeneity in

exogenous health risks is removed ("health risks" scenario), differences across countries in health

expenditures, health status and health inequalities decrease sharply. The gaps in expenditures

                                                  21
virtually disappears, going from 0.064 to 0.002. At the same time, the gap in the fraction of

individual in good health is reduced by 79.6%, going from -0.059 to -0.012 and the gap in income-

health gradient is by 66.5%, from 0.212 to 0.071. This country-specific health risks play a sizeable

role in accounting for differences between the US and Europe due to a simple mechanism. A large

proportion of Americans are in good health. However, they face a high probability of getting sick

(relative to Europe), so they spend more on medical care than their European counterparts, which

leads to a high U.S. GDP share of health expenditure. This additional spending on health care does

not compensate for the larger U.S. exogenous health risk, which leads the model to fit the larger

U.S. GDP share of health expenditures without better health outcomes.

         This decomposition of differences between the U.S. and the E.U. countries with respect to GDP

share of health expenditures, fraction of individuals in good health and income-health gradient

suggests that both the health services wedge and exogenous health risks explain most of the cross-

country gap while TFP differences cannot rationalize these gaps.



6         Welfare Consequences of the Health Services Wedge

6.1        Lifetime Cost-of-Living Index

We perform a counterfactual exercise in which Americans pay the average European health price.26

We then ask the question: What would Americans be willing to pay to switch to the average

European price? We can compute the Willingness-to-pay (WTP) for each agent (a, h, e) for accessing

an economy where the health services wedge is the same than in Europe. Using the model, we

compute the welfare of each (a, e, h)-type agent in the U.S. economy V (a, h, e|pZ , ΩX
                                                                                      U S ), which

depends on wedge values (pZ=U S,EU ) and on Ω = {ΩX
                                                  U S }X=U S,EU , a set of two vectors regrouping

(i) all US-specific characteristics (income risk, risky health behaviors, co-insurance rate) and (ii)

equilibrium factor prices (r(pX ), w(pX )) and tax rate (τ (pX )).27 When Z = EU , if X = U S,

the values are evaluated in partial equilibrium (PE), whereas if X = EU , they take into account

general equilibrium (GE) adjustments of interest rate, wage rate and taxation. Therefore, the state
    26
     To simplify the presentation, we present computations of welfare cost of price wedges. The welfare computations
related to the efficiency wedge (A) is identical, except for the index of the cost-of-living which is not defined without
endogenous labor supply.
  27
     With ΩU  S
            U S , input prices (w, r) and tax rate τ are taken at their general equilibrium values with pU S . This implies
that we restrict the analysis to partial equilibrium approach when p = pEU but Ω = ΩU        S
                                                                                            US.




                                                            22
contingent transfers P X (at , ht , et ) that keep agents indifferent between two price regimes, pU S vs.

pEU , is given by:28


             V (at + P X (at , ht , et ), ht , et |pU S , ΩU S                             X
                                                           U S ) = V (at , ht , et |pEU , ΩU S ) X = U S, EU.



The transfer P X (at , ht , et ) can be spent as agents choose in time and across goods. While this

transfer is informative about the welfare effect of a change in price, it does not convey much

information on the additional cost-of-living of an agent paying the price p = pU S , after controlling

for the same welfare as in an economy where p = pEU . To see this, let us define the lifetime

expenditure function E as follows

                                                 
                            E pU S , V t |ht , et = min at           s.t. V (at , ht , et |p, Ω) ≥ V t


where V t is some reference value of utility. For an optimal sequence of choices (consumption and
                                                                                                
health expenditures), the intertemporal budget constraint allows us to obtain E pU S , V t |h, e as

follows

               ∞ X X
               X
                                et (et+τ )πt (ht+τ |pU S )RτU S c(ht+τ , et+τ |pU S ) + µpU S m(ht+τ , et+τ |pU S )
                                                                                                                   
                                π
               τ =0 et+τ ht+τ
                                             ∞ X
                                             X
          = at + P EU (at , ht , et ) +                et (et+τ )RτU S (1 − τ (pU S ))w(pU S )e(et+τ )
                                                       π
                                             τ =0 et+τ

                            (at , ht , et |pEU , ΩEU                = at + P EU (at , ht , et ) + GU S (et )
                                                                
    ⇔          E pU S , V                         U S )|ht , et                                                         (15)


                     1
                               is the discount rate, GU S (et ) the human wealth29 and E pU S , V t , ΩEU
                                                                                                                          
where RU S =      1+r(pU S )                                                                           U S )|ht , et

the lifetime expenditures allowing to reach the targeted welfare V t = V (at , ht , et |pEU , ΩEU
                                                                                               U S ) in an

economy where p = pU S . When the agent faces price pEU < pU S , her optimal lifetime expenditures
   28
      A change in the price of health services leads to a new value function: V (a, h, e|pEU , ΩEU    U S ) in general equi-
librium, and V (a, h, e|pEU , ΩU     S                                                                               US
                                   U S ) in partial equilibrium. Notice that pU S > pEU implies V (a, h, e|pU S , ΩU S ) <
                   EU
V (a, h, e|pEU , ΩU S ).     Indeed, in partial equilibrium, input prices do not change and we trivially have
V (a, h, e|pU S , ΩU S                       US
                   U S ) < V (a, h, e|pEU , ΩU S ). In general equilibrium, a lower health price wedge reduces the tax rate
(τ (pU S ) > τ (pEU )). This increases the capital-output ratio and thus the wage rate w, thereby magnifying the increase
in value functions following the health price change.
   29
      Let −→
           e be the vector of productivity. The human wealth GX (e) is defined by

            GX (e) = (1 − τ (pX ))w(pX )e + RX Πe GX (e0 )          ⇒    GX = (1 − τ (pX ))w(pX )[Id − RX Πe ]−1 −
                                                                                                                 →
                                                                                                                 e




                                                                    23
required for her to reach the same welfare V t = V (at , ht , et |pEU , ΩEU
                                                                         U S ) is E(pEU , V t |ht , et ). We can

deduce this second lifetime expenditures function from the agent’s budget constraint:

             ∞ X X
             X
                               et (et+τ )πt (ht+τ |pEU )RτEU c(ht+τ , et+τ |pEU ) + µpEU m(ht+τ , et+τ |pEU )
                                                                                                             
                               π
             τ =0 et+τ ht+τ
                   X∞ X
         = at +                et (et+τ )RτEU (1 − τ (pEU ))w(pEU )e(et+τ )
                               π
                   τ =0 et+τ

             E pEU , V (at , ht , et |pEU , ΩEU
                                                          
   ⇔                                         U S )|ht , et = at + GEU (et )                                      (16)


Equation (16) provides the cost of lifetime expenditures at general equilibrium when p = pEU ,

whereas equation (15) pins down the cost of lifetime expenditures at general equilibrium when

p = pU S , given that the agent enjoys the same welfare in the two cases. The gap between these

two expenditure functions provides a measure of the lifetime cost-of-living in the U.S. Indeed, using

(15) and (16), we can define a lifetime cost-of-living index as follows:

                                    E(pU S , V (a, h, e)|h, e)       a + GU S (e) + P EU (a, h, e)
            ILT (a, h, e) ≡                                    100 =                               100           (17)
                                    E(pEU , V (a, h, e)|h, e)                a + GEU (e)

where the numerator measures the total resources needed to reach V in a economy where p = pU S

and the denominator measures the total resources needed to reach the same welfare (V ) but in an

economy where p = pEU . When ILT > 1, the lifetime cost-of living is higher in the economy where

p = pU S than in an other where pEU .

    This index is different from the Laspeyres index which would be defined in the case of our
                                   cU S +µpU S mU S
experiment as follows IL =         cU S +µpEU mU S    where cU S and mU S are the average values of consumption

and health expenditures. This index suffers from several limitations: i) it is valid only in a static

environment, ii) does not allow for substitution and hence does not keep utility constant, iii)

assumes a representative agent and iv) an economy without uncertainty. Moreover, one also needs

to account for general equilibrium adjustments: a change in health price induces changes of other

equilibrium prices (wages, interest rate).30 Berndt et al. (2001) discuss various of these shortcomings

in the context of constructing a price index for medical services. As Berndt et al. (2001) discuss,

a theoretically grounded cost-of-living index would account for the production of health (health
  30
     After the health price reduction of 15%, the tax rate is reduced by 0.7 pp, inducing a increase in after-tax wage
of 0.5% (less distortions), even if the wage is reduced. Remark that the interest rate increases by 0.04pp.



                                                             24
market services, health insurance and ability of individuals to use care for being in good health)

and consumption of health services (preferences and budget). Using Hicksian measures of cost-of-

living, first proposed by Konüs (1924), our measure provides a simple monetary metric that measures

the welfare costs of inefficient health services as a cost-of-living index in a general equilibrium model

with heterogeneous agents faced with idiosyncratic uncertainty. We aggregate the lifetime cost-of-

living index by using the agents’ distribution obtained in general equilibrium for the benchmark

economy, here the US economy with pU S . Therefore, the average ideal price index is given by

                                        XXX
                              ILT =                     λ(a, e, h|pU S , ΩU S
                                                                          U S )ILT (a, e, h)
                                          a    e    h


6.2      Quantitative results

Table 7 reports lifetime cost-of-living indices in the U.S. induced by the health service wedge. We

do these calculations both under partial (PE) and general equilibrium (GE) and report the indices

for agents in bad and good health as well as for three different levels of income (e0 lowest income,

e4 middle income and e9 highest income level). We also report the average lifetime cost-of-living

index.

       Our estimates of the average lifetime cost-of-living index are respectively 101 with GE adjust-

ments and 100.39 at PE. The cost-of-living index using GE effects is larger than the Laspeyres index

(100.36).31 Because the fall in the health service wedge can generate GE adjustments with a reduc-

tion in the tax needed to finance health insurance, but also an increase in the after-tax incomes, the

cost-of-living impact of lower prices is underestimated by a PE approach. Indeed, in PE, the WTP

measured as a fraction of the initial total wealth is equivalent to ILT − 100. In contrast, when input

prices and tax adjustments raise households’ purchasing power (in GE), a high health service wedge

increases the cost of living in the U.S. by reducing all market opportunities: with GE effects, the

impact on the U.S. lifetime cost-of-living is twice as large than in PE or with the Laspeyres index.
  31
   A measure of the cost of living with U.S. health price versus the European health price is provided by the
Laspeyres index:
                                           cU S
              cU S + µpU S mU S            yU S
                                                + µ pUySUmSU S                0.79 + 0.13 × 0.15
                                100 =   cU S                       100 =                             100 = 100.36
              cU S + µpEU mU S          yU S
                                              + µ ppEU
                                                    US
                                                       pU S mU S
                                                          yU S
                                                                           0.79 + 0.13 × 0.85 × 0.15

where s is 0.15, 0.79 is the observed consumption share of GDP in the U.S. over the period 1992-2008 and 0.85 is the
average relative price of health services in Europe. This index would suggest that inefficient health services impose
an additional cost-of-living in the U.S. of 4 tenth of a percentage point.



                                                              25
       Table 7 also shows that low-income agents are the least impacted by the health services wedge.

They consume less health than high-income agents. On the other hand, high-income agents are

less affected by GE adjustments. As a result, a larger portion of their gain come from behavioral

responses in PE.32 In contrast, the low-income agents benefit from the health service wedge reduction

only through tax reduction and wage increase.33 We find strong effects of GE adjustments which

redistribute resources to financially constrained agents.

       In Table 7, we also disaggregate by health status to quantify heterogeneous effects. We estimate

that the health service wedge leads to an additional cost-of-living of 1.01 % (0.85 %) for low-income

agents (high-income agents) in good health while it increases by 1.07 % (1.39 %) for a low-income

agents (high-income agents) in poor health. These additional costs supported by agents in poor

health are amplified by GE adjustments: in PE, the costs paid by an individual in poor health

are equal to those paid by agents in good health, whereas they are six percents larger when GE

adjustments are accounted for.

       Figure 5 shows the willingness to pay for reducing the health services wedge in the U.S. for

each type of agent (a, h, e). The concavity of the value function implies that the WTP increases

with the level of agent’s asset (see panels (a)-(c) of Figure 5): a positive gap in the welfare must

be compensated by a larger wealth increase when the asset level is large. The WTP is higher for

agents with a higher propensity to consume medical care. Because the high-income agents have the

highest propensity to consume higher medical care, they also have the highest WTP. For each asset

level, the WTP is larger for agents in poor health, underlying their need for health services and

therefore their larger willingness to pay for a reduction in health prices. Finally, by reducing the

taxation needed to finance less expensive health care, the general equilibrium adjustments make it

possible to increase the resources of all agents. However, these variations in labor incomes are all

the more profitable as agents have low labor income, since labor income represent a much larger

fraction of their total income. In general equilibrium, the reduction of the health services wedge

leads to a reduction in welfare inequalities.

       As a point of comparison, we compare the monetary impact of the two wedges (health services
  32
     In PE, only the health service wedge change. Low-paid workers, with a small level of asset, are not willing to
pay for the price change because they do not consume health services and face low earning mobility.
  33
     In GE, even if low-income agents do not consume health services, they are willing to pay for a change in the U.S.
health service wedge because they will benefit from the tax reduction and the wage increase.



                                                         26
and efficiency) by looking at the willingness-to-pay (WTP) for each agent for accessing an economy

where the health service wedge or the efficiency wedge are the same than in Europe. In Figure 6,

we show that the impact of reducing TFP in the U.S. by 5% (the European average of the efficiency

wedge), is much larger and implies a negative WTP (willingness-to-receive) of more roughly 3

consumption units, 1.5 times larger than the impact of the health services wedge (see Figure 5).

This larger impact of the efficiency wedge comes from the large direct impact of TFP on goods

consumption of all agents. But adjusting for the budget share of health expenditures, the health

services wedge has a quantitatively sizeable impact.



7    Conclusion

Health expenditures as a share of GDP and health status vary significantly across countries. In this

paper, we evaluate the contributions of two inefficiency wedges on the cross-country differences in

the GDP share of health expenditures and health status: (i) the efficiency wedge measuring the

delay in adoption new technology in the producing goods sector (TFP gaps), and (ii) the health

service wedge capturing the inefficiencies on the health service market.

    To this end, we extend a general equilibrium framework à la Aiyagari (1994) by including health

production (Grossman, 1972). Beyond to estimate structural parameters (preferences and health

production) using the method of simulated moments based on macro and micro data from the U.S.

and seven European countries, our structural approach allows us to identify these country-specific

wedges, after taking into country-specific risks (income risk and production function, health risk

and co-insurance rate).

    If the U.S. is the one of the most efficient for producing goods, is is also the country where

the distortions of the health services price are the largest. We estimate than the unit cost of

health expenditures is 15% larger for an American than a European. We show that efficiency

wedge cannot account for cross-country differences in health expenditures and health outcomes.

Using counterfactuels, we find that when health price distortions in the U.S. have the same order

of magnitude as in Europe, the gap in health expenditures is reduced by 20%, accompanied by a

reduction in gap for the fraction of individuals in good health by 30%. Reducing the price distortion

would result in a fall in US income-health gradient by 30% at quartile four.


                                                 27
   When we consider welfare, we estimate that the extra cost-of-living induced by the U.S. health

service wedge is 1 percentage point in life-time expenditures on average. The willingness-to-pay

of Americans to access European healthcare prices is only one and a half times smaller than the

transfer that we should give them so that they accept to live with the European technological

level. Our general equilibrium approach also underlines that the reduction of the inefficiency on

the health market allows the high-income agents to be the largest winners because they are the

largest consumers of health services. Low-income agents still benefit from the fall in health prices

through general equilibrium effects, with the lower taxation and increase in after-tax wage. This

result underlines that low-income agents pay for the current U.S. health system, through taxation

and large price distortions, while they are the ones who use less health services.




                                                 28
References

Acemoglu, D., A. Finkelstein, and M. Notowidigdo (2013). Income and Health Spending: Evidence

  from Oil Price Shocks. Review of Economics and Statistics 95 (4), 1079–1095.

Aiyagari, S. (1994). Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving. The Quarterly Journal of

  Economics 109 (3), 659–84.

Anderson, G., U. E. Reinhardt, P. Hussey, and V. Petrosyan (2003). It’s The Prices, Stupid: Why

  The United States Is So Different From Other Countries. Health Affairs 22 (3), 89–105.

Arrow, K. (1963). Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care. The American Economic

  Review 53 (5), 941–973.

ASPE (2018). Comparison of u.s. and international prices for top medicare part b drugs by total ex-

  penditures. Technical report from the office of the assistant secretary for planning and evaluation,

  US Department of Health and Human Services.

Avendano, M., M. Glymour, J. Banks, and J. Mackenbach (2009). Health Disadvantage in US

  Adults Aged 50 to 74 Years: A Comparison of the Health of Rich and Poor Americans With That

  of Europeans. American Journal of Public Health 99 (3), 540–548.

Banks, J., M. Marmot, Z. Oldfield, and J. Smith (2006). Disease and Disadvantage in the United

  States and in England. Journal of the American Medical Association 295 (17), 2037–2045.

Bergeaud, A., G. Cette, and R. Lecat (2016). Productivity trends in advanced countries between

  1890 and 2012. Review of Income and Wealth 62, 420–444.

Berndt, E., D. Cutler, R. Frank, Z. Griliches, J. Newhouse, and J. Triplett (2001, January). Price

  Indexes for Medical Care Goods and Services – An Overview of Measurement Issues. NBER.

Cameron, A. and P. Trivedi (2005). Microeconometrics. Cambridge University Press.

Canada Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (2016). Annual report. Technical report, Health

  Division.




                                                 29
Castaneda, A., J. Diaz-Gimenez, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2003). Accounting for the U.S. Earnings and

  Wealth Inequality. Journal of Political Economy 111 (4), 818–857.

Chari, V., P. Kehoe, and E. McGrattan (2007). Business cycle accounting. Econometrica 75 (3),

  pp. 781–836.

Cutler, D., E. Glaeser, and J. Shapiro (2003). Why Have Americans Become More Obese? The

  Journal of Economic Perspectives 17 (3), pp. 93–118.

Cutler, D. and D. Ly (2011). The (Paper) Work of Medicine: Understanding International Medical

  Costs. Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (6), 1174–1187.

Danzon, P. (2018). Differential pricing of pharmaceuticals: Theory, evidence and emerging issues.

  PharmacoEconomics 36, 1395–1405.

De Nardi, M., E. French, and J. Jones (2010). Why Do the Elderly Save? The Role of Medical

  Expenses. Journal of Political Economy 118 (1), pp. 39–75.

De Nardi, M., E. French, and J. Jones (2016). Medicaid insurance in old age. American Economic

  Review 106 (11), 3480–3520.

Dranove, D. and M. Satterthwaite (2000). The industrial organization of health care markets. In

  A. Culyer and J. Newhouse (Eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, pp. 1094–1139. Elsevier.

Feenstra, R., R. Inklaar, and M. Timmer (2015). The next generation of the penn world table.

  America Economic Review 105 (19), 3150–3182.

Fonseca, R., P.-C. Michaud, T. Galama, and A. Kapteyn (2020). Accounting for the rise of health

  spending and longevity. Journal of European Economic Association. Forthcoming.

French, E. and J. Jones (2011). The effects of health insurance and self-insurance on retirement

  behavior. Econometrica 79 (3), 693–732.

Gaynor, M. and R. Town (2012). Competition in health care markets. In A. Culyer and J. Newhouse

  (Eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, Volume 2 of Handbook of Health Economics, pp. 499–637.

  Elsevier.


                                               30
Gaynor, M. and W. Vogt (2000). Antitrust and competition in health care markets. In A. Culyer

  and J. Newhouse (Eds.), Handbook of Health Economics, pp. 1405–1487. Elsevier.

Gerdtham, U.-G. and B. Jonsson (2000). International Comparisons of Health Expenditure: Theory,

  Data and Econometric Analysis*. In A. Culyer and J. Newhouse (Eds.), Handbook of Health

  Economics, Volume 1, Part A, pp. 11–53. Elsevier.

Gomme, P., B. Ravikumar, and P. Rupert (2011). The return to capital and the business cycle.

  Review of Economic Dynamics 14, 262–278.

Gowrisankaran, G., A. Nevo, and R. Town (2015). Mergers when prices are negotiated: Evidence

  from the hospital industry. American Economic Review 175, pp. 172–203.

Grossman, M. (1972). On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health. Journal of

  Political Economy 80 (2), pp. 223–255.

Hall, R. and C. Jones (2007). The Value of Life and the Rise in Health Spending. The Quarterly

  Journal of Economics 122 (1), pp. 39–72.

Ho, K. and R. S. Lee (2017). Insurer competition in health care markets. Econometrica 85 (2),

  379–417.

Horenstein, A. and M. Santos (2018). Understanding growth patterns in us health care expenditures.

  Journal of the European Economic Association 17 (1), 284–326.

Hugonnier, J., F. Pelgrin, and P. St-Amour (2013). Health and (other) asset holdings. Review

  Economic Studies 80 (2), 663–710.

IFHP (2013). Comparative Price Report: Variation in Medical and Hospital Prices by Country.

  Technical report, International Federation of Health Plans.

Konüs, A. A. (1924). The problem of the true index of the cost of living. Bulletin of the Institute

  of Economic Conjuncture (9-10), 64–71. Reprinted in Econometrica, January, 1939, 10-29.

Laugesen, M. and S. Glied (2011). Higher fees paid to US physicians drive higher spending for

  physician services compared to other countries. Health Affairs 30 (9), 1647–1656.


                                                31
Manning, W., J. Newhouse, N. Duan, E. Keeler, and A. Leibowitz (1987). Health Insurance and the

  Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment. The American Economic

  Review 77 (3), pp. 251–277.

Newhouse, J. (1992). Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss? The Journal of Economic

  Perspectives 6 (3), pp. 3–21.

Newhouse, J. (1996). Reimbursing health plans and health providers: Efficiency in production

  versus selection. Journal of Economic Literature 35, pp. 1236–1263.

OECD (2013). Guidelines to improve estimates of expenditure on health administration and health

  insurance. Health division report, Health Division.

Ohanian, L., A. Raffo, and R. Rogerson (2008). Long-term changes in labor supply and taxes:

  Evidence from oecd countries, 1956-2004. Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (8), pp. 1353–1362.

Romley, J. A. and N. Sood (2013, October). Identifying the Health Production Function: The Case

  of Hospitals. NBER Working Papers 19490, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Rosen, S. (1974). Hedonic prices and implicit markets: Product differentiation in pure competition.

  Journal of Political Economy 82 (1), 34–55.

Smith, J. (1999). Healthy Bodies and Thick Wallets: The Dual Relation between Health and

  Economic Status. Journal of Economic Perspectives 13 (2), 145–166.

Solé-Auró, A., P.-C. Michaud, M. Hurd, and E. Crimmins (2015). Disease incidence and mortality

  among older Americans and Europeans. Demography 52 (2), 593–611.

Thorpe, K., C. Florence, D. Howard, and P. Joski (2004). Trends: The Impact Of Obesity On

  Rising Medical Spending. Health Affairs 22 (2), W4–480–6.

Thorpe, K., D. Howard, and K. Galactionova (2007). Differences In Disease Prevalence As A Source

  Of The U.S.-European Health Care Spending Gap. Health Affairs 26 (6), w678–w686.




                                                32
A     Solving the General Equilibrium Model

Step 1: Households’ decision rules. In step 1, we compute the household optimal policies.

Given r, w, τ, µ, p, we determine, for each state (a, h, e), consumption, savings and medical expen-

ditures {c(a, h, e), a0 (a, h, e), m(a, h, e)} that solve the households’ decision problem described in

(6). We rely on a discrete approximation of the state space. h takes 2 values (good or bad), the

number of e ability level is Ne and the asset grid is captured by a discrete set of points Nk . We

then compute 2 × Ne × Nk value functions. Let us make several comments on the asset grid. First,

we use piecewise linear interpolation, so that next period’s asset choice can lie outside the initial

grid on asset. Secondly, as it is standard in the literature (Castaneda et al. (2003)), the asset grid

is not equally spaced. For very low values of asset holdings, the distance between grid points is

small. This is done to allow financially constrained individuals to increase their savings by small

increments.

With respect to Aiyagari (1994)’s model, the complexity lies in the computation of two optimal

choices c and m (a0 being determined by the household’s budget constraint) that are related through

a dynamic first-order condition. We rely on value function iteration. Starting from a guess on op-

timal choices of c and m, for a given state (a, h, e), using Nelder-Mead optimization, we compute

values of c and m that maximize the value function (6), using a guess on next period’s value func-

tion. The new values for V , c and m are compared to the initial guess. If they are not close, replace

the guess by the new values of c, m, V and repeat the optimization procedure. If they are close

enough, the household’s policy was found for the given state (a, h, e). We then repeat the whole

process for all possible values of state (a, h, e).


Step 2: Stationary distribution. We compute the invariant wealth and health distribution

over a blown-up grid using interpolation. The vector of state probabilities over the states (a, h, e)

is updated using optimal policies and transition probabilities for shocks. The process is repeated

until the vector of state probabilities becomes invariant.


Step 3: General Equilibrium. We compute the general equilibrium factor prices (r mentioned

in (b.) in Section 3.5) then w is inferred from equation (9)) and the equilibrium tax rate τ (mentioned

in (d.) in Section 3.5). As a result, Steps 1 and 2 must be repeated until the interest rate r clears


                                                      33
the asset market and the tax rate τ ensures that health insurance budget constraint is satisfied.

When performing estimation, we omit the tax loop. Since we target s and hit it consistently across

countries, the tax rate can be set at the value consistent with the target. This speeds up the

estimation algorithm. When simulating counterfactuals, we allow taxes to adjust.

   The steps of the algorithm are then

  i. Compute the stationary level of employment N

 ii. Make an initial guess of the interest rate r and tax rate τ

  iii. Compute the wage rate w using equation (9)

 iv. Compute the household’s decision rules (Step 1)

 v. Compute the invariant distribution (Step 2)

 vi. Calculate aggregate variables using the agents distribution. Check market clearance on the

     asset market. Check that health budget constraint is satisfied. If these conditions do not hold,

     update the guess of the interest rate r and tax rate τ . If not, go back to ii.

 vii. Check for convergence and update the guess




                                                 34
Figures



                        7

                        6

                        5

                    ι   4

                        3

                        2

                        1

                        0
                            us   fr   de   nl        sp   se   dk   it



   Figure 1: Share of administrative costs in health expenditures: (OECD, 2013).




                                                35
          1.0
                                                                                                                 0.14

          0.9                                                                                                    0.12

                                                                                                                 0.10
          0.8
                                                                                                                 0.08
    Ỹ




                                                                                                           s
          0.7                                                                                                    0.06

                                                                                                                 0.04
          0.6
                                                                                                                 0.02

          0.5                                                                                                    0.00
                   us    dk    nl   de                            se           it    fr     sp                               us   fr   de   dk   nl   se   it   sp


                        (a) Relative GDP per capita                                                                          (b) GDP share health expenditures


                                                                                                                 1.00


          0.4                                                                                                    0.98


          0.3                                                                                                    0.96
    p10




                                                                                                         p11
     ̃




                                                                                                          ̃


          0.2                                                                                                    0.94


          0.1                                                                                                    0.92


          0.0                                                                                                    0.90
                   nl     sp   dk   de                                  it     fr    se     us                               dk   fr   de   nl   se   it   sp   us


                (c) Transition from Bad to Good Health                                                              (d) Transition from Good to Good Health



                                                                                    us
                                                                        1.25        it
                                                                                    sp
                                         probability good health : pq




                                                                        1.20        fr
                                                                                    dk
                                                                        1.15        de
                                                                                    nl
                                                                                    se
                                                                        1.10

                                                                        1.05

                                                                        1.00

                                                                               q1                q2                     q3             q4
                                                                                                      quartile

                                                                                         (e) Health-Income Gradient

Figure 2: Moments used in Estimation: See text for description of how each moments was
constructed.




                                                                                                      36
                                          from bad to good                                                     from   good to good
                        1.0                                                                 1.000




                        0.8                                                                 0.995
    p(h(t+1)=1|h=0,m)




                                                                        p(h(t+1)=1|h=1,m)
                        0.6                                                                 0.990
                                                                  de                                                                      de
                                                                  dk                                                                      dk
                        0.4                                       fr                        0.985
                                                                                                                                          fr
                                                                  it                                                                      it
                                                                  nl                                                                      nl
                        0.2                                       se                        0.980                                         se
                                                                  sp                                                                      sp
                        0.0                                       us                                                                      us
                                                                                            0.975
                              0      10     20       30      40   50                                0     10     20          30      40   50
                                                 m                                                                      m



                                  (a) From good to good health                                          (b) From bad to good health

Figure 3: Kinks in the production function: Estimation results for the health production
function across countries. Estimates produced conditional on being in good (left panel) and bad
health (right panel).




                                                                       37
                                   0.200
                                                                                                                                                                       1.0                                                                                         us
                                   0.175                                                                                                                                                                                                         dk

                                   0.150                                                                            us
                                                                                                                                                                       0.9
                  simulated data




                                                                                                                                                     simulated data
                                   0.125
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     de    nl
                                                                                           fr
                                                                                          de                                                                                                                                  se
                                   0.100                                                                                                                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  it
                                                                               senldk                                                                                                                            fr
                                   0.075                               spit
                                                                                                                                                                       0.7
                                   0.050                                                                                                                                                    sp
                                   0.025
                                                                                                                                                                       0.6
                                               0.04      0.06         0.08              0.10        0.12          0.14        0.16     0.18                                         0.6                 0.7                   0.8                0.9               1.0
                                                                                                data                                                                                                                                data

                                                                                                                                        pm
                                        (a) GDP share of health exp. s =                                                                 Y                                           (b) Relative GDP per capita Ỹ


                                        0.55                                                                                                                      1.04

                                        0.50                                                                               nl
                                                                                                                                                                  1.02
                                        0.45
                       simulated data




                                                                                                                                                simulated data
                                                                                                                                                                  1.00
                                        0.40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      se
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       nlfr dk
                                        0.35                                             it dk                                                                    0.98                                                        sp      itde
                                                                                             sp                                                                                                                             us
                                        0.30
                                                                                        fr de                                                                     0.96
                                        0.25                                     se
                                                         us                                                                                                       0.94
                                        0.20

                                        0.15                                                                                                                      0.92
                                                       0.20        0.25          0.30          0.35    0.40         0.45        0.50    0.55                                                     0.94                  0.96                0.98               1.00
                                                                                               data                                                                                                                                 data


                                        (c) Transition bad to good health p̃10                                                                              (d) Transition goog to good health p̃11




                            1.00
                                                                                                                                                                                  1.20
                                                                                                           dknl
                                                                                              se fr
                                                                                            sp itde
           simulated data




                            0.95                                                                                                                                                  1.15
                                                                                                                                                                 simulated data




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              us
                                                                                                                                                                                  1.10
                            0.90                               us

                                                                                                                                                                                  1.05                          de
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 fr sp
                            0.85                                                                                                                                                                                  nl it               dk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            se
                                                                                                                                                                                  1.00

                            0.80                                                                                                                                                  0.95
                                           0.80                0.85                     0.90                0.95                1.00                                                     0.95           1.00            1.05           1.10            1.15             1.20
                                                                                            data                                                                                                                                      data


                                                  (e) Fraction in good health p̃1                                                                                                           (f) Income-health gradient p2


                                        1.30                                                                                                                      1.35

                                        1.25                                                                                                                      1.30
                                                                                                                         us                                                                                                                               us
                                        1.20                                                                                                                      1.25
                       simulated data




                                                                                                                                                simulated data




                                        1.15                                                                                                                      1.20

                                        1.10                                                                                                                      1.15
                                                                                     de
                                                                                    fr                                                                                                                           de
                                        1.05                  sp     it                                                                                           1.10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       fr
                                                                          nl                                                                                                                            it sp
                                                                                  se dk                                                                           1.05
                                        1.00                                                                                                                                                      nl            sedk
                                                                                                                                                                  1.00
                                        0.95
                                                                                                                                                                  0.95
                                                      0.95      1.00           1.05         1.10      1.15          1.20        1.25    1.30                          0.95                  1.00         1.05          1.10        1.15     1.20       1.25        1.30        1.35
                                                                                             data                                                                                                                                  data


                                                  (g) Income-health gradient p3                                                                                                          (h) Income-health gradient p4

Figure 4: Comparison of Simulated Moments and Data: The Y axis measures the simulated
moments and the X axis moments from the data. The 45 degree line indicates a perfect fit. Each
circle denotes the pair of simulated and data moments for each country.



                                                                                                                                               38
                          1.4       bad hlth (ge)                                                                                                     bad hlth (ge)
                                                                                                                                            1.6
                                    bad hlth (pe)                                                                                                     bad hlth (pe)
                          1.2       good hlth (ge)                                                                                                    good hlth (ge)
                                                                                                                                            1.4
                                    good hlth (pe)                                                                                                    good hlth (pe)
                          1.0                                                                                                               1.2
     willingness to pay




                                                                                                                       willingness to pay
                          0.8                                                                                                               1.0

                          0.6                                                                                                               0.8

                                                                                                                                            0.6
                          0.4
                                                                                                                                            0.4
                          0.2
                                                                                                                                            0.2
                          0.0
                                0         20         40           60                         80         100                                       0         20         40           60   80   100
                                                       capital (k)                                                                                                       capital (k)

                                                (a) Low-income                                                                                                   (b) Middle-income


                                                                                   3.0
                                                                                             bad hlth (ge)
                                                                                             bad hlth (pe)
                                                                                   2.5       good hlth (ge)
                                                                                             good hlth (pe)
                                                              willingness to pay




                                                                                   2.0


                                                                                   1.5


                                                                                   1.0


                                                                                   0.5


                                                                                         0         20         40           60                         80         100
                                                                                                                capital (k)

                                                                                                        (c) High-income

Figure 5: Willingness-to-Pay for a Reduction in the Health Services Wedge: For the U.S.,
we report the willingness-to-pay for a reduction in the price of health services. We do this for three
types of agents: low-income (e = 0), middle-income (e = 4) and high-income (e = 9). For each,
we compute the willingness-to-pay as a function of health status (h = 0 for bad health and h = 1
for good health) and assets a. The willingness-to-pay is reported in consumption units in partial
equilibrium (dotted line) and general equilibrium (solid line).




                                                                                                                  39
                         −0.2                                                                                                −0.50
                                                                                  bad hlth (ge)                                                                           bad hlth (ge)
                         −0.4                                                     bad hlth (pe)                              −0.75                                        bad hlth (pe)
                                                                                  good hlth (ge)                                                                          good hlth (ge)
                                                                                  good hlth (pe)                             −1.00                                        good hlth (pe)
                         −0.6
    willingness to pay




                                                                                                        willingness to pay
                                                                                                                             −1.25
                         −0.8
                                                                                                                             −1.50
                         −1.0
                                                                                                                             −1.75
                         −1.2
                                                                                                                             −2.00
                         −1.4                                                                                                −2.25
                         −1.6                                                                                                −2.50

                                0   20      40           60                       80          100                                    0        20        40           60   80          100
                                             capital (k)                                                                                                 capital (k)

                                         (a) Low-income                                                                                            (b) Middle-income



                                                                       −3.5

                                                                       −4.0
                                                  willingness to pay




                                                                       −4.5

                                                                       −5.0

                                                                       −5.5
                                                                                  bad hlth (ge)
                                                                                  bad hlth (pe)
                                                                       −6.0       good hlth (ge)
                                                                                  good hlth (pe)

                                                                              0          20         40           60                      80
                                                                                                     capital (k)

                                                                                              (c) High-income

Figure 6: Willingness-to-Pay for a Reduction in the Efficiency Wedge: For the U.S., we
report the negative willingness-to-pay (willingness-to-receive) for a reduction in the TFP. We do
this for three types of agents: low-income (e = 0), middle-income (e = 4) and high-income (e = 9).
For each, we compute the willingness-to-pay as a function of health status (h = 0 for bad health
and h = 1 for good health) and assets a. The willingness-to-pay is reported in consumption units
in partial equilibrium (dotted line) and general equilibrium (solid line).




                                                                                                      40
Tables

                                            US     DE        DK       FR      IT      NL      SE      SP
      Prices
      Angiogram                              914                       264                             125
                            relative US        1                     0.288                           0.136
      Scan abdomen                           750     319               248             258             161
                            relative US        1   0.425              0.33           0.344           0.214
      Bypass surgery                       73420                     22344           14061           17437
                            relative US        1                     0.304           0.191           0.275
      Drug price index                         1    0.34             0.268   0.285   0.272   0.306   0.275
                             relative US
      Primary care physician fee
      Public payer                            60      46                32
                             relative US       1    0.76              0.53
      Private payer                          133     104                34
                             relative US       1    0.78              0.25
      Physician fee for hip replacement
      Public payer                          1634   1251               614
                             relative US       1   0.76              0.41
      Private payer                         3996                     1340
                             relative US       1                     0.33
      Hospital spending per discharge      18142   5072      11112   5201            13244   9870
                             relative US       1   0.27       0.61   0.28             0.73   0.54
      Efficiency
      Five-year survival rates (cancer)
      Colon                                0.649   0.648     0.616   0.637   0.641    0.63   0.649   0.633
                             relative US       1   0.998     0.949   0.982   0.988   0.971       1   0.975
      Cervical                             0.626   0.652     0.695   0.650   0.668   0.675   0.683   0.645
                             relative US       1   1.042     1.110   1.038   1.067   1.078   1.091   1.030
      Breast                               0.902   0.860     0.861   0.867   0.860   0.866   0.888   0.854
                             relative US       1   0.953     0.955   0.961   0.953   0.960   0.984   0.947
      Leukemia                             0.895   0.911     0.940   0.886   0.878   0.904   0.890   0.847
                             relative US       1   1.018     1.050   0.990   0.981   1.010   0.994   0.946

Table 1: Price and Efficiency Differences Across Countries: Price information (2013 dollars)
for angiogram, scan and bypass surgery from International Federation of Health Plans (IFHP (2013))
while the drug price index is taken from Danzon (2018). Fee information for physicians from
Laugesen and Glied (2011) in 2008 dollars. Hospital spending per discharge for 2009 from OECD
Health Data in 2011 dollars. Five-year cancer survival rates (2010-2014) from OECD Health Data




                                                        41
                                                       Country
                         DE       DK       FR        IT      NL      SE       SP       US
               ρe       0.9436   0.9182   0.9588   0.9433 0.9697   0.9182   0.9798    0.959
               σe2      0.0285   0.0150   0.0191   0.0303 0.0108   0.0150   0.0111   0.0396
               σu2      0.0967   0.0751   0.1143   0.0806 0.1192   0.0751   0.1364   0.1257
                  2
                 σe
                1−ρ2
                         0.26    0.0956   0.2367   0.275   0.181   0.0956   0.2776   0.493
                    e



Table 2: Covariance Structure of Income Process: Parameter estimates by minimum distance
as outlined in text. ρe refers to the persistence of permanent shocks, σe2 the variance of permanent
shocks and σu2 the variance of transitory shocks (assumed measurement error in model and set to
zero).




                                                     42
                                               Country
                      DE     DK       FR      IT    NL      SE      SP      US
                 µ   0.127   0.149   0.088   0.237 0.097   0.162   0.228   0.136
                 α   0.372   0.360   0.379   0.470 0.393   0.461   0.373   0.384
                 δ   0.039   0.043    0.04   0.039 0.041   0.046   0.037   0.048

Table 3: Calibration of Auxiliary Parameters: µ refers to the co-insurance rate of health
insurance, α refers to the expenditure share of capital while δ refers to the depreciation rate on
capital. Refer to text for sources for these data.




                                               43
                                          σ          φ       α0
                                        2.113      0.834    0.145
                                        (0.035)   (0.034)   (0.030)


Table 4: Common Parameters: Estimates by method of simulated moments on U.S. data. stan-
dard errors in parenthesis.


                     US        DE       DK          FR        IT        NL        SE       SP
            α10    -0.533    -0.813    -1.180     -0.851    -0.215    -0.970    -0.877    0.131
                   (0.015)   (0.027)   (0.067)    (0.066)   (0.004)   (0.382)   (0.048)   (0.005)
            α11    3.727     4.180     4.634      4.432     3.974     4.486     4.644     3.915
                   (0.033)   (0.040)   (0.075)    (0.066)   (0.019)   (0.066)   (0.067)   (0.044)
             p
            pU S     1       0.770     0.965      0.835     0.641     0.772     0.958     1.022
                     -       (0.006)   (0.069)    (0.010)   (0.022)   (0.058)   (0.006)   (0.026)
             A
            AU S     1       1.021     1.289      0.939     0.710     0.999     0.870     0.877
                     -       (0.006)   (0.052)    (0.009)   (0.012)   (0.020)   (0.085)   (0.128)


Table 5: Country-Specific Parameters: Estimated by method of simulated moments. Standard
errors in parenthesis.




                                                    44
                         GDP share of          Fraction good health         Income-Health
                    health expenditures s            p(h = 1)                 gradient p4
                    U.S. Europe       ∆      U.S. Europe        ∆       U.S. Europe         ∆
     baseline       0.154   0.090   0.064      0.9    0.959   -0.059    1.273    1.061    0.212
     price          0.141    0.09   0.051     0.92    0.962   -0.042    1.212    1.062     0.15
     efficiency     0.157   0.094   0.063    0.894    0.958   -0.064    1.288    1.055    0.233
     health risks    0.1    0.098   0.002    0.918     0.93   -0.012    1.221    1.149    0.071

Table 6: Decomposition of the Differences between U.S. and Europe: s is the GDP share
of health expenditures, p(h = 1) is the fraction of individuals in good health and p4 is the relative
probability to be in good health within fourth income quartile (Income-health gradient). For each
scenario, ∆ measures the percentage difference between the U.S. and the average over the countries
in the E.U.




                                                 45
                                            e0        e4       e9     Aggregate
                           Bad health     101.07    101.61   101.39
                     GE                                                  101
                           Good health    101.01    101.02   100.85
                           Bad health      100.1    101.02   100.83
                     PE                                                 100.38
                           Good health     100.1    100.41   100.35

Table 7: Lifetime Cost-of-living in the U.S. Induced by Wedges: We compute the lifetime
cost-of-living index (multiplied by 100) in the U.S. for a change in health service wedge (p) to Eu-
ropean levels. We report indices in partial equilibrium (PE) and accounting for general equilibrium
effects (GE) for individuals in bad and good health as well as for three levels of income (lowest e0 ,
middle e4 , and e9 highest).




                                                   46
