NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN SEIR INFECTIOUS DISEASE MODEL WITH TESTING AND CONDITIONAL
QUARANTINE
David W. Berger
Kyle F. Herkenhoff
Simon Mongey
Working Paper 26901
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26901

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2020

We thank David Dam, Meghana Gaur and Chengdai Huang for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed in this study are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the position of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by David W. Berger, Kyle F. Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

An SEIR Infectious Disease Model with Testing and Conditional Quarantine
David W. Berger, Kyle F. Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey
NBER Working Paper No. 26901
March 2020
JEL No. E24,I18
ABSTRACT
We extend the baseline Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered (SEIR) infectious disease
epidemiology model to understand the role of testing and case-dependent quarantine. Our model
nests the SEIR model. During a period of asymptomatic infection, testing can reveal infection
that otherwise would only be revealed later when symptoms develop. Along with those
displaying symptoms, such individuals are deemed known positive cases. Quarantine policy is
case-dependent in that it can depend on whether a case is unknown, known positive, known
negative, or recovered. Testing therefore makes possible the identification and quarantine of
infected individuals and release of non-infected individuals. We fix a quarantine technology—a
parameter determining the differential rate of transmission in quarantine—and compare simple
testing and quarantine policies. We start with a baseline quarantine-only policy that replicates the
rate at which individuals are entering quarantine in the US in March, 2020. We show that the total
deaths that occur under this policy can occur under looser quarantine measures and a substantial
increase in random testing of asymptomatic individuals. Testing at a higher rate in conjunction
with targeted quarantine policies can (i) dampen the economic impact of the coronavirus and (ii)
reduce peak symptomatic infections—relevant for hospital capacity constraints. Our model can
be plugged into richer quantitative extensions of the SEIR model of the kind currently being used
to forecast the effects of public health and economic policies.
David W. Berger
Department of Economics
Duke University
419 Chapel Drive
Social Science building 231
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
david.berger@duke.edu

Simon Mongey
Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
mongey@uchicago.edu

Kyle F. Herkenhoff
University of Minnesota
Department of Economics
4-101 Hanson Hall
1925 Fourth Street South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and IZA
kyle.herkenhoff@gmail.com
A Personal website is available at http://www.simonmongey.com

“Once again, our key message is: test, test, test.” — @WHO, March 16, 2020
“We suggest a strategy of massive testing that goes far beyond the group currently being tested — those most likely infected.
Instead, we need to test as many people as possible. If we know who is infected, who is not and who has recovered, we could
greatly relax social isolation requirements and send both the uninfected and the recovered back to work.”
— Searchinger (Princeton), LaManita (Virginia Tech Med.), Douglas (Cornell Med.), March 23, 2020,
Washington Post

Introduction
We are interested in understanding the role of testing asymptomatic cases and targeted quarantine in the trajectory
of the coronavirus pandemic. Our working hypothesis is that in combination with a quarantine policy that isolates individuals conditional on being known positive cases, increased testing may lead to shorter-lived quarantine
measures. To study this we incorporate incomplete information in the textbook SEIR model (Susceptible-ExposedInfectious-Recovered) (Kermack and McKendrick, 1927). Unknown, asymptomatic cases may be resolved by testing.1 This enables policies that vary depending on whether an individual case is an unknown, known positive,
known negative, or recovered. Figure 1 describes these possibilities. In a calibrated version of the model, we show
that increasing random testing and relaxing targeted quarantine measures can deliver the same amount of deaths
with a lower impact on the economy and lower peak symptomatic case load.
This paper comes with four very serious disclaimers. First, we are not epidemiologists. However, after reading a number of papers we concluded that there was not a framework for discussing some of the pressing public health policy questions, in particular the potential role of broad testing in ameliorating quarantine measures.
Should countries quarantine everyone at large social cost, or test everyone and apply quarantine in a more directed
fashion. Some models feature testing conditional on developing symptoms which allows for better care and reduced mortality, but to the best of our knowledge no models considered testing asymptomatic individuals so that
positive cases can be recognized and isolated. We would be very happy to learn from medical professionals and
epidemiologists that we have misread the literature and that this has been studied before.
Second, our model does not feature the full set of features that one would desire in order to make quantitative
statements and predictions. These would include transmission across geography, an age distribution of individuals with systematically different probabilities of infection conditional on contact with a positive case. Our model is,
however, a simple extension of and nests a textbook SEIR model which forms the backbone of more sophisticated
quantitative models. We also do not model the medical care block in detail. Like the SEIR model we abstract from
issues such as congestion of medical services. To that extent, we hope that this paper demonstrates that incomplete
information, testing and conditional policies can be simply and intuitively integrated into richer models. We view
the technical and computational costs low relative to the payoffs.2
1 Recent empirical evidence from random samples drawn in an Italian town suggest that around 50 to 75 percent of infected cases are
asymptomatic: Link to La Repubblica article, March 16, 2020.
2 Specifically, while the SIER model augmented for quarantine would have 8 states—the 4 S-E-I-R states each augmented for quarantine

2

Third, for most of this paper we fix an effectiveness of quarantine in reducing meeting rates of individuals. We
assume that complete isolation is off the table, however note here that improving quarantine would have large
effects. Therefore our exercise should be interpreted as follows: given access to a quarantine technology of some
fixed effectiveness, how does testing allow that technology be applied differently across individuals, potentially
mitigating costs of the pandemic. A different paper could be written on the quantitative effects of increasing the
effectiveness of quarantine. In Section 7 we repeat our main counterfactual under a more effective quarantine and
show how testing allows quarantine measures to be relaxed even further.
Finally, our model is not a behavioural economic model that integrates an epidemiological model as in Kremer
(1996) or the equilibrium model of Greenwood, Kircher, Santos, and Tertilt (2019). We think understanding the role
of testing in information acquisition should be key to any such integration. A simple S(E)IR model integrated into
an economic model with only common (non-targeted) quarantine policies available will unavoidably lead to a tradeoff between mortality and economic activity. More quarantine, less mortality, and vice versa. By increasing testing
of asymptomatic cases and conditional quarantine, we show that the model can deliver constant mortality rates
and higher economic activity, as measured by the fraction of individuals out of quarantine. Theories of quarantine
vs. mortality trade-offs are therefore discussions of second best policies, while testing presents a potentially better
option.
Contribution.

We include the minimal necessary modifications of the SEIR model in order to be able to address

the public health effects of testing asymptomatic cases. We augment the SEIR model, which we nest, as follows. In
the SEIR model an individual may be characterized as being in one of four health states: susceptible (S), exposed
(E), infected (I) and recovered (R). Our aim is to try to understand the role of asymptomatic transmission and
how testing and / or quarantine of asymptomatic cases can effect the prorogation of infection and mortality. Our
modifications therefore makes policies contingent on what is known about an individual. The policy we consider is
quarantine which lowers the rate of transmission. With incomplete information, an individual that has contracted
the corona virus, but is yet to present symptoms, will be infectious and subject to the quarantine rule for unknown
cases. If tested, however, the true health state of the individual is revealed and they are subject to the same
quarantine rules as known positive cases. Similarly such an individual, if untested, cannot be subject to quarantine
policies that apply to known positive cases.
Results.

We calibrate the model to data on the spread of the coronavirus and medical outcomes. This calibration

is ‘standard’ with respect to the SEIR models published over the last month. As a baseline we simulate the model
without policy interventions, which delivers the same trajectory for the pandemic as the SEIR model. We then
consider a benchmark counterfactual with common quarantine measures and no testing. We then ask the question,
If we increase testing, how much can we relax quarantine measures while making sure that deaths do not increase? We show
that increasing testing can accommodate extensive relaxation of quarantine measures. If we assume that economic
output, and social well-being are inversely proportional to the number of individuals quarantined, this implies
and non-quarantine—our model requires 12 states, with the additional 4 states reflecting the information structure of the model.

3

Figure 1: Incomplete information, testing, and an example of targeted quarantine policies

that testing can result in a pandemic with smaller economic losses and social costs while keeping the human cost
constant. That is, the common sense result prevails.
Overview.

This paper has seven sections. Section 1 reviews the related SEIR literature and recent papers using

this model to quantify the effects of the corona virus pandemic. Section 2 reviews some of the data regarding
infection and mortality, as well as policy responses in the form of testing and quarantine measures. Section 3
describes the model. Section 4 provides details of how we calibrate the model and provides baseline simulations of
the pandemic under no policy response. This replicates the familiar trajectories of infection and mortality of SEIR
models that have been used to model the evolution of the pandemic. Section 5 provides our main counterfactuals,
where we compare the consequences of common quarantine and no testing with targeted quarantine and testing policies.
Section 7 repeats these counterfactuals under a more effective quarantine technology. Section 8 concludes.

1

Literature review

Brauer and Castillo-Chavez (2012) provide a summary of recent SEIR models. SEIR stands for Susceptible, Exposed (people not yet infectious), Infectious, and Removed (quarantined or immune). In particular, they discuss
frameworks of quarantine (setting aside individuals who are exposed) and isolation (setting aside individuals who
are infected, often called hospitalization).
A recent policy paper by Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team (2020) incorporates several policy parameters into an SEIR model that is enriched to accommodate geographical transmission and age dependency of
transmission and mortality rates.3 In particular, they consider a model with quarantine, asymptomatic patients,
and testing of hospitalized patients, with policy thresholds that depend on positive test rates. Their predictions
have been reported widely in the press. Our contribution is to model (i) the matching process between different
subgroups, thus endogenizing R0 , and (ii) highlighting the importance of testing asymptomatic patients and, (iii)
3 At the time of writing the codes for Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team (2020) were not publicly available, and the paper does
not feature any equations that would allow a researcher to replicate their model.

4

quarantine policies that are contingent on the testing outcomes. Lastly, we use our measure of the fraction of individuals quarantined as a measure of loss of economic activity. This allows us to evaluate the role of widespread
testing which, as a policy, may have a similar mortality rates but lower quarantine rates.
Recent examples of testing and diagnosis in an SEIR model include Chowell, Fenimore, Castillo-Garsow, and
Castillo-Chavez (2003) who model the Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic in 2002. The purpose
of testing and diagnosis in Chowell, Fenimore, Castillo-Garsow, and Castillo-Chavez (2003) is an improvement
in healthcare, which reduces the rate of recovery from nearly one half.4 In our model, the role for testing and
diagnosis is being able to efficiently target quarantine measures.
Recent examples of quarantine in an SEIR model include Feng (2007) who derive closed form expressions
for the maximum and final rates of infection. Feng (2007) has two notions of quarantine: one in which exposed
individuals (who may not be infectious) are set aside, and another in which infectious individuals are set aside
(often discussed as hospitalization). In our model, quarantine is similarly case dependent, but can only depend on
observed health status. Exposed individuals that do not display symptoms cannot be quarantined without being
identified in a random testing of asymptomatic individuals.
Empirically, the literature has begun to document the rate of transmission and incubation periods. Wu, Leung,
and Leung (2020) compile a summary of R0 across various viruses (SARS-CoV, MERS-CoV, Commonly circulating
human CoVs (229E, NL63, OC43, HKU1)), and estimate an SEIR model with international outflows. Using data
from Wuhan, they report an R0 of 2.68, and an incubation period of 6.1 days. The World Health Organization
(2020) report that the time from symptom recovery to detection fell from 12 days in early January to 3 days in early
February 2020. After symptom onset, it typically takes 2 weeks for a mild case to recover, or 3 to 6 weeks for severe
cases.
Empirically, the literature has also begun to document the role of quarantine in reducing transmission, and the
rate of asymptomatic transmission. Kucharski, Russell, Diamond, Liu, Edmunds, Funk, Eggo, Sun, Jit, Munday,
et al. (2020) estimate that in China, the basic reproductive rate R0 fell from 2.35 one week before travel restrictions
on Jan 23, 2020, to 1.05 one week after travel restrictions. They use an SEIR model and estimated on this data to
forecast the epidemic in China, extending the model to explicitly account for infections arriving and departing via
flights. Using data from Wuhan, Wang et al (2020) report a baseline reproductive rate of 3.86, that fell to 0.32 after
the vast lock-down intervention. They also find a high rate of asymptomatic transmission, leading us to consider
the asymptomatic state to be infectious as opposed to the baseline SEIR model which assumes that the ‘exposed’
state is non-infectious.5 A high rate of asymptomatic carry of the virus has been identified in Iceland, one of the
few countries to adopt random testing of asymptomatic individuals.6
In the economics literature Atkeson (2020) considers the effectiveness of temporary quarantine measures in a
baseline SEIR model similar to Feng (2007). Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and Trabandt (2020) nest a similar SIR model
4 They report a SARs incubation period of 2 to 7 days, with most infected individuals either recovering after 7 to 10 days, or dying. The
SARS mortality rate is 4 percent or more. They estimate a basic reproductive number R0 = 1.2. They model a diagnosis rate and diagnosed
state. Individuals recover at a fast rate if diagnosed (8 days without diagnosis, 5 days with diagnosis).
5 https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.03.20030593v1
6 https://www.buzzfeed.com/albertonardelli/coronavirus-testing-iceland. “Early results from deCode Genetics indicate that a low proportion of the general population has contracted the virus and that about half of those who tested positive are non-symptomatic”.

5

Figure 2: US cumulative cases and deaths - 4 weeks up to March 22
Notes: Source: John Hopkins CSSE, https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19. Data reflect non-repatriated cases, and so exclude the
cases from the Diamond Princess and Grand Princess cruise ships.

in a canonical general equilibrium macroeconomic model of consumption, savings and labor supply. Individuals
catch and transmit the virus when consuming and working. They measure the effect of quarantine policies on
output and mortality. Our contribution to this strand of the economics literature is to enrich the underlying SEIR
by introducing scope for testing policies which may mitigate the output costs of quarantine policies while not
exacerbating the decline in output. It would be relatively straight-forward to integrate the information structure
of our model into Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and Trabandt (2020) in order to evaluate the economic benefits of broad
based testing.

2

Data on cases, deaths, quarantine and testing

This section provides a short overview of the evolution of the coronavirus pandemic in the United States.

6

Figure 3: US testing
Notes: Source: John Hopkins CSSE, https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19. Panel B plots the fraction of the untested population
that is tested each day. Let Tt be total cumulative tests—the black line in Panel A—, then Panel B plots ( Tt − Tt−1 )/(340m − Tt ). The y-axis of
Panel B is in fractions of one percent, i.e. 0.01 on the y-axis corresponds to a daily testing rate of 0.01 percent.

Cases.

The first case was reported in the U.S. on January 22, 2020. Figure 2 plots the evolution of confirmed cases

and deaths resulting from COVID-19.7 Table 1 reports the growth rate of cases (new cases divided by cumulative
cases) using different measurements. There are several dates with outlier growth rates due to testing rollouts. The
growth rate of cases is roughly 40 percent with these outliers included, and closer to 30 percent when we exclude
the outliers. Due to the lack of testing, the growth rate of cases in January and February is zero, thus lowering the
overall growth rate of cases significantly.
Deaths.

Figure 2 also plots the number of deaths and the cumulative number of deaths. Similar to the number of

cases, the number of deaths is stagnant prior to March. It then grows at a high rate with pronounced spikes. The
average growth rate in deaths is 48 percent per day, but also includes significant outliers due to sudden changes
in reporting.
Testing.

Figure 3 reports cumulative tests and the testing rate per day. At its peak to date, the US tested just short

of 0.02 percent of its untested population in a single day. We will use this rate to benchmark the rates of testing
considered in counterfactuals. In particular we will consider testing rates that are significantly higher than what
we currently observe in the United States.
Quarantine.

Table 2 reports the fraction of individuals who are quarantined in the United States. There are large

discrete jumps in the quarantine rate when California, New York, and Illinois announced state-wide shelter in
place orders.8 This is another important policy parameter. We must convert this series into a daily quarantine rate.
Roughly 24% of the population was quarantined over the course of 19 days since March 4, 2020. We approximate
7 We include our tabulations of the source data on our websites. At the moment data on recoveries is not particularly accurate, however we
can add this later.
8 We will refer to New York’s policy as shelter-in-place, despite alternative language used by the government of New York.

7

Table 1: US average daily growth rate of cases
Since first case on 1/22
March - From 1st to 19th
March - From 1st to 19th - Exclusing outliers with rates ≥ 50%

21.2%
40.8%
31.1%

Source: Derived from data available from John Hopkins CSSE, https://github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19.

Table 2: US quarantine
Date

Event

Quarantined

Frac. of US Pop.

3/4/2020
3/10/2020
3/16/2020
3/19/2020
3/21/2020
3/22/2020

New Rochelle
Bay Area
California
Illinois, New Jersey
New York

0
79,946
6,747,000
39,639,946
61,193,957
80,647,518

0.00%
0.02%
1.98%
11.66%
17.99%
23.72%

Source: Dates of enactment taken from various news outlets

this with a quarantine rate of roughly 1% per day. More quarantines have followed rapidly during the writing of
this article.

3

Model

Throughout this section Figure 4 and Figure 5 may be useful to the reader. Figure 4 maps our model of transmission
into the SEIR model. Figure 5 overlays this with our model of information and testing.

3.1

Overview

We make five modifications to the standard SEIR model.
1. Health states. As shown in Figure 4 we relabel these states in order to make a later distinction in terms of
testing and quarantine. These we call health states. We also allow for the possibility that the exposed state is
infectious, that is that there is possibly asymptomatic transmission.
i. Non-infected, Asymptomatic ( N A) - Individuals that have not been exposed to the virus, and are by
definition asymptomatic. This corresponds to S in the SEIR model: Susceptible.
ii. Infected, Asymptomatic ( I A) - Individuals that have met an infected individual but are as yet asymptomatic. This corresponds to E in the SEIR model: Exposed. Relative to the SEIR model we allow that
these individuals may also transmit the virus albeit at a lower frequency.
iii. Infected, Symptomatic ( IS) - Individuals that have met an infected individual and are now showing
symptoms. This corresponds to I in the SEIR model: Infectious.

8

iv. Recovered, Asymptomatic ( RA) - Infected individuals that have entered the recovery phase and are
no longer infected. As in the textbook SEIR model we assume these individuals are immune.9 This
corresponds to R in the SEIR model: Recovered.

Figure 4: Transmission and the relationship between our model and the SEIR model
Notes: This figure shows how our states map into the SEIR model. To understand the role of testing we group the asymptomatic states S, E and
label these Non-infected,Asymptomatic (NA) and Infected, Asymptomatic (IA). Without testing, authorities nor individuals are able to differentiate
between these states. To denote this lack of information, we put a bar over them: N A, I A. Exposed individuals show symptoms, which is the I
state of the SEIR model. We label this Infected, Symptomatic (IS). Individuals may then recover, which is the R state of the SEIR model. We label
this Recovered, Asymptomatic (IA).

Figure 5: SEIR model with incomplete information and testing of asymptomatic individuals
Notes: This figure augments Figure 4 to show how we extend the SEIR model to accommodate testing and incomplete information. We add
two additional states that can be revealed by testing, which differentiate asymptomatic individuals { N A, I A}. We denote these with a tilde:
g
If
A for identified infected, asymptomatic cases, and N
A for identified non-infected, asymptomatic cases. We assume that symptomatic cases
IS are instantly identifiable so are known positives, and that recovered cases have been tracked such that RA cases are known negatives.

Figure 4 tracks an individual case through these states. In terms of medical transmission, we assume that
infected individuals are contagious, although with different rates of transmission. The different rates of transmission nest the case that only IS individuals can transmit the disease, which is the case in the SEIR model.
Non-infected individuals cannot transmit the disease { N A, RA}.
The medical block of the model is very simple and could be enriched in many ways.10 Following the standard
SEIR model: (i) infected asymptomatic individuals show symptoms at rate δ, (ii) infected, symptomatic
9 To the best of our knowledge there is no empirical evidence regarding immunity following COVID-19. A quantitative version of this
model would want to take this into account. This is not the point of departure studied in this paper.
10 See http://gabgoh.github.io/COVID/index.html by Gabriel Goh for an example of an SEIR model of Transmission Dynamics that appends
a rich model of Clinical Dynamics which models hospitalization, length of hospital stay, and more. These states would intercede between IS,
RA and D, which is not the focus of this paper.

9

individuals recover at rate ω R and die at rate ω D . Note that all individuals that become infected show
symptoms at some point, this could be relaxed.
2. Incomplete information. We allow for incomplete information, as described in Figure 5. In terms of policy,
we assume that unless tested, individuals without symptoms are indistinguishable and so must be treated
in the same way by quarantine policy. To achieve this we distinguish between two types of N A and I A
individuals. Adding these new cases in green to Figure 4 gives Figure 5. In the first case the diagnosis
regarding infection is unknown. These are unknown cases which we denote N A and I A. In the second case
g
the diagnosis regarding infection is known, which we denote N
A and If
A. This information structure implies
that testing and quarantine policies can not distinguish between the following pairs of cases: unknown cases
g
g
{ N A, I A}, known positives { If
A, IS}, and known negatives { N
A, RA}. Our assumption that { N
A, RA} are
not distinguishable is a simplifying assumption in order to maintain a finite set of states, which we discuss
below.
3. Meeting and transmission rates. We assume that the underlying parameters consist of an explicit interaction
of social meeting rates, which are mutable to quarantine / social distancing policies, and medical transmission
rates, which are the medical rates of transmission between two individuals that meet.
We denote quarantine and non-quarantine states by Q and NQ, respectively. Interacted with our 4 health
states, plus two additional information states, this gives 12 total states that individuals can be in. The meeting
rates of non-quarantined individuals is given by λ, and for quarantined individuals by λQ . We interpret the
ratio factor by which quarantine reduces the rate of social interaction (λ/λQ ) as the quarantine technology and
treat it as a parameter.

We denote the transmission rates by ρ A ρS for asymptomatic (symptomatic) cases to accommodate evidence
that transmission rates are higher in symptomatic cases. These give the probability that, conditional on
g
meeting an infected case ( I A, If
A, IS), a non-infected individual ( N A, N
A) becomes infected. Crucially, individuals do not know who is infected, and do not know that they have met an infected person.11
4. Testing. We introduce a role for testing. Our information structure has assumed that when symptoms
present, the individual and society know that the individual is infected. In this paper we do not cover
testing of symptomatic individuals, although this is obviously a hugely important area.12 We assume that
testing of asymptomatic individuals takes place at a rate τ. Testing fully reveals an individual’s health state.
Tests do not produce false negatives or false positives.
An issue arises in that individuals who have previously tested negative can become infected. This would
require them to transition to either If
A or I A. If we assume either, then they move into a different group for
11 This seems like a reasonable assumption to us despite one of the requisites for testing in many countries being that individuals can identify
an infected individual that they interacted with.
12 Note that in our model if we were to test symptomatic individuals then all tests would yield positives. In the data a small fraction of tests
yield positives. In the US our interpretation of this is not that the US is testing asymptomatic people, but rather that individuals with similar
symptoms due to common colds and the flu are being tested. To introduce testing of symptomatic individuals one would really want to extend
the model to introduce an additional disease that presents observationally identical symptoms that can then be separated by testing.

10

the purpose of policy. However the transition would not be observed since the individual remains asymptomatic. Addressing this completely would require significantly enriching the model.13 To avoid this, and
in the spirit of this paper being a first step, we assume that testing has a ‘tagging’ property, such that the
g
transition from N
A to If
A is observed. We highlight this in the notes to Table 3.
5. Conditional quarantine. We allow for quarantine policy and restrict this to depend on the observable health
state of the individual. To keep the Markovian structure of the SEIR model, we quarantine individuals at
constant rates. When there is no testing, individuals are moved from non-quarantine ( NQ) to quarantine ( Q)
at rates ξ u , ξ + , ξ r , for unknown, known positive and recovered cases. When there is testing, individuals are
moved from non-quarantine ( NQ) to quarantine ( Q) at rates ξ u , ξ − , ξ + , ξ r , for unknown, known negative,
known positive, and recovered cases, where now the known positive cases include If
A individuals. We
assume a set of corresponding rates at which individuals are released from quarantine: r u , r − , r + , rr .

3.2

Transmission

Given the above description of the model, we now describe transition rates of individuals between states. We
work in continuous time and when simulating the model we consider a discrete time approximation in which a
period is one hour and days are 14 hours long.
States.

Individuals in the model are in one of 13 states:

- {Non-infected & Asymptomatic}×{Quarantine, Non-quarantine}×{Unknown, Known negative} → 4 states
- {Infected & Asymptomatic}×{Quarantine, Non-quarantine}×{Unknown, Known positive} → 4 states
- {Infected & Symptomatic} ×{Quarantine, Non-quarantine} → 2 states
- {Recovered & Aymptomatic} ×{Quarantine, Non-quarantine} → 2 states
- Deceased → 1 state
There is initially a distribution of a unit mass of individuals. When we simulate the model, we will assume that
these individuals are non-quarantined, asymptomatic and unknown cases, with a small number being infected:
N A, NQ and I A, NQ. We denote the mass of individuals in a state X in period t by MtX .
Social interaction.

In order to transmit the disease, individuals must first meet. We assume random matching.

Non-quarantined individuals meet other individuals at rate λ, while quarantined individuals meet others at rate
g
λQ . To save on notation we use, for example, N A to denote both N A and N
A when distinguishing between the
two is not relevant.
13 A richer model would include something like the following. Individuals tests are viewed as ‘good’ for some number of days. Policies
may therefore apply to individuals who were tested in, say, the ‘last 60 days’. It is understood that some of these individuals would become
infected and this would not be observed unless re-tested or symptoms develop. Given the law of large numbers, one could write down the
law of motion for the fraction of ‘tested negatives’ that have since become positive. In this model individuals would require re-testing to keep
track of the pandemic, a clear necessary extension of this model in order to use it quantitatively.

11

The conditional probabilities of meetings are as follows. The mass of individuals that are out in the world to
bump into is given by Mt , and depends on the mass of individuals that are quarantined and non-quarantined:
Mt = λMtNQ + λQ MtQ .
The masses of non-quarantined and quarantined individuals are given by:
MtNQ = MtN A,NQ + MtI A,NQ + MtIS,NQ + MtRA,NQ

,

MtQ = MtN A,Q + MtI A,Q + MtIS,Q + MtRA,Q .
Conditional on meeting an individual, the probability that the individual is infected (non-infected) is given by πtI

πtN :

πtI =
πtN

MtI
Mt

=

λMtI,NQ

+ λQ MtI,Q
Mt

=

h
i
h
i
λ MtI A,NQ + MtIS,NQ + λQ MtI A,Q + MtIS,Q
Mt

,

h
i
h
i
λ MtN A,NQ + MtRA,NQ + λQ MtN A,Q + MtRA,Q
λMtA,NQ + λQ MtA,Q
MtN
=
=
=
.
Mt
Mt
Mt

Conditional on meeting an infected individual, the probability that the infected individual is symptomatic (asymp
tomatic) is given by πtI A πtIS :
πtI A =

λMtI A,NQ + λQ MtI A,Q
MtI

,

πtIS =

λMtIS,NQ + λQ MtIS,Q
.
MtI


Infection. When individuals meet an infected individual, they become infected with probability ρ A ρS if the
individual they meet is asymptomatic (symptomatic). Once infected, an individual does not know that they are
infected as they are initially asymptomatic. A test, which occurs at rate τ, would reveal that they are infected, and
the subject to quarantine policies of infected individuals. We assume that infected individuals all show symptoms
and do not transition straight to a recovery.14 Infected, asymptomatic, individuals show symptoms at a rate δ.
Infected symptomatic individuals then recover at rate ω R and die at rate ω D . Recovered individuals gain complete
immunity in our experiments.
Transmission rate. Combining the above, the rate of infection of a quarantined (non-quarantined) person is given
by λQ αt , (λαt ), where αt is the probability of infection conditional on a random meeting:
i
h
αt = πtI πtIS ρS + πtI A ρ A .
14 This is to avoid the issue of having recovered individuals that do not know that they were ever infected. We plan to extend this later on.
The issue with this possibility is that we proliferate the state-space, adding a new state of Recovered, Uninformed, Asymptomatic. This will be
different to Non-infected, Uninformed, Aysmptomatic, due to the different immunity properties of the Recovered individual. Such a recovered
individual can then become infected, and so on and so forth, creating infinitely many states. Our assumption that all infected individuals
eventually know that they are infected by showing symptoms, and then know that they have recovered keeps the state-space finite while still
allowing for the key addition of asymptomatic transmission and incomplete information.

12

Note that the infection rate can be written


S

λαt = ρ λ



× πtI



πtIS

+ πtI A



ρA
ρS


.

Data on the rate of transmission alone will be insufficient to separately identify ρS and λ, although below we
discuss how variation in quarantine policy may be able to estimate these separately in future research.

3.3

Transition rates

As an example of the mechanics of the model, we describe the full set of transition rates for non-infected asymptomatic individuals, and infected asymptomatic individuals. These are the two cases that can be distinguished by
testing asymptomatic individuals. Table 3 provides transition rates between all 13 states. Along with initial conditions for the distribution of individuals across health and information states is sufficient to simulate the model.
3.3.1

Non-infected, asymptomatic individuals

We consider this state as all non-infected individuals in the model are assumed to begin in one of these states.
There are four possible states for non-infected, asymptomatic individuals. They can be an unknown or known
negative case, and they can be non-quarantined or quarantined.
1. Consider an individual that is an unknown case and non-quarantined: N A, NQ.
– Quarantine - At rate ξ u they take up quarantine and transition to N A, Q

– Infection - At rate λ they meet a random individual. With probability πtI πtIS πtI πtI A that individual
is infected and symptomatic (asymptomatic). The individual then becomes I A, NQ with probability

ρS ρ A depending on who the meeting is with. The total transition rate to I A, NQ is therefore λαt .
– Testing - At rate τ, they are tested and since tests are perfect, learn they are not infected, so transition to
g
being a known negative case: N
A, NQ.
2. Consider an individual that is an unknown case and quarantined: N A, Q.
– Quarantine - At rate r u they are released from quarantine and transition to N A, NQ.
– Infection - The rate of infection is lower in quarantine: λQ αt ≤ λαt .
– Testing - At rate τ, they are tested, learn they are not infected, and transition to being a known negative
g
case: N
A, Q.
g
3. Consider an individual that is a known negative case and non-quarantined: N
A, NQ
– Quarantine - Since they are recognized as a negative case they may be quarantined at a lower rate
ξ − ≤ ξ u . A policy of indiscriminate quarantine would have ξ − = ξ u . A policy that allows negative
cases to circulate would have ξ − = 0.
13

– Infection - The individual still becomes infected at rate λαt and in this case becomes an known infected,
asymptomatic case: If
A, NQ.
g
4. Consider an individual that is a known negative case and quarantined: N
A, Q
– Quarantine - Since they are recognized as a negative case they may be released from quarantined at a
higher rate r − ≥ r u . A policy of indiscriminate quarantine would have r − = r u . A policy that allows
negative cases to circulate would have r − = 1.
– Infection - The rate of infection is now reduced to λQ αt
3.3.2

Infected, asymptomatic individuals

For brevity we consider the case only for non-quarantined individuals.
1. Consider an individual that is a unknown case: I A, NQ
– Quarantine - Since they are also unknown cases, the rate of quarantine is the same that which must
face N A, NQ individuals. At rate ξ u they transition to quarantine: I A, Q .
– Infection - Since they are already infected there is no transition to infection.
– Testing - At rate τ, they are tested and since tests are perfect, learn they are not infected, so transition to
being a known positive case: I A, NQ.
2. Consider an individual that is a known positive case: If
A, NQ
– Quarantine - Since this is a known case then it can be subjected to the same rate of quarantine as
infected, symptomatic cases. At rate ξ + they transition to quarantine: If
A, Q .
– Infection - Since they are already infected there is no transition to infection.
– Testing - Since they are already tested there is no further testing.
3.3.3

Transition rates between all states

Using the above logic and the structure of the model we can construct the matrix of flows between all 12 active
states and into the deceased state. Table 3 describes all such transition rates.
3.3.4

Nesting the SEIR and SIR models

The SEIR model is nested in our model under the following parameter restrictions.
- No quarantine: λ/λQ = 1
- No asymptomatic transmission: ρ A /ρS = 0
- No testing: τ = 0
In this case individuals move from N A → I A → IS → RA, which correspond to the SEIR states. To obtain the
SIR model, additionally set δ = 1, such that infectiousness is immediate.
14

A. Initial state

B. Next instant states
Non-infected, Asymptomatic
N A, NQ

NA

IA

15
IS

N A, NQ
N A, Q
g
N
A, NQ
g
N
A, Q
I A, NQ
I A, Q
If
A, NQ
If
A, Q

g
N
A, NQ

ξu

τ

ru

g
N
A, Q

I A, NQ

I A, Q

If
A, NQ

Infected, Symptomatic
If
A, Q

IS, NQ

IS, Q

Recovered
RA, NQ

RA, Q

Dead
D

λαt
λ Q αt

τ
ξ−

λαt

r−

λ Q αt
ξu

τ

ru

δ
τ
ξ+

δ
δ

r+

δ
ξ+

IS, NQ
IS, Q

R

N A, Q

Infected, Asymptomatic

ωR

r+

ωD
ωR

ωD

ξr

RA, NQ
RA, Q

rr

Table 3: Transition rates between health and information states
Notes: This table gives the transition rates between states. Note that in any instant only one transition can occur. For example, an individual that is infected and asymptomatic
and not quarantined may transition to symptomatic and quarantined, but not to symptomatic and not-quarantined. The individual then may transition from symptomatic and nonquarantined into quarantine. Blue terms refer to policies applied to unknown cases. Red terms refer to policies applied to known positive cases. Green terms refer to policies applied
to known negative cases. The Pink terms are the result of the testing-as-tagging assumption: once tested and known negative, the transition to infection is observed so the individual
becomes a known positive.

3.4

Measurement

3.4.1

Basic reproduction number

Consider a hypothetical ‘date-zero’ case. An individual is in the state I A, NQ, while the rest of the population
is in N A, NQ and there are no quarantine procedures in place. A summary statistic of the transmission rate is
the expected number of infections caused by this single infected person: R0I A,NQ . We can state this recursively
as follows. At rate δ the individual becomes symptomatic, which will change their medical transmission rate to
ρS ≥ ρ A :15

R0I A,NQ = λρ A + (1 − δ) R0I A,NQ + δR0IS,NQ


R0IS,NQ = λρS + 1 − ω R − ω D R0IS,NQ .
This implies that

R0IS,NQ = λ

ρS
ωR + ωD

,

R0I A,NQ =



ρS λ ρ A
δ
+
δ
ωR + ωD
ρS

(1)

The nested case of the SIR model, which removes the exposed state, is obtained by setting δ = 1 and has a transmis
sion rate R0 = ρλ/ ω D + ω R .
We can try to use data on transmission rates from Wuhan to bound the effectiveness of quarantine. We view
the Wuhan response as a quarantine everyone policy. If everyone is quarantined then

R0I A,Q

ρS λ Q
=
δ



ρA
δ
+ R
S
ω + ωD
ρ



therefore the relative rates of transmission pre- and post-quarantine policy are informative of λ/λQ which is our
.
.
measure of the quarantine technology: λQ λ = R0I A,Q R0I A,NQ . In Wuhan, R0I A,NQ = 3.86, while post qurantine
measures leads toR0I A,Q = 0.32. The Wuhan quarantine technology delivers λQ /λ ≈ 0.10. We therefore view this as
an upper bound on the quarantine technology in the United States: (λQ /λ)US ∈ [0.10, 1.00].
3.4.2

Measures of activity

To summarize some of our results we construct five metrics: Output, symptomatic infection, reported cases, mortality and social well-being.
Output.

A reasonable approximation of economic activity is that it scales with the number of non-quarantined

workers. We further assume that quarantined workers are Arel ∈ [0, 1) less productive than non-quarantined
workers, and that symptomatic workers do not produce. We therefore define output Yt as


Yt = MtN A,NQ + MtI A,NQ + MtRA,NQ + Arel MtN A,Q + MtI A,Q + MtRA,Q .
15 In the case where ρ I = ρ A and the transition from asymptomatic to symptomatic is instantaneous—i.e. as in the SIR model—then we


have the recursion R0 = λρ + 1 − ω D − ω R R0 which gives R0 = λρ/ ω D + ω R .

16

In the initial period all individuals are non-quarantined, so Y0 = 1. Therefore Yt is in units of the percent change
in output from the initial period.
Symptomatic infection. A reasonable approximation of the load on the hospital system is that it scales with the
number of infected, symptomatic individuals. We therefore define hospital load Ht as
Ht = η H MtIS .
We do not consider a richer model of the rate of hospitalization of symptomatic cases, or the incidence of intensive
care. Empirical evidence suggests around 20 (5) percent of symptomatic cases require hospitalization (intensive
care). One could enrich the model such that mortality rates depend on Ht due to congestion and lack of resources,
but this is not the focus of this paper. We therefore present results as the percentage change in Ht period-on-period,
which subsumes linear scaling.
Testing and reported cases. Cases are reported when an asymptomatic infection case is tested, which occurs at
rate τ, or the instant an asymptomatic infection becomes symptomatic, which occurs at rate δ. Give Rt = 0, then
∆Rt = (τ + δ) MtI A .
We also track the number of tests. Initial tests are zero Tt = 0 and then


∆Tt = τ MtN A + MtI A .
Mortality.

Since the death state is absorbing total mortality is simply Xt = MtD . In our counterfactuals we con-

sider combinations of testing and quarantine policies that keep this number at the end of the pandemic constant,
and compare the implications for symptomatic infections and output.
Social well-being. We consider a measure of social interaction. Non-quarantined individuals interact and we
add up these meetings each period to get a measure of social interaction. There are MtNQ individuals that are
non-quarantined, in various health states. The rate at which these individuals meet non-quarantined individuals
is λπtNQ , where πtNQ = λMtNQ /(λMtNQ + λQ MtQ ). Therefore our period t measure of social well-being is
St =

λMtNQ

×

λMtNQ
λMtNQ + λQ MtQ

!
.

The upper bound for St is given by a virus-free society in which all individuals are non-quarantined, so S0 = λ.
The lower bound for St is zero, which occurs when all individuals are quarantined.

17

Parameter

Source / Target

Value

A. Known medical
Rate at which infected become symptomatic

6 days incubation period

δ
.

ρ A ρS

Relative rate of asymptomatic transmission

No current evidence

Recovery

ωR

14 day recovery period

Mortality

ωD

Mortality rate of 1 percent

B. Calibrated
Rate of meeting
Rate of transmission

λ
ρS

Normalized contact rate
Given λ, gives R0I A,NQ = 2.5

C. Policy parameters
Effectiveness of quarantine technology
Testing of unidentified and asymptomatic cases

λQ /λ
τ
n

Quarantine rates for observable cases
Release rates from quarantine for observable cases

o
ξu, ξ−, ξ+, ξr
n
o
r u , r − , r + , rr

Half of that implied by Wuhan ∆R0
25 to 50 times peak US testing rate

.
1 6
1
.
1 14


0.01/0.99 × ω R

1
0.0091

0.5
0.5% per day

See Section 5
See Section 5

Table 4: Model parameters and values

4
4.1

Calibration
Parameters

Parameter values are given in Table 4. The parameters of the model can be classified intro three groups. The first
relate to ‘known’ medical parameters, which would be the equivalent of technological parameters in an economic
model, and that we can take from the literature that has formed so far. Obviously the extent to which these
parameters are well understood will evolve over time and we may use this information later on. The second
relate to parameters that are similarly technological in that we think that they represent immutable features of the
model, but that we do not have values for and require calibration. The third are policy parameters and relate to (i)
testing rates, (ii) effectiveness of quarantine, (iii) rules for quarantine. We describe these in the next section when
describing our counterfactuals.
Known medical.

We assume that the rate at which infected individuals transition from asymptomatic to symp-

tomatic cases, δ, is such that the average incubation period is 6 days (Wu, Leung, and Leung, 2020). World
Health Organization (2020) report that the average recovery period is 14 days for mild infections, we therefore
set ω R = 1/14. There is little data on the relative rates of infection of symptomatic and asymptomatic individu.
als.16 We assume a common infection rate: ρ A ρS = 1.
From surveying estimates we target a mortality rate of 1 percent. In the model we denote this by π D , which is

16 https://www.buzzfeed.com/albertonardelli/coronavirus-testing-iceland. “Early results from deCode Genetics indicate that a low proportion of the general population has contracted the virus and that about half of those who tested positive are non-symptomatic”.

18

the fraction of individuals experiencing symptoms ( IS) that die. Then
ωD
.
+ ωD

πD =

ωR

We use this to determine ω D given ω R and π D = 0.01.
Unknown and calibrated.
λ and ρS . We treat

We use empirical estimates of the rate of basic transmission and equation (1) to calibrate

R0I A,NQ

as data, taking the value of 2.5, which is in the middle of the range of empirical

estimates. Using equation (1) provides an equation in two unknowns λ, ρS .
Without further data these parameters cannot be separately identified. We therefore set λ = 1 and back out the
implied ρS that is consistent with (1). To match the same basic rate of transmission requires
ρS =
λ
δ

h

R0I A,NQ

i.
δ
+
ω R +ω D
ρS

ρA

In the future, within-region across-time variation in quarantine measures may allow us to separately identify

λ, ρS . We set the quarantine technology λQ /λ = 0.50.

5

Counterfactuals

Our aim is to provide a small handful of counterfactuals with a minimal set of parameters. The configuration of
these parameters is given in Table 5, and their values are given in Table 6. Section 5 and Section 6 refer to Case 1 in
these tables, we consider Case 2—in which we repeat the exercise under more effective quarantine—in Section 7
Initial conditions.

We seed the economy by choosing initial conditions that replicate the U.S. COVID-19 experi-

ence. We assume an initial infected population of 300 individuals and 1 detected case. We measure all model and
data counterparts as of the 100th detected case.
Vaccine.

We abstract from the long-run, and instead focus on testing and quarantine in the current phase of the

pandemic. Consistent with this, we assume that in each case a vaccine is introduced to the economy after 500 days.
The vaccine moves individuals in any of the N A states through to RA, NQ state, which makes them immune. The
vaccine rolls out slowly, at a rate of 0.10 percent per day.
n
o n
o
Counterfactuals. We then consider three different cases for the policy parameters: ξ u , ξ − , ξ + , ξ r , r u , r − , r + , rr ,
τ. We express these parameters as daily rates, despite the model being hourly. With so many parameters we have
many degrees of freedom. We constrain these parameters in a simple way across counterfactuals so that we can
be precise, but others may wish to consider many alternatives. We consider one at the end. Given that we have

19

assumed immunity, in all cases we set the quarantine rate of recovered individuals ξ r to zero and their release rate
rr to 1.
Baseline.

Our baseline model features no quarantine and no testing. With no testing ξ − and r − are off the table,

since no unknown cases are tested and identified as negative. We then set ξ + = ξ u = 0 and r + = r u = 1.17 This is
the worst-case scenario in which the government does nothing to stop the spread of the virus.
Policy interventions. We consider two policy interventions that capture broad quarantine and targeted quarantine with testing. These policies begin on March 18th, which is two weeks after the first 100 cases are reported in
the data and in the model. Aiming to cut down on parameters, we assume that in both cases known positive cases
are quarantined and not released: ξ + = 1, r + = 0. We therefore have 6 parameters remaining: ξ u and r u in the
quarantine case, and ξ u , ξ − , r u and r − in the testing case.
1. No testing - Common Quarantine. Our first policy is an approximation of what we have observed in the
United States in March, 2020. In this counterfactual there is no testing of asymptomatic individuals and so no
known negative cases. There is therefore a common quarantine rate for all asymptomatic individuals. We set this
rate in counterfactual number 2 to ξ 2u = 0.010, implying a 1 percent per day quarantine rate. This is in line with
the data in Table 2, in which roughly 24 percent of the US population was quarantined within 19 days. We assume
that the rate of release from quarantine is zero.
2. Testing - Targeted quarantine. Our second policy assumes that the government tests asymptomatic individuals at a rate τ. While the US is testing at a rate of roughly 0.01 percent of the population per day.18 We assume that
the US increases its testing capacity by roughly 50 fold to τ = 0.5% per day. In levels, this would require testing
1,700,000 asymptomatic people per day, while the US is currently testing around 50,000 symptomatic people per day.
In the spirit of our paper being a proof of concept, we choose for comparison a very simple policy. We maintain
the rate of quarantine of unknown cases and assume that known negatives are not released (r3− − = 0). These
stack the decks against the testing policy having large effects. The only targeted quarantine measure that we take
is to assume that non-quarantined known negative cases are quarantined at rate ξ 3− = ∆ × ξ 2− , with ∆ < 1. We
then choose a value for ∆ such that the policy delivers the same number of total deaths as the common quarantine
policy. This procedure delivers a value of ∆ = 0.20. When testing asymptomatic cases, the rate of quarantine of
known negative cases can be cut by a factor of five without increasing the total number of deaths caused by the
pandemic.

17 For

technical reasons, when we set a parameter to 1 we set it to a number > .98 percent per day (effectively 1).
like South Korea are testing at a rate of approximately 0.05 percent per day. This comes from reports of South Korean testing capacity of 20,000 per day (https://www.wired.co.uk/article/south-korea-coronavirus) and a population in South Korea of 51.47
million.
18 Countries

20

A. Counterfactuals

B. Parameters
Quarantine rates

Baseline - Do nothing

Release rates

Testing

ξ+

ξu

ξ−

ξr

r+

ru

r−

rr

τ

0

0

—

0

1

1

—

1

0

0

0

0

—

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

τ

—

0

0

0

—

1

0

0

0

0

0

0

1

τ

Case 1 - Quarantine technology - λQ /λ = 0.50 - Section 5 & 6
1. No testing - Common quarantine
2. Testing - Targeted quarantine

ξu

1

—


ξu

1

∆ × ξu



Case 2 - Strong quarantine technology - λQ /λ = 0.30 - Section 7
1. No testing - Common quarantine
2. Testing - Targeted quarantine

ξu

1
1



ψ × ξu



Table 5: Configuration of policy parameters for each counterfactual
Notes: This table gives the configurations of the policy parameters of the model under our three counterfactuals. Recovered individuals are
immune and so never quarantined and always released. In the Baseline case there is no quarantine and no testing. Under the 1. No testing Common quarantine policy there is no testing, so uninfected and infected asymptomatic cases cannot be distinguished. Symptomatic cases are
the only known positives, and these are completely quarantined and not released. Unknown cases are quarantined at rate ξ 2u and not released.
Under the 2. Testing - Targeted quarantine policy there is testing of asymptomatic individuals at rate τ > 0. Negative, asymptomatic cases are
distinguished, quarantined at a lower rate, but released at the same rate as unknown cases. Given a value of τ we choose ∆ such that overall
deaths from Cases 1 and 2 are equivalent.

Description

Policy parameter

Daily rate

1. No testing - Common quarantine
Common quarantine rate

ξu

1.0 %

2. Testing - Targeted quarantine
Testing rate

τ

0.50 %

Case 1 - Quarantine technology λQ /λ = 0.50
Differential quarantine rate: Known negatives

∆

0.20

Case 2 - Strong quarantine technology λQ /λ = 0.30
Differential quarantine rate: Unknown cases

ψ

0.30

Table 6: Counterfactual parameters
Notes: The parameter ∆ is chosen so that both counterfactuals incur the same total deaths.

6

Results

Figure 6 plots our main results where we compare counterfactuals one and two. Statistics for these are given in
Tables 7, 8, 9, which include the Baseline simulation. Panel A plots the cumulative number of reported cases.
Panel B plots the number of infected, symptomatic cases. Given a constant rate of symptoms requiring medical

21

Figure 6: Counterfactuals - Quarantine technology - λQ /λ = 0.50
Notes: The red dotted line corresponds to the counterfactual 1. No testing - Common quarantine. The blue dashed line corresponds to the
counterfactual 2. Testing - Targeted quarantine. Output is total non-quarantined, asymptomatic workers. Output in period zeros is equal to
one since all workers are non-quarantined and asymptomatic.

attention, we can think of Panel B as capturing the number of individuals entering the hospital system. Panel C
plots the cumulative fraction of the population that dies. Panel D plots measured output under the assumption
that non-quarantined individuals produce 50 percent as much as quarantined individuals (Arel = .5).
Cases.

Common quarantine is effective at slowing the cumulative number of reported cases. Testing and targeted

quarantine are slightly more effective.
Case load.

Panel B plots the fraction of infected symptomatic individuals in the economy. Both counterfactual

policies ‘flatten the curve’ relative to the baseline. The reduction in peak infection load is lower under the testing
policy. If we interpret case load as the stress put on hospital capacity, targeted quarantine with testing generates
the smallest peak load of cases. Common quarantine pushes the peak infection back by about 170 days, whereas
the targeted quarantine with testing tends to put the peak case load back by 250 days, buying an additional quarter
to prepare the medical system. Table 9 reports these statistics.
Deaths.

Quarantine is an effective tool at reducing the number of deaths. The current US common quarantine

policy, if continued to be enacted at the same rate (1% of the U.S. population entering quarantine per day), would
22

more than halve the fraction of the population that dies from the disease. Table 7 reports the deaths in levels in
each of the scenarios. We deliberately set the parameters of the targeted quarantine policy to deliver the same cumulative deaths as the common quarantine policy, as can be seen clearly in Figure 6C. The testing policy backloads
these deaths. In the short run, there are fewer deaths, but in the long run, as known negative cases are quarantined
at a lower rate, total deaths converge.
Output.

Table 7 shows that the baseline economy features very little output loss, driven entirely by the massive

loss of life. This is the only tradeoff of quarantine in the textbook SEIR model: if a government quarantines
individuals to reduce deaths, the lower output. The testing model and policy provide a third way, where output
losses are less, due to relaxed quarantine but the same number of deaths is achieved.
In other words, targeted quarantine and testing alters the output-death tradeoff. With extra degrees of freedom
in terms of policy, the government can do better than common quarantine both in terms of deaths and output. Figure
6D shows this clearly. Under targeted quarantine and testing, fewer individuals needs to be quarantined, output
is significantly higher in the first 100 days of the pandemic and recovers more quickly. Accumulating output
produced each period over the first year of the pandemic, output is 10 percent higher under the testing policy. in
the long run the change in output only reflects the loss of life over the pandemic, and both policies deliver the
same loss of life, long run output is the same.
We also report these results relative to pre-COVID-19 levels in Table 8. With targeted quarantine, the level
of output is 10 percent higher in the first 200 days than with common quarantine, and then the two economies
recover at a similar rate.
Caution. While we do not want readers to interpret our numbers literally since we are not epidemiologists and
this is a not a rich quantitative SEIR model, we view Figure 6, panels C and D as illustrating our main point:
targeted quarantine allows governments that can implement significant testing to produce more output than under
the common quarantine policy. If the medical system produces fewer deaths under a more distant and lower peak
case load, then the testing policy would also deliver fewer deaths. The policy can produce fewer deaths and higher
output.

6.1

Robustness

For brevity we make one note regarding the robustness of our results to enriching the medical block of the model.
We use this to highlight the usefulness of benchmarking counterfactuals.
Quantitative models being used to forecast the trajectory of the pandemic have richer medical blocks that
incorporate congestion and capacity constraints in the health care system. From our understanding of these models
we think that the following is true. Take an SEIR model and append an arbitrarily rich medical block. Now
consider two policies A and B that deliver the same total number of infections over the pandemic—that is, the area
underneath the curve in Figure 6B. If policy A has a lower peak than policy B then policy A will result in fewer
deaths than policy B.
23

Experiment

Deaths
After 100 days

After 200 days

After 300 days

After 600 days

A. Deaths in Levels
Baseline - Do nothing
1. No testing - Common quarantine
2. Testing - Targeted quarantine

10,013
731
603

2,572,026
23,989
12,306

3,037,155
228,605
102,605

3,040,479
879,634
868,471

B. Deaths Relative to Baseline
1. No testing - Common quarantine
2. Testing - Targeted quarantine

-9,282
-9,410

-2,548,036
-2,559,719

-2,808,550
-2,934,550

-2,160,845
-2,172,008

Table 7: Counterfactual Deaths

Experiment

Output

1. Baseline - Do nothing
2. No testing - Common quarantine
3. Testing - Targeted quarantine

After 100 days

After 200 days

After 300 days

After 600 days

1.00
0.72
0.75

0.91
0.58
0.65

0.99
0.55
0.62

0.99
0.90
0.91



Table 8: Counterfactual Output: Outputt = MtA,NQ + 0.50 × MtA,Q

Experiment

Peak infection

Days to peak

A. Levels
Baseline - Do nothing
1. No testing - Common quarantine
2. Testing - Targeted quarantine

68,368,137
6,288,619
5,921,942

166
341
403

B. Percent relative to Baseline
1. No testing - Common quarantine
2. Testing - Targeted quarantine

-90.80 %
-91.34 %

105.42 %
143.77 %

Table 9: Counterfactual Peak Infections

We have constructed our counterfactuals such that the area under the epidemiology curves are the same. To
see this recall that there is a constant rate of transition from symptomatic states to death. Therefore, under the law
of large numbers, fixing the total number of deaths across counterfactuals by construction fixes the total number
of infections across counterfactuals as well. That is, we know that by construction we have flattened the curve in
moving from the common quarantine to the test and targeted quarantine policy. Under a richer medical block, the
testing and quarantine policy will result in fewer deaths.

7

More effective quarantine

Before concluding we consider how our counterfactual and available policies change under a more effective quarantine, that is a lower λQ /λ. Recall that we considered a value of 0.10 for this statistic for Wuhan, and in out main
counterfactual exercise considered a half as effective quarantine technology in the US, such that λQ /λ = 0.50. We

24

Figure 7: Counterfactuals - More effective quarantine technology - λQ /λ = 0.30
Notes: The red dotted line corresponds to the counterfactual 1. No testing - Common quarantine. The blue dashed line corresponds to the
counterfactual 2. Testing - Targeted quarantine. Output is total non-quarantined, asymptomatic workers. Output in period zeros is equal to
one since all workers are non-quarantined and asymptomatic.

now consider a more effective quarantine, halfway between these with λQ /λ = 0.30. Now with a more effective
quarantine, even if we set ∆ = 0 and quarantine no individuals that have tested negative, then the policy generates
fewer deaths than the no testing, common quarantine policy. This gives extra space for policy to reduce quarantining other individuals. We again model this simply, reducing the rate of quarantine of unknown cases to ψ × ξ u ,
with ψ ≤ 1. Table 5 and Table 6 describe this additional counterfactual, and show that we can set ψ = 0.30 and
still incur the casualties from the epidemic as the baseline quarantine policy. Figure 7 shows that this substantially
reduces the decline in our measure of output, and again ‘flattens the curve’ in terms of projected symptomatic
infections.

8

Conclusion

This short paper conceptualizes a minor and easily implemented change to the standard SEIR model of infectious
disease transmission. We assume that quarantine policies can only depend on observed health states, which creates
a role for testing in distinguishing between infected and non-infected asymptomatic individuals. We demonstrate
via a simple calibration of the model, that testing asymptomatic individuals can stand-in for costly quarantine

25

measures. We make this notion precise by simultaneously reducing quarantine measures and increasing testing
such that the overall mortality rate of the pandemic remains constant at ‘Quarantine Everyone’ levels. With fewer
individuals quarantined, we infer that output of the economy would decline substantially less. Thus, targeted
quarantine and testing alters the output-death tradeoff. The government can do better than common quarantine
both in terms of deaths and output.
The model here is not immediately applicable for serious quantitative work. However, we think that our exercises show that adding incomplete information and a role for testing through targeted quarantine does not overly
complicate the baseline model and allows discussion of testing policies that cannot be discussed in the baseline
complete information model. These additional features could be integrated into more quantitative epidemiology
models that append to the SEIR model demographics, geography, imperfect immunity, and so on.

26

References
ATKESON , A. (2020): “What Will Be the Economic Impact of COVID-19 in the US? Rough Estimates of Disease Scenarios,”
Working Paper 26867, National Bureau of Economic Research.
B RAUER , F.,

AND

C. C ASTILLO -C HAVEZ (2012): Mathematical Models in Population Biology and Epidemiology, vol. 2 of Texts in

Applied Mathematics. Springer.
C HOWELL , G., P. F ENIMORE , M. C ASTILLO -G ARSOW,

AND

C. C ASTILLO -C HAVEZ (2003): “SARS outbreaks in Ontario, Hong

Kong and Singapore: The role of diagnosis and isolation as a control mechanism,” Journal of Theoretical Biology, 224(1), 1–8.
E ICHENBAUM , M. S., S. R EBELO ,

AND

M. T RABANDT (2020): “The Macroeconomics of Epidemics,” Working Paper 26882,

National Bureau of Economic Research.
F ENG , Z. (2007): “Final and peak epidemic sizes for SEIR models with quarantine and isolation,” Mathematical Biosciences &
Engineering, 4(4), 675–686.
G REENWOOD , J., P. K IRCHER , C. S ANTOS ,

AND

M. T ERTILT (2019): “An Equilibrium Model of the African HIV/AIDS Epi-

demic,” Econometrica, 87(4), 1081–1113.
I MPERIAL C OLLEGE COVID-19 R ESPONSE T EAM , T. (2020): “Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce
COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand,” Mimeo.
K ERMACK , W. O.,

AND

A. G. M C K ENDRICK (1927): “A Contribution to the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics,” Proceedings

of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character, 115(772), 700–721.
K REMER , M. (1996): “Integrating Behavioral Choice into Epidemiological Models of AIDS*,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
111(2), 549–573.
K UCHARSKI , A. J., T. W. R USSELL , C. D IAMOND , Y. L IU , J. E DMUNDS , S. F UNK , R. M. E GGO , F. S UN , M. J IT, J. D. M UNDAY,
ET AL .

(2020): “Early dynamics of transmission and control of COVID-19: a mathematical modelling study,” The Lancet

Infectious Diseases.
W ORLD H EALTH O RGANIZATION , T. (2020): “Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019,” Mimeo.
W U , J. T., K. L EUNG , AND G. M. L EUNG (2020): “Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international spread
of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study,” The Lancet, 395(10225), 689–697.

27

A PPENDIX
A

Additional tables and figures

Figure A1: Counterfactuals - Including baseline - Quarantine technology - λQ /λ = 0.50
Notes: In each panel the black solid line corresponds to counterfactual Baseline - Do nothing. The red dotted line corresponds to the counterfactual 1. No testing - Common quarantine. The blue dashed line corresponds to the counterfactual 2. Testing - Targeted quarantine.
Output is total non-quarantined, asymptomatic workers. Output in period zero is equal to one since all workers are non-quarantined and
asymptomatic.

28

Figure A2: Counterfactuals - Including baseline - More effective quarantine technology - λQ /λ = 0.30
Notes: In each panel the black solid line corresponds to counterfactual Baseline - Do nothing. The red dotted line corresponds to the counterfactual 1. No testing - Common quarantine. The blue dashed line corresponds to the counterfactual 2. Testing - Targeted quarantine.
Output is total non-quarantined, asymptomatic workers. Output in period zero is equal to one since all workers are non-quarantined and
asymptomatic.

29

