NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERSTANDING REAL INTEREST RATES

Frederic S. Mishkin

Working Paper No. 2691

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1988

Invited paper for the American Agricultural Economics Association Meetings,
Knoxville, Tennessee, August 1-3, 1988. This research has been funded by a
Faculty Research Fellowship, Craduate School of Business, Columbia
It is part of NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations
University.
and Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
The data in the figures in this paper as well as the other data used in the
analysis will be made available free of charge to any researcher who will
send me a standard formatted 360 KB diskette with a self-addressedmailer.

NBER Working Paper #2691
August 1988
UNDERSTANDING REAL INTEREST RATES
ABSTRACT

This paper outlines an approach to measuring
testing hypotheses on their behavior.

real interest rates and

It then describes what we know about

real interest rates in the aggregate economy and provides estimates of real
interest rates for the agricultural sector.
The evidence presented in this paper indicates that real interest rates
l98Ds and that
economy have been extremely high in the

for the agricultural

their behavior seems to be linked to that found for real rates in the
aggregate

economy.

What has been the source of these high real rates?

The answer seems to be that it was a result of a concerted effort by the

aonetary authorities to disinflate the economy.
Fed's disinflationary

However,

the brunt of the

policy has fallen more heavily on the farm sector

which has had to face far higher reel rates than the rest of the economy.
Although breaking the back of inflation was certainly a worthy goal for
the Fed, farmers have had to pay a heavy price.

They have had to suffer

for the sins of an economy that was excessively

inflationary, which then

had to be brought back into line with disinflationary

policy.

Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 619
Columbia University
New York, NY 1DD27

I. Introduction

Real interest rates are among the most important economir variables
and have been atudied extensively. They figure prominently in discussions of the trsnsmission mechanisms of monetary policy and also play a

prominent role in explanations of business cycles and particular business
cycle episodes.

Real interest rates are a central element in savings-

consumption decisions and in debates about how to encourage savings, a
topic which has been prominent in recent years because of the rise of

supply—side economics.

Real interest rates are also a critical explana-

tory variable for investment decisions since they repcesent the real cost
of borrowing. They are especially important in the agricultural sector
since farmers must make extensive use of debt markets in order to finance
their production.
This paper outlines an approach to measuring real interest rates and
testing hypotheses on their behavior. It then describes what we know
about

real interest rates in the aggregate economy and provides estimates

of real interest rates for the agricultural sector.

By examining the

behavior of real interest rates in the agriculture sector, we may develop
a better understanding of some of the woes of the farming industry in

recent years.

II.

Methodology

The real interest rate of concern to economists is more precisely
referred to as the ex ante real interest rate. The ex ante real interest
rate for a one-period bond, that is, its expected real return, is:

2

(1)

rr

=

i

-

where,

rr

= the cx ante real interest rate on the
one—period bond at time
t: i.e.,

i

=

the nominal interest rate on
i.e.,

TC

the ex ante real return from time to t+1.
the one-period bond at time t:

the nominal return from time t to t+l.

= the inflation rate from time t to t+1
experted at time t.

The problem with measuring the ex ante real interest rates is that
experted inflation,

7t,

is not directly observable and so neither is the

cx ante real interest rate.

In the literature,

several approaches have

been used to measure cx ante real interest rates.

In one approach, real

interest rates have been calculated by subtracting survey data on inflation expectations, such as the Livingston data, from nominal interest
rates.

The problem with survey-based measures of resl interest rates

is

that they are only as good as the survey measure of inflation expectations

and there may be little incentive for the survey respondents to

answer accurately. An even more telling criticism of survey-based
measures, often ignored in the literature,

is that the behavior of market

expectations is driven by economic agents at the margin who are eliminating unexploited profit opportunities. Market expectations are unlikely,

therefore, to be well measured by the average expectations of survey
respondents

1

Another approach is to use futures market data to examine real
interest rate behavior. Futures market data can be used to directly
construct own—commodity real interest rates --

i.e.

,

the

ex-ante real

return on a bond in terms of specific commodities —- and then the
own-commodity real rates can be used to make inferences about the real

3

interest rate for the aggregste economy.
(1987),

As pointed out by Nishkin

however, this approach also runs into problems because own-

commodity real rates constructed using futures market data contain
information not only about the real interest rate for the aggregate
economy or for a particular sector, but also about ex ante relative price
movements for the particular commodity. Since, as demonstrated in
Mishkin (1987), these ex ante relative price movements

(which can be

thought of as noise) are far greater in magnitude than movements in the
aggregate real interest rate (the signal), then the noise-to-signal ratio
in own-commodity real rates will be very high.

Own-commodity real rates

constructed using futures market data will thus contain little information about the aggregate real interest rate of primary concern to
economists.2
Although the ex ante real interest rate is not directly observable,
the ex post real interest rate, which is the actual real return from
holding the one-period bond from t to t+1 is observable.

It is defined

as,

(2)

eprr

=

-

=

rr

-

where,

eprr

= the ex post real interest rate on the one-period bond at
time
=

the

t:

i.e.,

the realized real return from time t to t+1.

actual inflation rate from time t to t + 1.

= the inflation forecast error,
7t

7t.

The approach for measuring ex ante real interest rates

outlined here

makes use of ex post real interest rate data with the assumption of
rational expectations. Specifically, the assumption of rational

4

expectations implies that inflation forecast errors are unforecastable
given any information at time t:

i.e.,

E(ct)

=

0,

where E(. ..I4) is

the mathematical expectations operator conditional on all information
available at time
If the ex ante

cal rate is correlated with observable variables,

we can describe the cx ante real Interest rate as a linear projection
onto

rr

(3)

=

XtB

+

Ut

where,
= a set
Ut

=

the

of variables in the svailable information set

error from projecting

uncorrelsted with

rr

onto

X,

which by definition is

X.

Finally, combining equations (1) through (3) we obtsin the following
regression equation,

eprrXtB+u

(4)

Since data on

eprr

and

-

at

are observable, equation (4) can be

estimated by ordinary least squares (OLS) and hypothesis tests can be
conducted on

13.

Measures of the ex ante real rate can be constructed

from the fitted values obtained from the OLS estimate of this regression
equation: i.e.,

(5)

ir

=

XtJOLS

In a similar fashion, estimates of expected inflation are generated by

(6)

ftt

i - ?r

-

XtiOLS

5

The question arises:

what are the properties of the estimated B's

and of the measures of the ex ante real interest rate and expected
inflation described above.

The answers to this question are outlined

briefly in the following set of econometric points.

More formal demon-

strations of these points can be found in Mishkin (1981a, 1984a).
1.

The

60LS estimate is a consistent estimate of the projection

equation B in (4).

X

orthogonal to
because
implies

This follows directly from the fact that

by definition, while

is in the information set

that

c

u

is

is also orthogonal to

and rational expectations

is orthogonal to any information included in

Another way of thinking about the result is that a regression using
ex post real rates

will asymptotically yield the same estimates of
Thus we can make

B as a regression using ex ante real rates.

inferences about the relationship of the ex ante real interest rate
with variables known at time t via ex post real rate regressions,
even though the ex ante real rate is unobservable.
2.

However, we do lose information by using ex post real rates in a
regression rather than ex ante real rates.
error term
that

c

The appearance of the

in the ex post real rate regression equation (5) means

will have higher standard errors and will be measured less

precisely.

Furthermore, as a result, the statistical power of tests

on the B-coefficients may be quite low.
3.

The B and its consistent estimate

X

do not imply causation from

to the ex ante real rate for two reasons:

(i) the

variables

are not necessarily exogenous and (ii) information relevant to real
rates that is correlated with

X may have been excluded from the

explanatory variables of the regression equation. Without further

0

can be intecpceted only aa

identifying iniormation, the

reflecting the correlation of cx ante real ratea with the
variables.
4.

The

eetimates wiil be good estimates of real interest

and

rates and expected inflation only if the variance of the
error
Ut
term is smsil.

This will be the case if no ceievant information is

excluded from the ex post real rate regression or if the relevsnt
information left out is highly correlated with

5.

X.

-

An important diagnostic check for a good specification of

u

produces a small

involves exsmining the residuals

that

from the cx

post resl rate regression to see if they are white noise.
rational expectations,

c

Under

is serially uncorrelated because with the

holding period matching the observation interval (non-overlapping
data), all past

Ca

uncorrelated with

are in the information set

s.3

On the other hand,

or correlated with past values of
varianre nf

u

c.

and are thus

u may

be autororrelated

If this is the case and the

is large, then the regression residual,

be serially correlated.

However, if the variance of

then the regression residual,

u

-

is

u

u

dominated by

-

will

is small,

c

and is

necessarily serially uncorrelated. Thus the absence of serial
correlation in the residuals

of the ex post real rate regression is

a necessary condition for a small variance of

irt
6.

and

u,

and hence for good

estimates.

In order for OLS to yield correct standard errors for the
13—estimates, the regression residuals must satisfy the Gausa-Flarkov

conditions that they not be heteroscedaatic or aerially correlated.
Satisfying the diagnostic check described above is therefore also

7

important because it helps insure that the OLS standard errors of
the coefficients are correct.5

Real Interest Rates for the Aggregate Economy: What Do We Know?

III.

Using the methodology above, a number of basic facts about the
behavior of the real interest rates have been uncovered. The ioterested
reader is directed to papers by Fama, Nelson and
(1981a,

1984a,

Schwert, Mishkin

1984b) Fama and Gibbons, Summers (1983), Fluizinga and

Mishkin (1984, 1986), and Cumby and Nishkin (1986).
these results involve

Note that all of

the measurement of an ex ante real interest rate

for the aggregate economy in which inflation is measured with a broad—
based price index such as the CPI.
1.

The hypothesis that the real interest rate is constant (i.e., that

B-coefficients on all variables except the constant term equal zero
In equation (4) is strongly rejected for most sample periods. Only
in the unusual sample period from 1953 to 1971 studied by Fama,

In

which there was very little variation in the data, is the constancy
of the real rate not rejected.

Even in this sample period, the

failure to reject constancy of the real rate should not be taken as
strong evidence that the real interest rate was constant in that
period; rather it appears to be a reflection of the lack of statistical power of tests on the B-coefficients.
2.

The real interest rate is negatively correlated with expected
inflation.

This finding is an extremely robust one, having been

found for sample periods going back over a hundred years and for
other countries besides the United States.

Another way of

8

characterizing this reault is that bonds have been a poor inflation
hedge even in an ex ante sense.
3.

Iocreaaed money aupply growth is aaaociated with a decline in real
interest rates.

However, little evidence has been foond that money

growth affects real interest rates other than through its effect on
fnflation,

although this result could be due to the low power of the

atatistical tests.
4.

In the postwar period in the United States, fluctuationa in nominal
interest ratea have typically reflected changes in expected inflation rather than in real interest rates.

This so-called Fiaher

effect in which there is a high correlation between nominal interest
rates and expected inflation is not a general phenomenon.

There is

little evidence of a Fisher effect in the U.S. in the period between
the two world wars and during the
change in Federal Reserve operat-

ing procedurea from October 1979 to November 1982.
5.

Movements in nominal interest rates are often not a reliable indicator of movements in real rates.

The correlation of nominal interest

rates with real rates in the U.S. has been found to be negative in
most of the postwar period, with the exception of the October 1979
to October 1982 period.

However, in that period, nominal interest

rates became highly positively correlated with real interest rates,
moving one-for-one with them.
6.

Other countries often display a different relationship between
nominal interest rates with eitber expected inflation or real
interest rates than is found in the U.S. Even before 1979, several
other countries had only a very weak Fisher effect with low correla-

9

tion between nominal interest rates and expected inflation, yet have
had a strong positive correlation between nominal and real rates.
7.

Real interest rates were extremely high during the contraction phase
of the Great Depression. From the perspective of real interest
rates, money was extremely tight

8.

in this period.

Real intorest rate were positive in the 1950a and 60s, turned
negative in the mid to late 1970s, jumped up dramatically in the
early 1980a to levels comparable to those during the contraction
phase of the Great Depression, and although having declined somewhat
have continued to remain at levels above those in the SOs and 60s.

9.

Real interest rates in other developed countries do tend to move in
tandem with those in the United States.

Just as in the U.S., real

interest rates in these countries declined from the 1960s to the
70s, and then rose to levels unprecedented in the postwar period.

Although there is a statistically significant link between real
interest rates in these countries and those in the U.S., real rates
in these countries do not move one-for-one with those

in the U.S.

As a result, the equality of real interest rates across countries
can be strongly rejected.

An important puzzle in the list of facts above is why real interest
rates became so high in the 1980a.

Politicians and many economiata blame

the high real rates on the dramatic jump in the U.S. budget deficit after
1981, but closer scrutiny of the data does not give strong support

this

view.

6
Instead,

..

to

.

recent reaearch by Huizings and Miahkin (1986)

points to monetary policy as the source of high real interest rates.
Decause the issue of why real interest rates have been ao high in recent
years is such an important one, particularly to the agricultural sector,

10

it is worthwhile describing the evidence for the conclusion that the high

real interest rates in the 1980s are a monetary phenomenon.
Modern monetary theory {Lucasj suggests that regime changes have an
important impact on the stochastic process of many economic variables.
With the change in monetary regime in October 1979, the Fed changed the
method of conducting monetary policy;
ary monetary policy of the l970s.

in order to reverse the inflation-

The basic question is whether this

disinflationary, monetary regime change is associated with a shift in the
stochastic process of real interest rates which resulted in the high real
rates in the 1980a.
The answer appesrs to be yes.

When the Fed sltered its behavior in

October 1979, there was s statistically significant shift in the stochastic process of real interest rates.

In addition, if one asks when the

shift in the stochsstic process of real rstes actually occurred, statistical evidence indicates that it corresponded exactly to the October 1979
change in the monetary policy regime.

These results point the finger at

Volcker's change to a disinflationary monetary policy regime as a major
factor causing the high level of real rates.
The research strategy described above is one in which we look for a
clearly definable historical event such as the October 1979 change in
Federal Reserve operating procedures, and then see if there is a significant change in the behavior of a particular economic variable immediately
afterwards.

Suppose that for historical reasons we know the first event

is exogenous, so that it occurs as a result of an independent action that
could not possibly be caused by the other economic variable.

Then when a

significant change in the economic variable follows the exogenous event,
we have strong evidence that the first event is

raus the

change in the

11

behavior of the economic variable.

In a sense then, we are treating the

October 1979 change in the Fed operating procedures as an exogenous event
--

in

other words, a controlled experiment -- and when we see the shift

in the behavior of the real interest rate, we are aacribing causation
from the monetary regime shift to the change in real rate behavior.
The approach described above actually provides identification using
historical knowledge to rule out such problems as reverae causation.

It

is one method for getting around the identification problem posed by the

rational expectations revolution [see SimsJ.

However, one danger of sucb

a hiatorical-econometric approach is that it runs the danger of fitting

one historical episode with one tailor-made theory.

Truly convincing

evidence that the Fed's monetary policy regime change led to high real
interest ratea must involve examination of similar "controlled experiments" in other time periods.

Examination of another episode of a

monetary regime shift in 1920 that has many similarities to the October
1979 shift provides exactly this kind of evidence.

At the beginning of 1920, the pursuit of the real bills doctrine by
the Fed led to rapid money supply growth, a sustained high level of

inflation with double digit levels similar to that of the late 1970s, and
a weak dollar.

In January and June of 1920, the Fed decided to reverse

-its inflationary monetary policy by raising the discount rate sharply

by

1 1/4% in January and 1% in June.

In the early years of the Fed,

changing the discount rate was the main tool of monetary policy, and it
was particularly potent at this time because the total amount of member
bank borrowing from the Fed exceeded the amount of nonborrowed reserves.
The result of this policy was a rapid disinflation (in fact, a defla—

12

tion).

This disinflstion was similar to the one we saw in the early

1980a and thus we might expect to find parallels between the two periods.

The empicical analysis of the period surrounding 1920 reveals a
significant shift in the stochastic process of real interest rates which
has many similarities to the experience of the 1980s.

Not only is the

shift significant, but the dating of the shift is coincident with the
Fed's taking action to raise the discount rate in June 1920.

Further-

more, the 1920 monetary regime change and the subsequent disinflation is
associated with a strengthening of the correlation of nominal interest
rates

and real interest rates and a shift to a sustained higher level of

real interest rates.7

The striking correspondence between the impact of

the monetary regime shifts on real interest rates in 1920 and 1979

provides strong support for the view that the rerent shift in real rate
behsvior is a monetary phenomenon.

Particularly important in this regard

is that high budget deficits were not a feature of the 1920s,8

thus

suggesting that monetary factors are more important than budget deficits
to the recent behavior of real interest rates.9
Now that we have discussed what we know about real interest rate
behavior for the aggregate economy, we might ask whether the real interest rate that is more applicable to the agricultural sector has behaved
in a similar way.

IV.

Tbia is what we turn to now.

Real Interest Rate Behavior for the Agricultural Sector

Clearly, there is no unique real interest rate.

The real rate

depends not only on the risk characteristics of the particular security
being studied, but, more importantly, also on the price index used to

13

calculate real returns.

The real interest rate relevant to production

decisions in the agricultural sector is not the real interest rate
calculated with a broad-based price index such as the CPI, the one
discussed above.

Instead, a real interest rate relevant to the agricul-

tural sector should be measured with a price index that reflects the
prices of agricultural output.
Using the farm products component of the producer price index and
one-month Treasury bills, ex post real interest rates for the agricultural sector have been constructed for the January 1953 - December 1986
Ex post real rate regressions for the pre-October 1979

sample period.

and post-October 1979 sample periods have been run using the same explan-

atory variables as in }{uizinga and Mishkin (1986), but the only explanatory variable with a statistically significant coefficient in either
period is the one-month bill rate (i).'0 Even with just this one
explanatory variable in the regressions, the diagnostic check for serial
correlation of the residuals does not reveal any evidence of serial
correlation.'' Not only are the Durbin-Watson statistics near two, but
Q-statistics cannot reject that the first twelve autocorrelstions of the
residuals

the

Thus there is no evidence that the specification of

are zero.

information set is inadequate.

X

The regression results with

standard erors of coefficients in parenthesis are as follows:'2
Sample Period: January 1953

eprr
R2 = .001

3.27
(3.69)

-

.53
(.81)

i+

Standard Error = 30.49

—

October 1979

St
Durbin-Watson = 2.05

14

Sample Period: November 1979 - Derember 1986

eprr

=

-15.22

+

(9.74)

= .080

2.73
(1.01)

i

+

r

Standard Error = 26.48

Durbin-Watson = 1.73

The first striking feature of these results ia the very large

standard error of the regression,
points.

whirh is on the order of 30 percentage

Since the absence of serial correlation in the residuals sug-

gests that most of the variation of the regression residuals ran be
attributed to the forerast error of inflation,

these regressions indirate

that one-month forerast errors for farm products inflation have a standard deviation of thirty percentage points at an annual rate. On the
other hand, for the same time periods, standard errors of the regression
for ex post real rate regressions using the CPI price index are

on the

order of 2 to 2.5 percentage points,'3 which is less than one-tenth as
large.

The exceedingly large forecast errors for farm products inflation

is not surprising considering how volatile far prices are, but it does

mean, as the earlier discussion of methodology suggests,

that ex post

real rate regressions for the agricultural sector will have low statistical power.

This helps explain why only the T-bill rate is found to be a

significant explanatory variable in the regressions.
Despite the low statistical power, the ex post real rate regressions
above for farm products yield similar conclusions to ones estimated using
the CPI price index.

They suggest that in the pre-October 1979 period ex

ante real rates for the agricultural sector are negatively correlated
with nominal interest rates, while after the monetary regime shift in
1979 they become positively correlated.

In addition,

an F-test for the

stability of the coefficients in the two sample periods indicates that

15

the stochastic process of real rates for the farm sector also undergoes a
significant shift in October 1979: F(2,404) = 3.57 while the critical
value at the 5% level is 3.00.
Using the fitted values of the above regressions

to construct

measures of expected farm products inflation, we can run regressions of
ex post real rates on expected inflation. The results are that the
coefficient on expected inflation is — .35 in the pre—October 1979 period
with a standard error of .34, and the coefficient is -1.58 in the postOctober 1979 period, also with a standard error of

3414

Thus,

just as

with results using broader-based price indices such as the CPI, real
rates for farm products are found to be negatively correlated with

expected inflation.
Figure

1

displays the estimates of the real interest rate for farm

products derived from the above regressions, along with 95% confidence
intervals for these estimates.'5 We see that over the January 1953 to
October 1979 period the estimated real rate is relatively constant but
has a slight downward trend.

The real rate has an average of 1% over the

period, bat has small negative values in the late 1970s.
1979, the behavior of the real rate changes dramatically.

After October
It jumps to

near the 30% level in the 1980-81 period, with even the lower bound of
the 95% confidence interval above ten percent, and it remains

high

afterwards. The real rate estimates for the agricultural sector in
Figure 1 suggest one factor that baa led to the difficulties of the
agricultural sector in the 1980a is that farmers faced a real coat of
borrowing in terms of their production of almoat 30% in 1980-81 and an
average of 10% for the entire November 1979 to December 1986 period.

57

I__J___.__l .

95% Coo P iduncu SaL - LVO

Products Roal Rate

83

I 1.1. .j5I .1.

Farm

.1
69

Rstimated Real interest

-

RuLe

Figure 1

-

I

-

I

75

I

I

Por Fare Products

81

-I

—10

0

10

I

20

2

0

.40

4

Annual Rate

16

Real rates of this magnitude certainiy have made life for the American
farmer a difficult one in recent years.
A natural question to ask is: has the striking behavior of real
interest rates for the agricultural sector been similar to that of real
interest rates for the aggregate economy. This question is answered in
Figure 2 which compares estimated ex ante real rates for farm products
with estimated ex ante real rates using the CPI price index.16 As we can
see in Figure

2,

the general pattern of real rate movements is the same

for the aggregate economy and for the agricultural sector.

The aggregate

real rate also has small positive values in the 1950s and 60s, has small
negative values in the late l970s, then also jumps dramatically to levels
above 8% in the 1980-81 period and remains high thereafter.

Indeed the

real rate for the agricultural sector looks like an amplified movement of
the real rate for the aggregate economy.

This is confirmed by regressing

the estimated real rate for farm products on the CPI estimated real rate.

The estimated coefficient on the CPI real rate is 1.52 with a standard
error of.70,'7 so that there is s statistically significant comovement of
these two series (t =

2.16)

in which the farm products real rate moves

more than one-for-one with the CPI real rate.

V. sonrlusion

The evidence presented in this paper indicates that real interest
rates for the agricultural economy have been extremely high in the 1980s
and that their behavior seems to be linked to that found for real rates
in the aggregate economy.

What has been the source of these high real

57

Farm Products Rea' Rate
CPI Real Rate

63

Comparison

69

of Farm Produc t
Real Rate and CP1 Ceo] Rate

Figure 2

75

61

1_ 0

0

I
10

2
20

i

0

40

-4 5

Annue I Role

rates?

The answer seems to be that it was the result of

a

conrerted

effort by the monetary aothorities to disinflate the economy.

However,

the brunt of the Fed's disinflationary policy has fallen more heavily on
the farm sector which has had to face far higher real rates than the rest

of the economy.

Although breaking the hack of inflation was certainly a

worthy goal for the Fed, farmers have had to pay a heavy price.

They

have had to suffer for the sins of an economy that was excessively
inflationary, which then had to he brought back into line with
disinflationary policy.

18

Footnotes

*

Graduate School of Business, Columbia University and National Bureau
of Eronomic Research.

This research is part of the NBER's researrh

program in Eronomir Fluctuations and Finanrial Markets and Monetary
Eronomirs.

The dats in the figures

The usual disrlaimer applies.

in this paper as well as the other data used in the analysis will be
made available free of rhsrge to any researcher who will send me a
stsndsrd formatted 360 KB diskette with a self-addressed mailer.
1.

See Mishkin (198lb).

2.

On the other hand,

an own-commodity real interest rate measured with

futures market data may provide valuable information on the real
cost of borrowing to a producer of that commodity.

For a hog

farmer, a high own-commodity real rate in terms of hogs indicates a
high cost of financing hog storage or production.
3.

If the data are overlapping, say the observation interval is one
period and the holding period and time to maturity of the bond is
periods, then

c

will be serially correlated and will have a PIA(j-1)

time series process.
correlated with

This occurs because

ttl

to

can be

since they will not be realized at time t and
In the overlapping data

thus will not be in the information set

is uncorrelated with

case the diagnostic check examines whether
c's lagged j periods or more.
4.

Although the diagnostic check described here is valuable, it is not
powerful agaimst certain alternatives.
correlated or correlated with past

r,

If

u

is not serially

then the regression residual,

19

u

-

a,

will not be serially correlated even if the variance of

is large.
5.

Although OLS produrea consistent estimates of B in the overlapping
data case of footnote 3 in which

t

is serially correlated, the OLS

standard errors of the coefficients will be inrorrert.

The standard

errors rsn be corrected, however, using the techniques outlined by
Hansen and Hodrick and Cumby, Huiziuga and Obstfeld [see references
in Huizinga and Hishkin (1986)]
6.

For example, see Blsnrhard and Summers and Evans.

7.

The 1920 regime shift is also associated with a weakening of the
Fisher effect, just as occurred after October 1979.

8.

Although the federal government ran substantial budget deficits in
the years 1917-1919 as a result of World War I, there were budget

surpluses in every year from 1920 to 1929.
9.

Note that financial deregulation, investment tax credits and oil
price shocks were also not present in the 1920s.

Thus the rorre-

spondenre between the l920s and the 1980s of real interest rate
behavior also weakens the case that these were important fsrtors
affecting recent real rate behavior.
10.

The list of explanatory variables examined included the one—month
bill rate, two lags of the inflation rate (calculated using the farm
products price index) and one lag of a supply shock variable measured as the relative price of energy in the PPI.

11.

Goldfeld-Quandt tests also reveal no evidence of heterosredastirity
in the post-October 1979 sample period, but do reject homosredasticity in the pre-October 1979 period.

However, when the pre-

October 1979 regression is rerun with a weighted least squares

20

correction for heteroscedasticity along the lines of Glesjer, the
cesults are very similar to those reported in the text; the coefficient of the bill rate is still negative and insignificantly different from zero.
12.

The one-month bill rate data was obtained from the Center for
Security Prices (CRSP) at the University of Chicago.

The bill rate

and ex post real rate are continuously compounded percentages at an
annual rate.

The timing of the data is as follows:

A January bill

rate observation uses the end of December bill rate, while the
January observation for the one-month inflation rate is calculated
as the logarithmic change from the December to January values of the
farm products ppi index (multiplied by 1200 to put it as percent at
an annual rate).

The January ex post real rate observation equals

the January bill rate observation minus the January farm products
inflation observation.
13.

Huizinga and Nishkin (1986) reports the standard errors of these
regressions on page 247.

Note, however, that the Huizinga-Nishkin

standard errors have to be multiplied by 1200 to be in percent at an
annual rate.
14.

The standard errors of the expected inflation coefficient are
estimated with an instrumental variables procedure described by
NcCallum and Pagan [see references in Huizinga and Mishkin (1986)].
This is necessary because OLS estimates of the standard errors will
be incorrect since OLS estimation involves a two-step procedure in
which expected inflation is estimated first and then ex post real
rates are regressed on this measure.

21

15.

The formula for the confidence interval ia derived under the
reasonable aasumption that the variance of inflation forecaat errors
are large relative to the variance of

u.

The formula ia given in

r1iahkin (1981a).
16.

The estimated rates using the CPI price index are estimated using
the regression specification of Huizinga and Mishkin (1986)

17.

For reasons similar to those described in footnote 14, correct
standard errors of this coefficient are obtained with an instrumental variables technique.
tlishkin.

This procedure is described in Cunhy and

22

References

Blanchacd, O.J. and Summers, LII., "Perspectives on High World Real
Interest Rates," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2 (1984):
2 73-324.

Cumhy, Robert E. and Mishkin, Frederic S.
Real Interest Rates:

,

"The International Linkage of

The European-US Connection," Joucual of

International Money and Finance, 5 (1986): 5-23.
Evans, P., "Do Large Deficits Produce High Interest Rates?" American
Economic Review, 75 (1985): 68—87.
Fama, Eugene F., "Short Term Interest Rates as Predictors of Inflation,"
American Economic Review 65 (1975): 269-82.
and Gibbons, Michael R., "Inflation, Real Returns and
Capital Investment," Journal of Monetary Economics, 14 (1982):
297-323.
Glesjer, H., "A New Test for Heteroscedasticity," Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 64 (1969): 316—23.
Goldfeld, S. and Quandt, R.E., "Some Tests for Heteroscedasticity,"
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 6D (1965): 539-47.
Huizinga, John and Mishkin, Frederic S.

,

"Inflation and

Real Interest

Rates on Assets with Different Risk Characteristics," Journal of
Finance 39 (1984): 699—712.
___________________________________________

"Monetary Policy Regime Shifts

and the Unusual Behavior of Real Interest Rates," Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 2D (Spring 1986): 231-74.

23

Lucas, R. E. Jr., "Econometric Policy Evaluation:

A Critique," in K.

Brunner and A. Meltzec (eds.) The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets,
Carnegie—Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,

1

(1976):

19-46.

Mishkin, Frederic S., "The Real InteresL Rate:

An

Empirical

Investiga-

tion," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy,

15

151-200.

(Fall 1981a):

"Are Market Forecasts Rational," American Economic
Review, 71 (1981b): 295-306.

"The Real Interest Rate: A Multi-Country Empirical

___________________

Study," Canadian Journal of Economics, 17 (May 1984): 283—311.
"Are Real Interest Rates Equal Across Countries?
An Empirical Investigation of International Parity Conditions,"
Journal of Finance, 39 (December 1984): 1345-1357.
_____________________—,

"Can Futures Market Data Be Used to Understand the

Behavior of Real Interest Rates?" National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper #2400, October 1987.
Nelson, Charles R.

,

and Schwert,

G.

William, "Short-Term Interest Rates

as Predictors of Inflation: On Testing the Hypothesis that the Real
Rate of Interest is Constant," American Economic Review, 67 (1977):
478—86.
Sims, C. "Macroeconomics and Reality," Econometrics (1980).
Summers, L.H., "The Nonadjustment of NOminal Interest Rates:

A

Study of

the Fisher Effect," in J. Tobin (ed.) A Symposium in Honor of Arthur
Okun (Washington, D.C. 1983: Brookings Institution).

