NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MACROECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF COVID-19:
CAN NEGATIVE SUPPLY SHOCKS CAUSE DEMAND SHORTAGES?
Veronica Guerrieri
Guido Lorenzoni
Ludwig Straub
Iván Werning
Working Paper 26918
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26918

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2020

I do not have any conflict of interest or financial relationship that would bear on the research in
this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and Iván Werning. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Macroeconomic Implications of COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand
Shortages?
Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and Iván Werning
NBER Working Paper No. 26918
April 2020
JEL No. E21,E32,E60,I18
ABSTRACT
We present a theory of Keynesian supply shocks: supply shocks that trigger changes in aggregate
demand larger than the shocks themselves. We argue that the economic shocks associated to the
COVID-19 epidemic—shutdowns, layoffs, and firm exits—may have this feature. In one-sector
economies supply shocks are never Keynesian. We show that this is a general result that extend to
economies with incomplete markets and liquidity constrained consumers. In economies with
multiple sectors Keynesian supply shocks are possible, under some conditions. A 50% shock that
hits all sectors is not the same as a 100% shock that hits half the economy. Incomplete
markets make the conditions for Keynesian supply shocks more likely to be met. Firm exit
and job destruction can amplify the initial effect, aggravating the recession. We discuss the
effects of various policies. Standard fiscal stimulus can be less effective than usual because
the fact that some sectors are shut down mutes the Keynesian multiplier feedback. Monetary
policy, as long as it is unimpeded by the zero lower bound, can have magnified effects, by
preventing firm exits. Turning to optimal policy, closing down contact-intensive sectors and
providing full insurance payments to affected workers can achieve the first-best allocation,
despite the lower per-dollar potency of fiscal policy.
Veronica Guerrieri
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
vguerrie@chicagobooth.edu

Ludwig Straub
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer 211
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
ludwigstraub@fas.harvard.edu

Guido Lorenzoni
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Dr
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
guido.lorenzoni@northwestern.edu

Iván Werning
Department of Economics, E52-536
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
iwerning@mit.edu

1

Introduction

Jean-Baptiste Say is famously misquoted for stating the Law “supply creates its own
demand.” In this paper, we introduce a concept that might be accurately portrayed as
“supply creates its own excess demand”. Namely, a negative supply shock can trigger a
demand shortage that leads to a contraction in output and employment larger than the
supply shock itself. We call supply shocks with these properties Keynesian supply shocks.
Temporary negative supply shocks, such as those caused by a pandemic, reduce output
and employment. As dire as they may be, supply shock recessions are partly an efficient
response, since output and employment should certainly fall. However, can a supply shock
induce too sharp a fall in output and employment, going beyond the efficient response?
Can it lead to a drop in output and employment for sectors that are not directly affected by
shutdowns? Relatedly, could this process produce an anemic recovery or is a V-shaped
recession assured?
These are the questions we seek to address in this paper. They are also the questions
behind recent debates over monetary and fiscal policy responses to the COVID-19 epidemic and the ensuing economic fallout. We also examine the logic behind these class of
stabilization measures.
A simple perspective on the effects of COVID-19, casts the issue as one of aggregate
supply versus aggregate demand, whether the shock to one side is greater than the other.
Some have expressed skepticism that any demand stimulus is warranted in response to
what is essentially a supply shock, and argue that the economic response should be purely
framed in terms of social insurance. Others have expressed the belief that the pandemic
shock can cause output losses larger than efficient. For example, Gourinchas (2020) has
argued for macro measures aimed at “flattening the recession curve.” The debate illustrates
that a discussion focused on demand versus supply opens up many possibilities, but leaves
many questions unanswered. What forces would induce demand to contract more than
supply?
The perspective we offer here is different and based on the notion that supply and
demand forces are intertwined: demand is endogenous and affected by the supply shock
and other features of the economy. Our analysis uncovers features of the economy that
matter and the mechanisms by which forces acting on the supply side end up affecting
the demand side as well. The basic intuition is simple: when workers lose their income,
due to the shock, they reduce their spending, causing a contraction in demand. However,
the question is whether this mechanism is strong enough to cause an overall shortfall in
demand.
2

Figure 1: How negative supply shocks can lead to demand shortages
— Case with equal inter- and intra-temporal elasticities —

sector 2
workers

(c) Incomplete markets

sector 1

sector 2

sector 1

shocked

unaffected

shocked

sector 2
bust

sector 1
workers

sector 2
workers

sector 1
workers

sector 2
workers

income

income
sector 1
workers

sector 2

income

sector 1

(b) Representative agent

income

(a) Before the shock

First, we show that in one-sector economies the answer is negative: the drop in supply
dominates. The result is well-known in a representative agent economy. Less obviously, we
show that it holds true in richer incomplete market models that allow for heterogeneous
agents, uninsurable income risk and liquidity constraints, creating differences in marginal
propensities to consume (MPC). In these models, a mechanism from income loss to lower
demand is present, but although it makes the drop in aggregate demand larger than in the
representative agent case, the drop is still smaller than the drop in output due to the supply
shock. Intuitively, the MPCs of people losing their income may be large, but is bounded
above at one, which implies that their drop in consumption is always a dampened version
of their income losses.
We then turn to economies with multiple sectors. When shocks are concentrated in
certain sectors, as they are during a shutdown in response to an epidemic, there is greater
scope for total spending to contract. The fact that some goods are no longer available
makes it less attractive to spend overall. An interpretation is that the shutdown increases
the shadow price of the goods in the affected sectors, making total current consumption
more expensive and thus discouraging it. On the other hand, the unavailability of some
sectors’s goods can shift spending towards the other sectors, through a substitution channel.
Whether or not full employment is maintained in the sectors not directly affected by the
shutodwn depends on the relative strength of these two effects.
We show that a contraction in employment in unaffected sectors is possible in a representative agent setting when the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is sufficiently

3

high and the elasticity of substitution across sectors is not too large.1 An alternative intuition is that under these conditions the two goods are Hicks complements, so that lower
marginal consumption of goods affected by the shutdown decreases the marginal utility
from consuming unaffected goods.
We then turn to incomplete markets and show that the condition for a contraction in
employment in unaffected sectors becomes less stringent. Intuitively, if workers in the
affected sectors lose their jobs and income, their consumption drops significantly if they
are credit constrained and have high MPCs. To make up for this, workers in the unaffected
sectors would have to increase their consumption of the remaining goods sufficiently. This
requires a higher degree of substitution across sectors. If goods are not too close substitutes,
aggregate demand contracts more than supply and employment in the unaffected sectors
falls.
Figure 1 illustrates this logic for two sectors, 1 and 2, where sector 1 gets shocked.
In a representative agent setting, agents working in both sectors pool their income and
spend it across sectors identically. Here, the difference between inter- and intra-temporal
elasticities matters for whether sector 2 is affected by the shock in sector 1. Figure 1(b)
shows the knife-edge case where both elasticities are equal and sector 2 is unaffected. Panel
(c) then emphasizes that with incomplete markets, even this case causes sector 2 to go
into a recession, as sector 1 workers cut back their spending on sector 2. Thus, Figure 1
illustrates how a supply shock in sector 1 can spill over into a demand shortage in sector 2,
that is amplified by incomplete markets.
The fact that aggregate demand causes a recession above and beyond the reduction in
supply might lead one to think that fiscal policy interventions are powerful in keeping
aggregate demand up. We show that this is a false conclusion. First of all, the marginal
propensity to consume may be low. Second, and more surprisingly, the standard Keynesian
cross logic behind fiscal multipliers is not operational in the recession, there are no second
round effects, so the multiplier for government spending is 1 and that for transfers is
less than 1. To see this, note that the highest-MPC agents in the economy are the former
employees of the shut down sector. They do not benefit from any government spending.
They do benefit from direct transfers, but none of their spending will return to them as
income. Thus, the typical Keynesian-cross amplification is broken as the highest-MPC
agents in the economy do not benefit from spending by households or the government that
was induced by fiscal policy.
We next extend the model to consider the effect of business closings. To do so, we
1 Rowe

(2020) provides a colorful and careful intuition for this possibility.

4

introduce a continuum of varieties agents can consume. Each variety is produced by a
business that is required to pay a fixed cost to remain open and operational. In this case, we
identify a firm exit multiplier. As some initial set of businesses is shut down (e.g. restaurants),
e.g. due to health concerns, Keynesian forces reduce demand for other businesses (e.g. car
dealers) as well. This, however, might mean that some of the other businesses become
unable or unwilling to remain open. When they close, however, laying off their workers, a
new, endogenous, Keynesian supply shock is born, that amplifies the existing exogenous
one, creating a multiplier effect that may be sufficiently strong to shut down most of the
economy.
We use this framework with endogenous business operations to discuss the effectiveness
of several policies. We find that profit subsidies or employer-side payroll tax cuts are
effective in keeping businesses afloat and preventing closures. Crucially, however, we find
that these policies only work because they are conditional on remaining open; a lump-sum
transfer to businesses would not necessarily prevent closures. When fixed costs stem from
debt obligations, we find that monetary policy adopts a new transmission channel in the
recession. By lowering debt payments, it can help prevent businesses from closing.
A related model features labor hoarding in the sector hit by a productivity shock. Firms
may engage in labor hoarding, holding on to their workers at a loss, or let them go at the
given wage, destroying the match and losing on future profits. When the incentives to
keep workers is not large enough the analysis replicates our earlier results. However, for
low enough interest rates firms put enough weight on future profits relative to current
losses and decide to keep and pay their workers. In our model, this results in perfect
insurance, possibly solving the demand deficiency at given interest rates. The decision to
destroy job-worker matches may have longer run consequences on productivity, making
the recovery after the shock more difficult. If firms are liquidity constrained then this
distorts their labor hoarding decisions, so policies that mitigate these liquidity problems or
improve firm balance sheets, while providing an incentive to keep workers, may improve
the outcome.
Finally, we study the jointly optimal health and macroeconomic policy caused by a
pandemic. We nest our previous model in a setting where we can model the health concerns
more explicitly, private and social, and think about optimal policy, both of the Pigouvian
nature and the macro stabilization. We show that the first best policy in our model involves
closing down contact-intensive sectors and insurance payments to affected workers.

5

Literature Motivated by Pandemic
A large set of papers has emerged and is still expanding on macroeconomic issues surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic. There are a number of policy proposals, with a large
number of them collected in Baldwin and Weder di Mauro (2020).
Fornaro and Wolf (2020) consider a standard New Keynesian representative-agent
economy and study a pandemic as a negative shock to the growth rate in productivity.
They also consider endogenous technological change and stagnation traps. In contrast, we
focus on temporary shocks to supply due to shutdowns.
Faria e Castro (2020) builds on studies different forms of fiscal policy in a calibrated
DSGE New Keynesian model. The model builds on Faria e Castro (2018) and features
incomplete markets in the form of borrowers and savers with financial frictions. The
pandemic is modeled as a large negative shock to the utility of consumption. Our paper
instead focuses on a supply shock, motivated by the shutdowns, and studies the induced
effects on demand.
A growing number of recent papers, motivated by the recent COVID-19 pandemic,
make contact with epidemiological SIR or SIER models of contagion, merging them into
an economic setting.2 Atkeson (2020) provides a useful overview of the epidemiological
models and their implications in the current COVID-19 pandemic. Berger, Herkenhoff and
Mongey (2020) present an extended model with immunity and random testing. Eichenbaum, Rebelo and Trabandt (2020) consider a real one-sector dynamic model analysis
and studies the effect of the pandemic taking into account optimal rational responses by
private agents. They then consider optimal Pigouvian policy to internalize the externalities.
Alvarez et al. (2020) study the optimal dynamic shutdown policy within a canonical SIR
model. None of these papers focus on demand shortages or feature multiple sectors.
Jorda et al. (2020) provide some time-series evidence from historical pandemics on the
impact on rates of return. The pandemics they study are persistent, with large numbers
casualties.They find evidence that pandemics reduce the real rate of interest. It is not clear
if this is comparable to the events we focus on, since we do not focus on the longer-term
effects of death, but instead on the shorter-term effects of shutdowns that respond to the
pandemic.
2 Of

course, a larger prior literature in history, health and development economics studied pandemics, and
just to name a few recent examples, Philipson (1999), Greenwood et al. (2019) and Fogli and Veldkamp (2020).

6

2

Single Sector: Standard Supply Shocks Even with Incomplete Markets

We being by studying the effects of a supply shock in a one-sector model. We find that supply shocks have standard features here: they never cause demand effects strong enough to
dominate the effects on the supply side. This applies even in economies with heterogenous
agents and incomplete markets.
The framework we use for this section, and that we expand on in later sections, is a
standard infinite horizon model with a single good. The model is populated by a unit mass
of agents whose preferences are represented by the utility function
∞

∑ βt U (ct ) ,

(1)

t =0

where ct is consumption and U (c) = c1−σ / (1 − σ) is a standard CES utility function with
intertemporal elasticity (EIS) σ−1 . Each agent is endowed with n > 0 units of labor which
are supplied inelastically. Competitive firms produce the final good from labor using the
linear technology
Yt = Nt .
The supply shock we introduce in the economy is inspired by the recent COVID-19 epidemic: a random fraction φ > 0 of agents is unable to go to work in period t = 0. This
captures the idea that the epidemic is making it unsafe for some agents to work, e.g. because their job requires close interaction with the public, so these agents stay home, either
by choice or due to government containment policies.3 Thus these agents can no longer
supply their labor endowments in the first period. Starting in t = 1, we assume that all
agents can again supply their full labor endowments of n.
We analyze the effects of this supply shock separately for two versions of the model;
first with complete markets, that is, with a representative agent; then with incomplete
markets. In both cases, we look for two indicators—the response in the (natural) interest
rate and the response of output if the real interest rate does not (or cannot) adjust in line
with the natural rate. These indicators reveal whether the supply shock has standard effects
or Keynesian effects. In the first case, the natural interest rate increases, and aggregate
demand falls less than aggregate supply at a fixed real interest rate. In the second, the
3 For

now we take this as given. Section 6 studies an extension of the model with contagion, including both
private and public (externalities) motives. We find that it can be optimal to shut down parts of the economy.

7

natural interest rate falls, and aggregate demand falls more than aggregate supply at a
fixed real rate.

2.1

Complete Markets

Consider first the case of complete markets and thus a representative agent. Although
the argument here is well known, it is useful to review it to set the stage for the rest of
the analysis. Since markets are complete, we can view the supply shock as reducing the
representative agent’s labor supply from n to (1 − φ)n in period t = 0.
What happens to the natural interest rate? Consider the flexible price version of this
economy in which labor is always fully employed. The effect of the labor supply shock is
mechanical: consumption falls at t = 0 before returning to its previous level. Thus, at date
t = 0, the real interest rate rises to
1 + r0 =

1 U 0 ((1 − φ)n)
1
>
0
β
U (n)
β

above its previous steady state level of 1/β.
The fact that the natural interest rate increases in this economy is a sign that there is no
shortage of demand, in fact the opposite. To corroborate this logic, we introduce nominal
rigidities. A convenient and tractable way to do so is to assume that nominal wages Wt are
downwardly rigid. In that case, if labor demand falls below the labor endowment, wages
are unchanged. This means that this economy can in principle display unemployment.
We continue to assume that firms are perfectly competitive, so nominal prices are equal to
nominal wages, Pt = Wt , and the real wage is wt = 1.
In this economy, demand falls less than supply. To see why, let us do the following
experiment. Assume that the central bank ensures full employment at all future dates so
ct = n for t = 1, 2, .... Assume also that at t = 0 the central bank tries to keep the real
interest rate at its steady state level 1/β − 1. Consumption is then purely determined by
the forward looking condition
1
U 0 ( c0 ) = β U 0 ( n ) ,
β
which yields c0 = n. This means that aggregate demand is completely unaffected, while
aggregate supply falls to (1 − φ)n.4 We summarize the results with complete markets.
4 This

cannot be an equilibrium, so the real rate will have to raise to its natural rate. For our purposes
here, we do not need to specify the mechanism by which equilibrium is restored. A way of thinking about

8

Proposition 1. Consider the single-sector model with complete markets. The negative supply shock
causes an increase in the natural interest rate. If the real rate does not adjust, there is excess demand
in the labor market.
An alternative interpretation of Proposition 1 is that of a positive news shock. At
t = 0, the representative agent learns that labor endowments will increase over time, from
(1 − φ)n to n per period. This intuitively explains why labor demand exceeds supply at
t = 0 unless the real interest rate adjusts.

2.2

Incomplete Markets

Next we move to an economy with incomplete markets. The effects of the supply shock
are less obvious here. After all, the agents hit by the shock lose their earnings and, in the
presence of market incompleteness, might severely cut back their spending. We will start
with a relatively simple setting with incomplete markets, but the results apply to more
general setups.
For this economy, we label agents by i ∈ [0, 1]. Each agent i maximizes utility (1) subject
to the budget constraint
cit + ait ≤ wt nit + (1 + rt−1 ) ait−1
Here, we assume agents have access to real, zero-net-supply, one-period bonds, paying
real interest rate rt . For the mass 1 − φ of non-shocked agents, labor supply nit equals n.
For the mass φ of shocked people, nit = 0. We assume that market incompleteness takes
the form of a borrowing constraint,
ait ≥ 0
(2)
which is imposed on a fraction µ ∈ [0, 1] of agents. Henceforth, we refer to such agents
as “constrained” agents. There is the same fraction µ of constrained agents in both sectors.
The limit case µ = 0 yields the same outcome as the representative agent complete-markets
case; the limit case µ = 1 corresponds to the case in which (2) is imposed for all agents. The
economy starts in the symmetric steady state, in which ai,−1 = 0 for all agents i.
Once again, we begin by characterizing the flexible price equilibrium and deriving the
response of the natural interest rate. Constrained agents hit by the shock see their income
drop to zero and, due to (2), their consumption falls to zero as well, cit = 0. All other agents
adjustment is to think that “off equilibrium” the excess demand of labor causes nominal wages to increase
and the central bank responds to observed inflation by raising rates.

9

are on their Euler equation, that is,
U 0 (ci0 ) = β (1 + r0 ) U 0 (ci1 ) .
Due to homothetic preferences, their total consumption, which we denote by ct , also
satisfies the Euler equation,
U 0 ( c0 ) = β (1 + r0 ) U 0 ( c1 ) .

(3)

Moreover, the goods market clearing condition has to hold in each period, implying that in
all periods t > 0,
ct + µφn = n
(4)
and at date t = 0,
c0 = (1 − φ)n.

(5)

To understand condition (4), note that µφn is the steady-state spending of constrained
agents that were shocked at date 0. As their consumption falls to zero at date 0, it is missing
in (5). Substituting (4) and (5) into the Euler equation (3), we arrive at the expression for
the natural interest rate,
1 U 0 ((1 − φ)n)
1
1 + r0∗ =
≥
.
(6)
β U 0 ((1 − µφ)n)
β
Once more, the natural interest rate increases in response to the shock, as (1 − φ)n ≤
(1 − µφ)n. The logic is similar to the one above. All agents on their Euler equation would
like to smooth their consumption over time. Yet, that would lead to demand c0 that exceeds
labor supply (1 − φ)n. Thus, the natural rate increases. What is new in the incomplete
markets model is that not all agents are on their Euler equation and thus are able to smooth
consumption. This reduces the necessity of interest rates to rise. In fact, in the special case
where all agents are subject to the borrowing constraint (2), µ = 1, the interest rate remains
unchanged.
Now turn to the economy with rigid nominal wages, in which the central bank again
attempts to implement a fixed interest rate 1 + r0 = 1/β. By (3) and (5), this implies that
agents on their Euler equation demand
c0 = (1 − µφ)n
exceeding the supply of labor (1 − φ)n. In particular, each non-shocked agent would have
1−µφ
to supply n0 = 1−φ n ≥ n units of labor. Again, the supply shock leads to a boom in labor
10

demand for each non-shocked worker, unless µ → 1.
The case of µ → 1 turns out to be an instructive extreme case. With µ → 1, each
shocked agent that loses the income n cuts back spending by exactly n, that is, the agents
responds with a marginal propensity to consume (MPC) of 1. Thus, taken together, the
shock removes φn units of labor supply and φn units of labor demand. On net, therefore,
labor market clearing still holds without any other agent changing their behavior, and
without interest rates moving.
This intuition turns out to greatly transcend the specific model written here. In fact, it
applies to much richer incomplete-markets models, possibly with uninsurable idiosyncratic
shocks, as long as they still have a single final good. The result being that in none of these
models can the natural interest rate fall in response to the supply shock. To see this, note
that the “best case scenario” for a falling interest rate is one in which all shocked agents cut
back their spending 1-for-1 with the income shock they suffered. Yet, in that scenario, the
supply shock reduces demand by exactly as much as it reduces supply. Thus, the interest
rate does not move. Since this was the “best case scenario”, it follows, that when shocked
agents do not respond 1-for-1 to their income shocks, the natural rate always increases.
We summarize the insights from the incomplete markets model.
Proposition 2. Consider the single-sector model with incomplete markets. The negative supply
shock causes an increase in the natural interest rate. When real rates do not or cannot adjust, this
translates into excess demand (a boom) in the labor market. In the corner case in which shocked
agents cut their spending one for one with their income (µ → 1), the natural interest rate remains
constant.

3

Multiple Sectors: Keynesian Supply Shocks

We now enrich the model to include more than one sector. For some of the supply shock
examples we would like our model to apply to, this is very natural. For example, the
spread of the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated containment policies have clearly
had asymmetric effects on different sectors. Particularly affected have been service sectors
that require personal contact between consumers and workers.
This section will thus work with two sectors, 1 and 2. Later on, we will allow for a
continuum of sectors. We assume that a fraction φ of agents works in sector 1, and a
fraction 1 − φ of agents works in sector 2. As before, agents inelastically supply labor n
to their respective sector in the flexible price equilibrium; they may supply less than n

11

in the equilibrium with wage rigidities. For now, we assume that workers are perfectly
specialized in their sector.
The supply shock in this section will be one that prevents sector 1 agents from working.
In terms of the COVID-19 example, consumption and production in sector 1 may require
consumers and producers to meet in person. Consumption and production in sector 2,
however, can take place without any personal contact. Containment measures may then be
aimed at limiting contagion by preventing sector 1 agents from working.5
The technology to produce both goods is linear
Yjt = Njt ,

(7)

for j = 1, 2. Competitive firms in sector j hire workers at the sector-specific wage Wjt and
sell good j at price Pjt . Prices Pjt are flexible and, given the technology above, the price of
good j will be Pjt = Wjt .
Consumer preferences are now represented by the utility function
∞

∑ βt U (c1t , c2t ) ,

(8)

t =0

where
U (c1t , c2t ) =

 1− σ
1  ρ 1− ρ
1− ρ 1− ρ
φ c1t + (1 − φ)ρ c2t
,
1−σ

so the utility function features constant elasticity 1/ρ between the two goods and constant
intertemporal elasticity of substitution 1/σ. To ensure that the model is well behaved under
our supply shock, which prevents sector 1 agents from working, we assume for now that
ρ < 1. We will discuss later how relaxing CES preferences may be useful in a context in
which consumption of a set of goods goes to zero.
Next, we characterize the response of this multi-sector economy analogously to how
we studied the single-sector model in the previous section, beginning with the complete
markets case.
5 We

study the optimal containment policy in Section 6.

12

3.1

Complete Markets

Consider first the economy in steady state, before the shock hits, assuming all prices adjust
flexibly so the economy reaches full employment. The equilibrium allocation is
c1∗ = Y1∗ = φn,

c2∗ = Y2∗ = (1 − φ)n.

By symmetry, the relative price of good 1 in terms of good 2 is
p∗ = 1.

(9)

The real interest rate is 1/β as in the one good economy, since consumption is constant in
steady state. For reasons that will be clear shortly, it is useful to focus on the real interest
rate in terms of good 2, defined as
1 + r t ≡ (1 + i t )

P2t
P2t+1

where it denotes the nominal interest rate. The real interest rate 1 + rt enters the Euler
equation for good 2,
Uc2 (c1t , c2t ) = β(1 + rt )Uc2 (c1t+1 , c2t+1 ) ,

(10)

where Uc j denotes the partial derivative of U with respect to c jt .
At date t = 0, when the supply shock hits, production in sector 1 shuts down, so
c10 = Y10 = n10 = 0.
Of course, there can no longer be full employment in sector 1. That is the inevitable effect
of the shock. So we ask what happens in sector 2. As before, the shock is temporary and the
economy goes back to steady state at t = 1. And, as before, we look first at what happens
to the real interest rate to maintain full employment of the workers in sector 2; then we look
at what happens to aggregate demand if the central bank keeps the real rate unchanged.
Using the representative agent’s Euler equation (10), the natural rate after the shock is
1 + r0 =

1 Uc2 (0, c2∗ )
.
β Uc2 c1∗ , c2∗

(11)

The natural interest rate falls due to the epidemic shock if the ratio of marginal utilities on
13

Intertemporal elasticity 1/σ

Figure 2: When are supply shocks Keynesian with a representative agent?

Keynesian supply shocks

1
Standard supply shocks

0

0

1
Intratemporal elasticity 1/ρ

Note. We can extend the validity of (12) to the case 1/ρ < 1 by replacing 0 in (11) with c1 and letting c1 → 0.

the right-hand side is smaller than 1, or, using the functional forms introduced above, if
ρ−σ

(1 − φ) 1−ρ < 1.
An immediate consequence of this inequality is the following.
Proposition 3. In the multi-sector model with complete markets, the negative supply shock translates into a reduced natural interest rate if and only if
1
1
< .
ρ
σ

(12)

The interpretation of this result is straightforward. If the inequality (12) is satisfied the
two goods are complements, so a drop in the production of good 1 increases the marginal
utility of good 2, acting like a negative demand shock for good 2. To incentivize consumers
to keep consuming enough of good 2 to keep employment at n, we need a drop in the
interest rate. We graphically illustrate the condition in Figure 2.
Before further discussing the plausibility of (12), we look at the effects of the shock
on aggregate demand, assuming downwardly rigid nominal wages as before. A simple
corollary of the proposition above is that if (12) is satisfied and the central bank keeps the
14

real interest rate at its steady state value 1/β − 1, then there is an inefficient recession in
sector 2, and the size of the output drop is given by
1 ρ−σ
n20
= ( 1 − φ ) σ 1− ρ .
n

(13)

Thus, when ρ > σ and the central bank does not (or cannot) act, the economy features two
types of job losses: the unavoidable job losses φn due to the direct effect of the shock, and
the inefficient job losses n − n20 due to insufficient demand in sector 2, with n20 given in
(13).
Is ρ > σ a plausible parameter configuration? If we look at standard models with a
continuum of goods or varieties, the elasticity of substitution among goods 1/ρ is usually
calibrated at values much larger than 1, while the intertemporal elasticity 1/σ is usually
somewhere near 1. Such a choice of parameters would give us the opposite configuration.
In that case, the two goods are substitutes, so a recession in sector 1 produces a demand
boom in sector 2. Wages increase, generating inflation, and the central bank has to increase
the nominal rate to avoid it.
One can argue whether that standard calibration is appropriate here, since here we are
not interested in the elasticity of substitution among different varieties of the same good,
but instead across different sectors, or across different locations. When restaurants are
locked down in a whole city, it is hard to substitute them for restaurant meals elsewhere.
This is why choosing an appropriate number for ρ requires thinking about whether the
person-to-person services that get affected by containment policies are mostly complements
or substitutes to other goods and services produced in the economy. In sum, we think
condition (12) might be satisfied for the case of the recent COVID-19 supply shock.
What real interest rate? Before turning to incomplete markets, it is useful to provide an
alternative interpretation of the result above. Notice that the shutdown of sector 1 can be
interpreted as making the shadow price of good 1 prohibitively high. The ideal consumer
price index (CPI) in this economy is

Pt =

ρ −1
ρ

ρ −1
ρ

φP1t + (1 − φ) P2t

 ρ−ρ 1
.

If we set the price P1t to infinity in period 0, the price index is still well defined, with ρ < 1.
For a given nominal interest rate i0 , and assuming zero inflation in good 2, the real interest

15

rate in terms of the aggregate consumption basket Ct is

(1 + i0 )

ρ
P0
= ( 1 + i 0 ) ( 1 − φ ) ρ −1 > 1 + i 0 .
P1

Proceeding in this way and using the Euler equation U 0 (C0 ) = β (1 + i0 ) PP10 U 0 (C1 ) it
is then possible to re-derive equation (13). We can then reinterpret the shock causing
unemployment in this economy as a shock that, for a given nominal rate, leads to a sharp
temporary increase in the real interest rate, due to the fact that the shadow price of a number
of goods goes up to infinity, as the goods cannot be bought. While this interpretation is
useful, it is a bit harder to match to observables, because the shadow price of the goods
not traded is not observed and their quantity goes to zero. So in the following we remain
focused on what happens to the real interest rate in terms of the goods that are still traded.
In other words, we focus on the measured CPI, rather than the ideal CPI.
The discussion above explains why we find it useful to work with the real interest rate
in terms of the goods that are traded in all periods, which in this section means good 2.

3.2

Incomplete Markets

We now generalize this economy to allow for market incompleteness, exactly as in Section 2.
Again, we use a simple description of market incompleteness but all results in this section
generalize to richer setups, e.g. those in Werning (2015). In particular, a random fraction µ
of households is subject to the borrowing constraint (2), and all households have the same
initial financial wealth ai0 = 0.
To derive the response of the natural rate, we focus again on the group of agents who
are not shocked or not constrained. Denote their consumption of goods 1 and 2 by c1t
and c2t , aggregated across the group. Due to homothetic preferences, we have Gorman
aggregation. Thus, if their Euler equation holds individually, it also holds for the group, so
1 + r0 =

1 Uc2 (0, c20 )
.
β Uc2 (c11 , c21 )

(14)

To evaluate this expression, consider first the labor market clearing condition for sector 2 at
date 0. Since shocked and constrained households consume nothing at date t = 0, labor
market clearing requires
c20 = (1 − φ)n.
At date t = 1, the group of not shocked or unconstrained household has total income
16

(1 − φµ) n̄ and consumes a fraction φ on good 1 and a fraction 1 − φ on good 2.6 We then
have
c11 = φ (1 − φµ) n̄, c21 = (1 − φ) (1 − φµ) n̄.
Substituting the consumption levels derived above, equation (14) yields
1 + r0 =

ρ−σ
1
(1 − φ) 1−ρ (1 − φµ)σ .
β

Notice that the expression on the right-hand side is equal to 1/β when φ = 0. Differentiating that expression with respect to φ and checking if the sign of the derivative is negative,
yields the following result.
Proposition 4. In the multi-sector model with incomplete markets, the negative supply shock
translates into a reduced natural interest rate if and only if
1
1 − µ 1 µ (1 − φ )
>
· +
.
σ
1 − φµ ρ
1 − φµ

(15)

This result is similar to the one in Proposition 3, in that it provides a lower bound on
the EIS for the natural rate to fall. In Proposition 3, that lower bound was given by the
elasticity of substitution, 1/ρ (which is greater than 1). Proposition 4 shows that market
incompleteness relaxes this condition, possibly considerably so. In particular, condition
(15) only requires 1/σ to lie above a convex combination of 1/ρ and 1. Moreover, that
convex combination converges to 1 as µ → 1. Thus, in the special case where the borrowing
constraint applies to all agents, the condition for Keynesian supply shocks is simply given
by
1
> 1,
σ
or that the EIS exceeds 1. Interestingly, this condition no longer depends on the elasticity of
substitution across goods, as long as 1/ρ > 1. We illustrate condition (15) in Figure 3.
Before providing more of an intuition for this result, consider the case of a fixed real
interest rate. If r0 is fixed by the central bank at 1/β − 1, the ratio of labor demand to labor
relative price of the two goods is always p∗ = 1 in period 1, because this economy features Gorman
aggregation and the wealth distribution does not affect relative prices. So individual consumption of all
agents satisfy
φ
ci11
φ
−1
=
.
( p∗ ) ρ =
ci21
1−φ
1−φ
6 The

17

Intertemporal elasticity 1/σ

Figure 3: When are supply shocks Keynesian with incomplete markets?

Keynesian supply shocks

1
Standard supply shocks

0

0

1
Intratemporal elasticity 1/ρ

Note. We can extend (15) to the case 1/ρ < 1 by replacing 0 in (14) with c10 and letting c10 → 0. In that
extension, we find that (15) becomes 1/σ ≥ 1/ρ for 1/ρ < 1.

supply in sector 2 is

1 ρ−σ
n20
= (1 − φµ) (1 − φ) σ 1−ρ .
(16)
n
Under condition (15), the supply shock has Keynesian effects: labor demand falls below
labor supply, causing a recession in the second sector.
Why does market incompleteness make it more likely for aggregate demand to fall?
Compared to an economy with complete markets, a fraction µ of sector 1 agents cut their
spending one-for-one with their income loss. This cut in spending weighs on aggregate demand above and beyond the spending response of unconstrained agents. Thus, aggregate
demand falls more with incomplete markets.
We illustrate this in Figure 4 for a case where 1/ρ > 1/σ. In that case, with complete
markets, µ = 0, sector 2 experiences a boom. With sufficient market incompleteness µ,
however, condition (15) can be met, causing a bust in sector 2. Interestingly, in that case, a
larger shock φ means a greater boom for small µ, but a greater bust for large µ.

No Paradox of Toil. An interesting perspective on this model is that it resolves NewKeynesian paradoxes at the ZLB. A number of papers have noticed that negative supply

18

Figure 4: Incomplete markets can cause recessions even with 1/ρ > 1/σ.

Output gap in non-shocked sector

50%

φ = 0.75
φ = 0.6

bust with incomplete markets,
worse with larger φ

φ = 0.4
φ = 0.2

0
boom if 1/ρ > 1/σ,
stronger with larger φ

-50%
0

1
Market incompleteness µ

shocks, such as negative labor supply or negative TFP shocks, are expansionary at the ZLB
in the New-Keynesian model (e.g. Eggertsson Paradox of Toil). This is not the case in our
model if condition (15) is satisfied: In that case, output indeed falls in response to negative
supply shocks, even when interest rates are fixed at the ZLB.

3.3

Fiscal Policy in the Incomplete Markets Model

One remedy against the ongoing COVID-19 recession that is currently being debated is
fiscal stimulus. To consider the effects of fiscal stimulus in our model, we introduce a
stylized government sector. We assume that the government chooses paths of government spending Gt , lump-sum transfers (or taxes) Tjt that can be targeted by sector, and
government debt Bt , subject to the flow budget constraint
Gt + T1t + T2t + (1 + rt−1 ) Bt = Bt+1
We assume that in the steady state, G = T1 = T2 = B = 0.
We consider two stimulus policies. The first is traditional government spending,
whereby the government raises G0 at date zero, purchasing sector 2 goods, financed
by uniform taxes in some future period T1t = T2t < 0. The second is a transfer program,
such as unemployment insurance benefits, according to which the government chooses a
19

positive transfer T1,0 to sector 1 consumers, again financed by uniform taxes in some future
period.
Proposition 5. Under government spending G0 and transfers T1,0 , equilibrium employment in
the incomplete markets is given by
1 ρ−σ
T
G
n20
= 0 + µ 1,0 + (1 − φµ) (1 − φ) σ 1−ρ .
n
n
n

In particular, there is a unit government spending multiplier and a transfer multiplier equal to the
average MPC. Both are smaller than predicted by the Keynesian cross.
This is a striking result. The average MPC in the economy is µ. In a typical recession in
this model that affects both agents similarly (e.g. a discount factor shock) the multiplier
would be 1/(1 − µ) and the transfer multiplier would be equal to µ/(1 − µ), exactly in
line with the Keynesian cross (Galí et al. (2007), Farhi and Werning (2016), Auclert et al.
(2018), Bilbiie (2019)). This is not the case here, however. The spending multiplier is simply
1, and the transfer multiplier is µ. Both multipliers are therefore missing the amplification
through the Keynesian cross.
Why? The reason is that sector 1 is shut down: No agent can spend on sector 1. This
means that any money spent by agents or the government flows into the pockets of sector
2 workers, and not sector 1 workers, who are up against their borrowing constraint and
thus have greater MPCs. This suggests that traditional fiscal stimulus is less effective in a
recession caused by our supply shock.

3.4

Labor Mobility

For now, we have assumed workers cannot move between sectors. It is easy to extend the
analysis to the case in which they can move. In particular, suppose a fraction α of workers
in each sector can move to the other sector. Consider first what happens with complete
markets. Now the full employment level of output and consumption in sector 2 is larger as
that sector can absorb the labor supply αφn of the mobile workers initially in sector 1. The
natural rate is now
ρ−σ
1 Uc2 (0, (1 − φ + αφ) n)
1
1− ρ

1 + r0 =
=
1
−
φ
(
)
β
β
Uc2 c1∗ , c2∗



1 − φ + αφ
1−φ

−σ
.

The condition for the natural rate to fall is now weaker than with immobile labor. In
particular, the natural rate now also falls in the case ρ = σ. The reason for this is simple:
20

sector 2 can now temporarily absorb some of the workers in sector 1, so spending in sector
2 needs to be temporarily larger. The consumption profile of good 2 is thus decreasing over
time, requiring a lower rate.
If we look at employment under a constant real rate, the level of employment is still
given by (13) (under ρ > σ) and is independent of α. This result may seem surprising, but
simply follows from the purely forward looking nature of consumption decisions in the
complete markets economy. Notice however that if we now look at the total employment
losses in this economy
1 ρ−σ

n̄ − (1 − φ) n20 = n̄ − (1 − φ) (1 − φ) σ 1−ρ n̄,
their decomposition between efficient employment losses and excess employment losses
changes. Efficient losses are now given by n̄ − (1 − φ + αφ) n̄, excess employment losses
are (1 − φ + αφ) n̄ − n20 . More mobility means that there are more excess losses.
Let us turn now to the incomplete market case. Now labor mobility affects directly
spending decisions, for a given r0 , because the workers who can move do not lose their
income. Now the fraction of workers who lose their income and are constrained becomes
(1 − α) µφ, so if the interest rate is fixed, the employment losses in sector 2 are now
1 ρ−σ
n20
= (1 − (1 − α) φµ) (1 − φ) σ 1−ρ .
n

Less mobility causes a deeper recession by causing larger income losses.
Excess employment losses in the incomplete market economy are


(1 − φ + αφ) − (1 − (1 − α) φµ) (1 − φ)

1 ρ−σ
σ 1− ρ


n̄.

If the following inequality holds
1 ρ−σ

µ ( 1 − φ ) σ 1− ρ < 1
it is still true that excess employment losses are larger in the economy with more mobility,
as in the complete market case, because the effects on incomes that affects the demand side
is weaker than the effect on the full employment output level.

21

3.5

Demand Chains

The analysis so far has focused on the degree of substitutability between the two goods
for the possibility of Keynesian supply shocks. Introducing input-output relations allows
us to look at the complementarity between the two sectors in a different light. The basic
idea here is that restaurants (in sector 1) may need services from accountants (in sector 2)
to produce their final good. When restaurants shut down that reduces a source of demand
for accounting services. This logic suggests that input-output relations could increase the
degree of complementarity between sectors, beyond the degree of complementarity driven
purely by preferences.
Let us investigate this idea formally by introducing a simple input-output structure. In
particular, we consider the possibility that goods produced by sector 2, that do not require
personal contact, are used as intermediate inputs by sector 1, which requires personal
contact.
The structure of preferences and markets is the same. We only change the technology.
Good 1 is produced according to the production function
Y1 = X α N11−α ,
where X is good 2 used as intermediate input in sector 1. The technology to produce good
2 is still linear
Y2 = N2 .
Workers are still fully specialized with φ of them supplying n̄ units of labor to sector 1 and
1 − φ of them supplying n̄ units of labor to sector 2. We use the term “demand chains” to
capture the mechanism investigated here, because the usual argument is that supply chain
disruptions cause an amplification of supply shocks upstream in the chain, while here we
focus on disruptions happening downstream which reduce demand for upstream sectors.
First, consider the steady state economy before the shock. In steady state, the economy
is at full employment and by market clearing
c1∗ = Y1∗ = X ∗α (φn)1−α ,

c2∗ = Y2∗ = (1 − φ)n − X ∗ ,

where X ∗ is the steady state optimal level of intermediate input in sector 1. To find X ∗ , we
just need the following two equations. The optimal demand for the intermediate input:
pαX α−1 (φn)1−α = 1,

22

where p is the relative price of good 1 in terms of good 2. And the relative demand for the
two consumption goods, using market clearing at full employment:

p=

φ
1−φ

ρ 

X α (φn)1−α
(1 − φ ) n − X

−ρ
.

Substituting p from the second equation in the first, gives one equation in X, which can be
shown to have a unique solution. The steady state real interest rate is 1/β − 1 as before.
Consider now the effects of a temporary shutdown of sector 1. As before, this naturally
implies that there cannot be full employment in the economy anymore. The difference is
that now the shut down of sector 1 has an additional direct effect on the demand for good
2 due to the fact that there is no more demand for intermediate inputs for sector 1. As in
the previous sections, let us first analyze what happens to the real interest rate if we want
to keep full employment of the workers in sector 2. As in the model with no intermediate
inputs, the natural rate after the shock that maintain full employment in sector 2 can be
derived using the Euler equation in terms of the good 2
1 + r0 =

1 Uc2 (0, (1 − φ)n)
 .
β Uc2 c1∗ , c2∗

The natural rate falls after the shock if the ratio of marginal utilities is smaller than 1, which,
using the functional forms we introduced is true if


1−φ
α 1− α
∗
∗
p (x ) φ
+ 1 − φ − x∗

 ρ−σ 
1− ρ

1 − φ − x∗
1−φ

 ρ +ρ ρ−σ
1− ρ

<1

where x ∗ ≡ X ∗ /n. This condition is weaker than the condition derived in Proposition 3, as
for example it is satisfied when ρ = σ.7 The reason is simple, in normal times there is a
fraction x ∗ of labor supply in sector 2 is absorbed by the production of intermediates for
sector 1. When the shock hits, this demand vanishes and needs to be replaced by direct
demand by the consumers. This requires an increase in consumption of good 2, tilting the
7 To

make this argument precise, the condition is weaker if we calibrate the model with no intermediate
inputs and the model with intermediate inputs so that the fraction of sector 2 in GDP is the same in steady
state. That fraction is
1−φ
in the baseline model and is

1−φ
p ∗ ( x ∗ ) α φ 1− α + 1 − φ − x ∗

in the model with inputs, so the two models need different values of φ.

23

real rate downwards.
It is possible to extend the rest of the analysis. Skipping directly to what happens to
output in the incomplete market case, when the central bank keeps the real rate at 1/β − 1,
we obtain that the recession in sector 2 is now given by
n20
= (1 − µφ)
n̄



1−φ
α
1
−
α
px φ
+1−φ−x

 1 ρ−σ 
σ 1− ρ

1−φ−x
1−φ

 ρ + ρ ρ−σ
σ

σ 1− ρ

.

The presence of the input-output structure adds the last factor in this expression, thus
magnifying the effect of incomplete markets, given by the first factor.

4

Business Exit Cascades

An important problem in an economy hit by an adverse supply shock of the sort we
consider in this paper is that businesses that are exposed to the shock see their revenues fall
and might not be able to stay afloat. If businesses exit, however, workers will lose their jobs
and might cut back on spending, feeding back into the magnitude of the recession. This
feedback loop, and potential policies to break it, are investigated in the current section.
To do so, we generalize the model studied in the previous section. In particular, we
now allow for a continuum of sectors j ∈ [0, 1], each of which produces according to the
linear aggregate production function (7). A representative worker supplies labor to each
of the sectors, without cross-sectoral mobility. Preferences are still given by (8), but we
change the consumption aggregator to
Ct =

Z

1− ρ
c jt dj

1/(1−ρ)
.

We assume that markets are incomplete in the sense used above. Specifically, we focus on
the case where µ → 1, that is, all agents are subject to the borrowing constraint (2).
We assume that each sector j is monopolistically competitive, charging markups
ϕ≡

1
.
1−ρ

Throughout this section, wages are assumed to be rigid, but prices are flexible. This implies
that the real wage is constant at w = 1 − ρ and profits of sector j are given by
Π jt = ρNjt .
24

We make the simplifying assumption that projects earned by sector j are rebated lump-sum
to the representative worker employed in sector j.8
We continue to study the same supply shock as before. In particular, a random fraction
φ of agents can no longer supply labor to their sectors. Without loss, we assume these to be
the sectors j ∈ [0, φ]. Observe that, without any other changes, this model generates the
exact same predictions as the model in Section 3.2, as we could bundle the sectors j ∈ [0, φ]
together as “sector 1” and the remaining sectors as “sector 2”. In particular, with φ inactive
sectors, the date-0 response of employment n0 in any of the active sectors is given by (16),
that is,
ρ 1− σ
n0
= ( 1 − φ ) σ 1− ρ .
(17)
n

4.1

The Business Exit Multiplier

We next allow for endogenous business exits. For this section, we define a business as
owning a single sector j. Thus, businesses can also be labeled by j. Each period, a business
has to pay a random fixed cost υ jt , which for simplicity we model as a transfer from
business j to its representative worker. υ jt is drawn i.i.d. from a distribution Υ(υ). We
assume that Υ(0) = 0 and Υ(ρn) = 1. This ensures that no fixed cost realization leads to
exit in the steady state.
Thus, business j makes profit Π jt − υ jt and finds it optimal to exit if Π jt < υ jt . The mass
of inactive businesses is denoted by φ̂t . By definition, φ̂t always exceeds the fraction of
shocked agents φ. Due to endogenous exit of businesses, however, φ̂t might be strictly
greater than φ.
With this formulation, we have at date 0 that
1 − φ̂0 = (1 − φ) Υ(ρn0 ).

(18)

Moreover, with 1 − φ̂0 active businesses, demand for employment is given by
ρ 1− σ
n0
= (1 − φ̂0 ) σ 1−ρ
n

(19)

Jointly, equations (18) and (19) pin down the mass of active businesses φ̂0 as well as
employment n0 .
The relationship between (18) and (19) is illustrated in Figure 5. The horizontal axis
8 This

assumption simplifies the algebra but does not materially affect the results.

25

Figure 5: The business exit multiplier
(b) After the shock

(a) Before the shock
1

1
equilibrium

n0
n

n0
n

equilibrium

demand locus

demand locus

0

business exit locus

business exit locus
0

0

1

1−φ

0

1 − φ̂0

1

1 − φ̂0

represents the mass of active businesses 1 − φ̂0 . The vertical axis represents the employment
relative to potential n0 /n. Under the assumption σ−1 > 1, both (18) and (19) describe
positively sloped curves in Figure 5. We call (19) the “demand locus”, as it describes the
demand for employment, taking as given how many workers are able to work (1 − φ̂0 ).
We call (18) the “(business) exit locus” as it describes the mass of businesses exiting given
labor demand n0 .
When there is no shock, φ = 0, the two curves necessarily intersect at coordinates
1 − φ̂0 = 1 and n0 /n = 1 (Panel a). However, a positive φ > 0 shifts the exit locus to the
left (Panel b). Interestingly, this shift raises the mass of inactive businesses by more than
just φ, as additional workers laid off by exiting businesses also stop consuming. There is a
cascade of business exits that generates a “business exit multiplier”.9
A tractable special case.
form for Υ(υ),

To see this even more cleanly, consider the following functional
Υ(υ) =



υ
ρn

η
.

(20)

Here, η > 0 captures businesses’ sensitivity to shutting down when average profits fall.
A smaller η implies that almost all businesses have low fixed cost draws and thus stay in
irrespective of profits. Vice versa, a larger η implies that businesses are more likely to exit
when profits fall.
9 Figure

5 shows that one can easily get multiple equilibria in this setting, when both curves intersect
multiple times. We plan to investigate this case in future research.

26

With the functional form (20), the two equations (18) and (19) can be solved explicitly,
giving
1
σ −1 − 1
n0
log(1 − φ).
(21)
log
=
−1 −1
n
ρ −1 − 1
1 − η σρ−1 −
1
|
{z
}
firm exit multiplier

This equation makes the business exit multiplier explicit. When η = 0, we are back in the
case of Section 3.2 with exogenously active sectors. When η > 0, however, businesses’
exit choices are endogenous to demand; but because supply shocks are Keynesian when
σ−1 > 1, exit feeds back into less demand.

4.2

Policies

We use the framework laid out here to discuss the effectiveness of two policies.
Profit subsidy / employer-side payroll tax cut. The first policy is a profit subsidy, which,
as in Section 3.3, we assume is paid for by employed agents. The subsidy raises profits by
1 + τ for some τ > 0. In our model, this is equivalent to an employer-side cut in payroll
taxes. Such a subsidy enters (18), modifying it to
1 − φ̂0 = (1 − φ) Υ((1 + τ )ρn0 )
and thus shifting the exit locus to the right. This mitigates some of the consequences of the
shock. In the tractable special case studied above, the employment response is given by
log

1
n0
σ −1 − 1
=
(log(1 − φ) + η log(1 + τ )) .
−1 −1 −1
n
ρ −1
1 − η σρ−1 −
1

Monetary policy. We model monetary policy as a change in the real interest rate 1 + r0
away from 1/β. This clearly affects the demand locus (19), through the Euler equation. In
particular, we have that
ρ 1− σ
n0
= (1 − φ̂0 ) σ 1−ρ · ( β(1 + r0 ))−1/σ .
n

Accommodative monetary policy shifts the demand locus up, thereby also reducing the
number of business exits in the economy.
Aside from the standard intertemporal substitution channel, however, there is another
27

transmission mechanism that can be active here. To illustrate this, we assume that when
exiting, businesses sacrifice a claim to future profits Π, which instead is earned by new
entrants in t = 1. This implies that the exit decision now compares current profits relative
to fixed cost net of discounted future profits, υ jt − 1+1r0 Π. In this case, a “business exit
channel” of monetary policy emerges. The exit locus now becomes



1
1 − φ̂0 = (1 − φ) Υ ρn0 +
Π .
1 + r0
This channel operates by shifting the exit locus to the right.

5

Labor Hoarding vs Job Match Destruction

The previous analysis applied to businesses in the sectors that were not hit by the shutdown.
We now briefly discuss how to model another margin, especially relevant for businesses in
the sectors hit by the shock. To do so, we return to the two sector model from Sections 2-3,
but make the following modifications.

5.1

A Simple Model of Labor Hoarding

Rather than describe the model in detail, we sketch out the model ingredients and main
ideas for now. Production in the sector hit by the shock is carried out by firm-worker match
pairs. Each firm is matched with a single worker, from some previous search process,
which we shall not presently model for simplicity. We assume that these workers have a
previously established wage w. There are no fixed costs, only the wage bill. These firms are
owned in equal proportion by all agents in the economy, in both sectors.
For now we assume that if these workers are let go then they are able to return to work
in the next period at t = 1, but not at the same firm, they instead match costlessly with
new firms created at t = 1. This is a simplifying assumption to ensure that output at t = 1
remains anchored. We discuss relaxing this assumption below.
Will a firm in the shutdown sector wish to maintain the match or let the worker go? A
firm considers the present value of its profits at t = 0 to be
V0 = max{−w +

1
V1 , 0}
R

where V1 is the given present value of profits from t = 1 onwards if they do not break up
the match. We assume that V1 is strictly positive, i.e. they expect py − w > 0 in future
28

period.10

5.2

Monetary Policy Implications

Now suppose parameters are such that at the initial interest rate R = 1/β firms wish to
let go of their workers, −w + R1 V1 < 0. Then these firms will not be worth anything. The
analysis from Section 3 then applies, creating a demand deficient recession.
Suppose instead R is lowered sufficiently, so that −w + R1 V1 = 0, or still lower. Then
firms will want to keep their workers. As a result, this outcome achieves perfect insurance
across workers in the two sectors: they both have the same income and financial assets.
Note that the lower interest rate required for −w + R1 V1 = 0 may be above or below the
natural rate of interest that ensures full employment in the unaffected sector. If the interest
rate is below this natural rate, then the monetary easing required to maintain job matches
goes beyond that for full employment in the unaffected sector. Otherwise, there is a divine
coincidence of sorts and the first-best outcome is achieved.

5.3

Scarring Job Match Losses

What happens if workers that are let go at t = 0 cannot immediately find a new job at
t = 1? To be concrete and consider a simple case: suppose no matches can be created at
t = 1, but they can be costlessly created at t = 2. Then if the interest rate is low enough to
make firing workers an equilibrium the economy will suffer a recession over both periods
t = 0, 1, effectively prolonging the duration of the supply shock. In period t = 0 the supply
shock is exogenous, but in period t = 1 it results from the loss of job matches. Through an
expectations channel, this may also make the recession at t = 0 deeper. More generally, a
vast empirical literature has documented the scarring effects of job losses.11
The assumption that matches cannot be created at t = 1 but can be costlessly recreated
at t = 2 is extreme, but we expect similar conclusions in a more elaborate model of search
and vacancies, where job matches are created in a costly and incremental manner over
time.
10 For

simplicity we assume for now that V1 is identical across firms, but one can make V1 or w vary across
firms to get a smoother response to shocks.
11 To be sure, in the context of shutdowns, we do not know if the effect of job losses is as damaging as
during regular economic downturns or massive layoffs at firms during normal times. It is possible that job
matches can be partly re-established at the end of a shutdown. Most likely, reality is a mix, where layoffs
contribute to some scarring but potentially less than the ones we can expect during regular times.

29

5.4

Liquidity Problems and Policy Proposals

What happens if firms are liquidity constrained? If firms have some finite amount of
liquidity at their disposal, say, because they cannot borrow nor issue equity and have
limited past accumulated profits at their disposal, then they no longer maximize the
present value of profits in an unconstrained fashion. This distorts firm decisions towards
laying workers off, since the current period loss cannot be financed.
In this case, policies that directly affect the liquidity of firms or that insure firms for
their loss in revenue, may restore the preferable outcome. In the model, this could be
accomplished by a transfer to firms. In practice, these policies could be implemented
in a number of ways and through a combination of fiscal and monetary branches of the
government.
This discussion lends support to policy proposals at at the outset of the economic
crises in March 2020 generated by the COVID-19 pandemic in the US and Europe. For
example, Hamilton and Veuger (2020) propose emergency loans for small and medium
sized firms most affected by liquidity problems facilitated by the Fed, complimented with
tax credits on the fiscal side. Saez and Zucman (2020) propose an ambitious insurance
policy, or “buyer of last resort”, whereby the government makes up for any loss in revenue
by in effect buying up the missing demand. Even some policy proposals aimed at paying
workers directly, through unemployment benefits, emphasize the importance of preserving
matches. For example, Dube (2020) calls for incentivizing temporary layoffs, so called
furloughs, and the use of worker-sharing provisions, to keeps workers on payroll and
allows workers to return easily after the shutdowns.12

6

Optimal Combined Shutdown and Macro Policy

Up to now we have taken the supply shock as given, just assuming certain sectors were
inactive because of a lockdown. We now nest our model in a setting where we model more
explicitly the health concerns, both private and social, and think about optimal policy, both
in terms of Pigouvian interventions and of macro stabilization.
To this end, let us modify the consumers’ objective function to include a health component. To keep things simple, we assume the health component is additive and does not
directly affect the consumers’ capacity to work. In particular, we modify the two sector
12 Giupponi and Landais (2018) provide some evidence on related policies in Europe and study optimal
policy in a model of labor hoarding and work-sharing.

30

model of Section 3, introducing the utility function:
∞

∑ βt (U (c1t , c2t ) + ht ) ,

t =0

where
ht = H (c1t , n1t , Y1t , ξ t )
is the consumer’s health. The parameter ξ t is the underlying shock and can take two values:
ξ in normal times and ξ when there is an ongoing epidemic. When ξ t = ξ, the function H
is just a constant. When ξ t = ξ, the function H is decreasing in c1t , n1t and Y1t . The idea is
that agents have a higher probability of being infected if they consume more in sector 1, if
they produce more in sector 1, and if aggregate activity is higher in sector 1. The variables
c1t and n1t are chosen by individual consumers, while the level of activity in sector 1, Y1t , is
taken as given by individual consumers. The presence of Y1t captures the basic externality
of an epidemic: more interactions in sector 1 cause a faster spread of the epidemic and so
increase the probability of being infected for each person. The rest of the model is identical
to the model in Section 3.
As in the rest of the paper, we assume that the shock is temporary and unexpected,
so ξ 0 = ξ and ξ t = ξ for t = 1, 2, .... We assume that a government lockdown makes it
impossible to consume and produce good 1. Therefore, under a lockdown the equilibrium
analysis Section 3 applies unchanged here, as ht is constant, because either ξ t = ξ or ξ t = ξ

and h0 = H 0, 0, 0, ξ .
To discuss interactions between public health policies and macroeconomic policies, we
begin by considering partial interventions and their effects, and then we work out a case
in which both sets of policies are set optimally and achieve the first best allocation. Our
results are organized around three remarks. We start with an elementary observation.
Remark 1. Involuntary unemployment is not necessarily socially inefficient in our model.
To make this point, consider what happens in an economy in which there is no containment policy in place, so both sectors are potentially active, despite the shock ξ 0 = ξ.
Even absent containment policies, private motives will still induce a contraction in activity
in sector 1, as people try to avoid contagion by reducing consumption and labor supply.
This contraction in activity may result in involuntary unemployment in sector 1. To show
that in a simple case, consider the complete market economy with nominal wage rigidities.
Suppose ρ = σ and suppose the central bank keeps the interest rate unchanged, so sector 2

31

is at full employment and Y2t = (1 − φ) n̄. We can have an equilibrium with
c10 = Y10 < φn,
if the following two conditions are satisfied

Uc1 (Y10 , (1 − φ) n̄) + Hc1 Y10 , Y10 , Y10 , ξ = Uc1 (c1∗ , c2∗ ) ,
and


Uc1 (Y10 , (1 − φ) n̄) + Hc1 Y10 , Y10 , Y10 , ξ + Hn1 Y10 , Y10 , Y10 , ξ > 0.

(22)

The first condition is the Euler equation in terms of good 1 and it gives Y10 < φn simply
because consumers try to avoid consuming good 1 due to Hc1 < 0. The second condition is
the optimality condition for labor supply and implies that it is optimal for the consumers
to supply n10 = n̄ as the private benefit from consumption, captured by the first two terms,
exceeds the private cost of working, captured by the last term. The expression (22) can be
interpreted as a Keynesian wedge, as the only disutility from work in our model comes
from health costs.
Once we take into account the public health aspect, the presence of unemployment may
not be socially inefficient, as agents do not internalize the externality in H. That is, it is
possible that



Uc1 (Y10 , (1 − φ) n̄) + Hc1 Y10 , Y10 , Y10 , ξ + Hn1 Y10 , Y10 , Y10 , ξ + HY1 Y10 , Y10 , Y10 , ξ < 0,
so reducing further activity in sector 1 increases social welfare. The last equation shows
that the Keynesian wedge, captured by the first three terms, can be more than compensated
by a Pigouvian wedge, captured by the last term.
In the example above, there is a trade-off between public health objectives and aggregate
demand stabilization. That happens in an example in which there are no public health
policies are in place. Once public health policies are introduced, in the form of a lockdown,
are the social welfare benefits of macro stabilization larger? That is, are the two policies
complementary? The next remark shows that in our context the answer is yes.
Remark 2. There are complementarities between public health policies and aggregate
demand stabilization.
The basic reason for this remark is that public health policies can produce a Keynesian
supply shock and macro policies can then be helpful to correct the effects of the latter.
Again consider the example above and now suppose the government shuts down sector
32

1. Consider again the complete market economy, with nominal rigidities. Suppose now
that ρ > σ, so we have an inefficient recession in sector 2. Lowering r0 (assuming we do not
hit the ZLB) allows the government to reach a first best efficient allocation if the following
condition is satisfied at the full employment allocation



Uc1 (0, (1 − φ) n̄) + Hc1 0, 0, 0, ξ + Hn1 0, 0, 0, ξ + HY1 0, 0, 0, ξ < 0.

(23)

This condition means that a corner solution with a complete shutdown of sector 1 is socially
efficient, as the public health benefits are large enough, given the shock ξ.
What happens when markets are incomplete? Now the social planner has to take into
account three possible sources of inefficiency: inefficiency due to the public health externality, inefficiency due to lack of insurance, inefficiency due to involuntary unemployment.
The next remark shows that if the government has sufficient tools it can deal with all of
them and restore first best efficiency. In discussing the remark, we will show that again
there are relevant complementarities between the tools used. In particular, social insurance
policies that intervene on the second inefficiency, can ameliorate the dilemma between the
other two that can arise with incomplete markets.
Remark 3. In the incomplete markets economy, a combination of public health policies,
social insurance policies, and monetary policy can achieve the first best for a utilitarian
social planner.
For this example, we need the incomplete market version of the two sector model,
with nominal wage rigidities. Suppose that parameters are such that a shutdown policy
produces a Keynesian supply shock, so there is inefficient unemployment in sector 2.
Suppose also that monetary policy is constrained by a ZLB constraint and suppose that this
constraint is binding in equilibrium of the incomplete market economy, with a shutdown.
And suppose also that the ZLB constraint is not binding with complete markets. We know
such a configuration is possible possible by Proposition 4.
Suppose first that the only policy tools available are a lockdown and monetary policy,
and monetary policy is stuck at the ZLB. Suppose we can relax slightly the containment
policy and increase output in sector 1 by dY1 . Consider the marginal benefit of this increase,
for a utilitarian social planner. The effects on the consumption component of utility is
Z 1
0

[Uc1 (0, ci10 ) ∂ci10 + Uc2 (0, ci20 ) ∂ci20 ] di

where ∂cij0 is the effect of dY1 on the consumption of consumer i of good j, in general
33

equilibrium. This effect can be large when the fraction of constrained agents µ is large for
two reasons: for distributional reasons, as there are consumers with zero consumption of
both goods, and for the presence of inefficient involuntary unemployment in sector 2. So it
is possible that relaxing the containment policy may be desirable, as a second best way of
correcting these two inefficiencies.
Suppose now that the government can also introduce a social insurance policy that
reallocates income from sector 2 workers to sector 1 workers, so as to equalize their aftertransfer incomes. Given this policy, the constraint on monetary policy is no longer binding,
as we are now effectively in the complete markets economy. Moreover, if condition (23) is
satisfied, a complete shut down of Sector 1 is now optimal.
In the example just discussed, there is a combination of policies that achieves the first
best allocation: a containment policy that shuts down sector 1, a social insurance policy
that compensates the workers in sector 1, and a monetary policy that hits the natural rate.
The fact that the social insurance policy makes it easier to achieve the demand stabilization
objective is not surprising per se: it is an example of a fiscal policy that makes it easier to
do monetary policy. The novel observation is that this type of fiscal policy also makes it
less costly for the government to impose a larger supply shock on the economy, that is, it
makes it easier to pursue public health objectives.

7

Concluding Remarks

This paper asks a simple question: can a shock to supply, such as those experienced during
a pandemic, lead to deficient demand? What are the combination of policy tools, monetary
and fiscal, that best address this question in our model? Our answer is positive, demand
may indeed overreact to the supply shock and lead to a demand-deficient recession. We
have tried to lay out the conditions for this to be the case. Low substitutability across sectors
and incomplete markets, with liquidity constrained consumers, all contribute towards the
possibility of Keynesian suppy shocks. We then showed that various forms of fiscal policy,
per dollar spent, may be less effective in our model. Despite this, the optimal policy to face
a pandemic in our model combines as loosening of monetary policy as well as abundant
social insurance.

References
Alvarez, Fernando, David Argente, and Francesco Lippi, “A Simple Planning Problem
34

for COVID-19 Lockdown,” March 2020. mimeo.
Atkeson, Andrew, “What Will Be the Economic Impact of COVID-19 in the US? Rough
Estimates of Disease Scenarios,” Working Paper 26867, National Bureau of Economic
Research March 2020.
Auclert, Adrien, Matthew Rognlie, and Ludwig Straub, “The intertemporal keynesian
cross,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.
Baldwin, Richard and Beatrice Weder di Mauro, Economics in the Time of COVID-19,,
VoxEU CEPR Press, 2020.
Berger, David, Kyle Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey, “An SEIR Infectious Disease Model
with Testing and Conditional Quarantine,” Working Paper 2020-25, Becker Friedman
Institute for Economics 2020.
Bilbiie, Florin O, “The new Keynesian cross,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2019.
Dube, Arin, “Filling the Holes in Family and Business Budgets: Unemployment Benefits
and Work Sharing in the Time of Pandemics,” Economics for Inclusive Prosperity, March
2020, (24).
Eichenbaum, Martin S, Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt, “The Macroeconomics of
Epidemics,” Working Paper 26882, National Bureau of Economic Research March 2020.
Farhi, Emmanuel and Iván Werning, “Fiscal multipliers: Liquidity traps and currency
unions,” in “Handbook of Macroeconomics,” Vol. 2, Elsevier, 2016, pp. 2417–2492.
Faria e Castro, Miguel, “Fiscal Multipliers and Financial Crises,” Working Papers 2018-23,
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis October 2018.
, “Fiscal Policy during a Pandemic,” Working Papers 2020-006, Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis March 2020.
Fogli, Alessandra and Laura Veldkamp, “Germs, Social Networks, and Growth,” Review
of Economic Studies (forthcoming), 2020.
Fornaro, Luca and Martin Wolf, “Covid-19 Coronavirus and Macroeconomic Policy,” Technical Report, CEPR March 2020.

35

Galí, Jordi, J David López-Salido, and Javier Vallés, “Understanding the effects of government spending on consumption,” Journal of the european economic association, 2007, 5
(1), 227–270.
Giupponi, Giulia and Camille Landais, “Subsidizing Labor Hoarding in Recessions: The
Employment & Welfare Effects of Short Time Work,” CEP Discussion Papers dp1585,
Centre for Economic Performance, LSE December 2018.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, “Flattening the Pandemic and Recession Curves,” 2020.
mimeo Berkeley University.
Greenwood, Jeremy, Philipp Kircher, Cezar Santos, and Michele Tertilt, “An Equilibrium Model of the African HIV/AIDS Epidemic,” Econometrica, 2019, 87 (4), 1081–1113.
Hamilton, Steven and Stan Veuger, “How to Help American Businesses Endure and Jobs
Survive,” 2020. mimeo George Washington University.
Jorda, Oscar, Sanjay S. Singh, and Alan M. Taylor, “Longer-run economic consequences
of pandemics,” March 2020. mimeo.
Philipson, Tomas, “Economic Epidemiology and Infectious Diseases,” Working Paper
7037, National Bureau of Economic Research March 1999.
Rowe, Nick, “Blog Post: Relative supply shocks, Unobtainium, Walras’ Law, and the
Coronavirus,” Worthwhile Canadian Initiative A mainly Canadian economics blog, March
2020.
Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman, “Keeping Business Alive: The Government as
Buyer of Last Resort,” 2020. mimeo Berkeley.

36

