NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPECTATIONS, REFERENCE POINTS, AND COMPLIANCE WITH COVID-19
SOCIAL DISTANCING MEASURES
Guglielmo Briscese
Nicola Lacetera
Mario Macis
Mirco Tonin
Working Paper 26916
http://www.nber.org/papers/w26916

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
March 2020

A version of this work limited to the first survey wave circulated as "Compliance with
COVID-19 Social-Distancing Measures in Italy: The Role of Expectations and Duration” (NBER
Working paper 26916). We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Sandra Rotman
Centre for Health Sector Strategy at the University of Toronto and the Hopkins Business of
Health Initiative. The study received approval by the Research Ethics Board of the University of
Toronto (Protocol #00039165) and by the Homewood Institutional Review Board of Johns
Hopkins University (Protocol #HIRB00010962). We thank Luigi Guiso and seminar participants
at Bocconi University, OECD, the University of Pittsburgh, the University of Bologna, and the
Society of Italian Economists (SIE) for useful comments. All authors contributed equally to this
article. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Guglielmo Briscese, Nicola Lacetera, Mario Macis, and Mirco Tonin. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Expectations, reference points, and compliance with COVID-19 social distancing measures
Guglielmo Briscese, Nicola Lacetera, Mario Macis, and Mirco Tonin
NBER Working Paper No. 26916
March 2020, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. C42,D91,H12,H41,I12
ABSTRACT
We surveyed representative samples of Italian residents at three critical points in the COVID-19
pandemic, to test whether and how intentions to comply with social-isolation restrictions respond
to the duration of their possible extension. Individuals reported being more likely to reduce, and
less likely to increase, their self-isolation effort if negatively surprised by a given hypothetical
extension (i.e., if the extension is longer than what they expected), whereas positive surprises had
no impact. These results are consistent with reference-dependent preferences, with individual
expectations serving as a reference point, and loss aversion. Our findings indicate that public
authorities should carefully manage expectations about policy measures and account for
behavioral reactions to deviations from previous announcements.
Guglielmo Briscese
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
gubri@uchicago.edu
Nicola Lacetera
University of Toronto
Institute for Management and Innovation
3359 Mississauga Road, Room KN 235
Mississauga, ON L5L 1C6
CANADA
and NBER
nicola.lacetera@utoronto.ca

Mario Macis
Johns Hopkins University
Carey Business School
100 International Drive, Office 1333
Baltimore, MD 21202
and IZA
and also NBER
mmacis@jhu.edu
Mirco Tonin
mirco.tonin@unibz.it

1. Introduction
We study how government announcements and individuals’ expectations about a policy’s duration
affect citizens’ willingness to comply. We investigate this topic in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic, when compliance with lockdown measures was crucial to slow down the spread of the virus
and alleviate the burden on the health systems (Baldwin and Weder di Mauro 2020). We conducted
three cross-sectional surveys on representative samples of the Italian population at critical moments of
the pandemic and found that the willingness to comply with the self-isolation measures is sensitive to
how long citizens expect the measures to last in comparison with the end date announced by the
government. Respondents expressed a lower willingness to comply with self-isolation measures if the
possible extensions of these norms were longer than they expected. Moreover, individuals grew more
impatient over time and reported a lower intention to comply after the government extended the duration
of the lockdown.
Many public policies aim to influence citizens’ behavior. Policymakers can leverage on incentives
and sanctions; however, strict enforcement is often costly, and voluntary compliance is crucial to
achieve the desired behavior. Ensuring voluntary cooperation is particularly important when individuals
do not fully internalize the negative effects that their behavior might have on others. The social
distancing measures that many countries introduced to contrast the spread of COVID-19, ranging from
limitations to gatherings to shelter-in-place orders, are a relevant example. In this context, one
additional complication is that people might not even be aware of hurting others when violating socialdistancing rules, because many infected individuals are asymptomatic and unaware of being positive
due to limited testing capabilities (especially so at the onset of the pandemic). Thus, voluntary
compliance is critical (Watanabe and Yabu 2020), and so is the investigation of what factors motivate
it (Maharaj and Kleczkowski 2012).
Some studies have documented that compliance with social distancing measures can depend on
socio-economic constraints, e.g. whether citizens have access to flexible work arrangements
(Papageorge et al. 2020), but also on behavioral factors, such as beliefs about the infectiousness of the
virus (Akesson et al. 2020) and their sense of civic duty (Barrios et al. 2020; Durante et al. 2020). Our

2

research provides evidence of another important behavioral factor: people’s expectations of the duration
of self-isolation measures.
In the spring of 2020, governments adopted different approaches to communicate the duration of
the COVID-19 lockdown to the public; some implemented the measures “until deemed necessary”,
whereas others specified an end date. 1 These choices identify a tension between different potential
effects. On the one hand, limits to personal mobility and economic activity without setting an end date
can increase the perceived severity of the crisis, thus improving compliance; at the same time, they
might also increase anxiety or fatalism, thus potentially reducing the respect of the rules. 2 On the other
hand, a specific end date may be easier to communicate to the public, although it might convey the idea
that the epidemic will be under control by that date. However, because of the uncertainty surrounding
the pandemic’s severity and its evolution, authorities could not rule out potential extensions to the
announced end date of the restrictions. Lengthening the lockdown after having set clear expectations
may reduce the public’s acceptance, trust in the authority, and ultimately reduce compliance. 3 These
tensions witness the importance of understanding how citizens’ willingness to comply with social
distancing measures depends on the announced duration of the measures and their possible extensions.
The psychological mechanisms that we study, and their behavioral consequences, are akin to those
identified in other contexts where reference points and expectations showed to influence decisions.
Consistent with prospect theory (Kahneman and Tversky, 1979; Tversky and Kahneman, 1992),

1

In the Hubei province of China, where the virus originated and first spread, authorities imposed a strict lockdown
of the population without setting a defined end date (Yang and Kubota 2020; Hessler 2020). In Italy and other
countries such as Canada, France, the United States, India and the United Kingdom, instead, the government
enacted stay-at-home mandates specifying an end date for the measures. However, most countries extended the
lockdowns beyond the end that that they had originally set. In Ontario (Canada), for example, two weeks after
enacting a two-week public-school closing, the provincial government issued a further extension of the closure
without defining an end date. The governments of France also considered an extension of the lockdown measures,
with politicians and commentators debating whether the extension should be in place for an additional specified
period of time, or indefinitely until necessary (France 24, 2020). Similarly, the British Prime Minister announced
on March 23rd, referring to the just-introduced lockdown measures in the country that the government was going
to revisit the end date after three weeks, and relax them only if the evidence showed that it was possible to do so
(BBC News 2020; Davies and Diver 2020).
2
Previous research found that quarantine measures have negative short and long-term psychological effects,
including anxiety and post-traumatic stress, with even more severe effects for longer quarantines (Brooks et al.
2020). For the role of fatalism, see Akesson et al. (2020).
3
Moser and Yared (2020) discuss additional tradeoffs that governments face when deciding between committing
not to extend the lockdown measures beyond the date originally set or, instead, keeping open the option to extend
them if the evolution of the epidemic makes it necessary.
3

individuals have shown to value the outcomes of certain decisions based on an internal reference point.
Abeler et al. (2011) show that reference points can be exogenously altered, and that high expectations
can nudge workers to work longer hours and earn more money (see also Camerer et al., 1997 and
Thakral and Tô, 2017 for similar results). Reference points have proved to influence efforts also in a
variety of other settings, such as physical activity (Allen et al. 2017), buying decisions (Wenner, 2015;
Kőszegi and Rabin, 2006), 4 and charitable giving (Exley and Terry, 2019).
In the context of our study, another implication of moving the deadline of the social distancing
measures is the so-called “goal gradient” effect, according to which the farther a person is to a goal the
less likely they exert effort to achieve it (Bonezzi et al. 2011; Heath et al. 1999). This effect is visible
in several contexts, such as the dissatisfaction that consumers may have from experiencing a lower
quality of a good or service than they expected, or that patients and airline passengers feel if wait times
are longer than announced. These mis-confirmations may lead the individuals to not engage with a
service or purchase a good again (e.g. see Craig et al., 2017). 5 In the case of the COVID19 outbreak,
moving the goalpost of when the social distancing measures will be lifted might have led to frustration
among the public if they began to believe that the goal was unattainable (Huang et al. 2012; Louro et
al. 2007).
Our study shows that citizens’ willingness to comply with government policies is sensitive to
expectations in a manner consistent with prospect theory, in a context where citizens’ compliance has
high stake consequences for public health. Because the evolution of the policy responses to COVID-19
in Italy resembles the subsequent experience of other countries, our results may extend beyond this
specific case and have implications for the timing of policy announcements by other governments
around the world. In this way, we offer insights on the importance of communication framing and
expectation setting by governments interested in implementing behavioral change policies. This is
particularly true for time-limited policies that inevitably set an expectation among the public about their

4

For a review on reference price research, see Mazumdar et al. (2005)
Insights for good and service providers vary; for example, foot-in-the-door techniques (asking initially for a
small commitment, and escalate later) may facilitate initial adoption, but lead to a negative shock in the future.
Door-in-the-face approaches, whereby the proposer starts by asking a strong commitment, may discourage
adoption but, conditional on adopting, may lead to positive surprises and higher satisfaction and retention (Staw
1981; Kelly and Milkman, 2013).
5

4

duration. Since acceptance and compliance by citizens are as difficult to achieve as important to the
effectiveness of the policy, governments should pay attention to how they communicate interventions.
In the next section, we report the institutional background and the methodology of the study; in
Section 3 we describe the data, and we discuss the results of the empirical analyses in Section 4. We
conclude, in section 5, with policy implications from our study and directions for future studies.

2. Institutional background and survey
In early 2020, Italy was the first Western country to implement a lockdown in response to the rapidly
growing number of COVID-19 cases at the outset of the virus outbreak. The government first
communicated the implementation of the lockdown as temporary and announced a specific end date
that it later revised twice before gradually relaxing the measures (see Appendix A for a detailed account
of COVID-19 events and policy responses in the country). Despite media coverage stressing the gravity
of the virus, hefty fines and severe sanctions for lawbreakers, the Italian government initially struggled
to ensure full compliance by the public.
To study how the duration of stay-at-home measures influenced compliance, we collaborated with
a well-established survey firm to run three carefully timed surveys on representative samples of the
Italian population. 6 In Figure 1, we plot some indicators of the epidemiological developments, the
timing of the main policy responses, and the timing of the three waves of our survey. The first wave ran
on March 18-20, 2020, the second on April 8-10, and the third on April 22-24; the three waves reached
nationally representative samples of 894, 891 and 912 individuals, respectively.

6

SWG is one of the most established market research firms in Italy and a member of the European Society for
Opinion and Marketing Research. The company manages a panel of over 60,000 individuals in the country.
Respondents fill the surveys online or respond to questions via an online computer-assisted telephone interview
(CATI) software. The firm began administering questions related to the COVID-19 epidemic in a weekly survey
in late January 2020. We added a set of questions to three of SWG’s surveys (questions in Italian and their English
translation are in Appendix B).
5

FIGURE 1: Timeline of COVID-19 epidemic and policy responses in Italy

Notes: Source: authors’ calculations based on European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control
data. Last update May 19, 2020.

Each survey wave had four main parts. In the first part, respondents answered questions about what
actions they were adopting to reduce the likelihood of contagion.
Next, we measured respondents’ awareness of the official end date of the stay-at-home measures by
asking them to report it. Third, after showing all respondents the officially announced end date to fix
for heterogeneous levels of awareness (April 3 in wave 1, April 13 in wave 2, and May 3 in wave 3),
we recorded the respondents’ subjective expectations on possible extensions of the measures. In this
question, there were four statements and we asked participants to choose the one they believed would
be most likely to occur. The options were as follows: (a) “the measures will end on the date indicated
by the Government”; (b) “the measures will be extended by a few weeks”; (c) “the measures will be
extended by a few months”; and (d) “the measures will be extended indefinitely, until deemed
necessary”. Finally, we asked respondents to consider a set of scenarios with different extensions of the
stay-at-home measures, and to indicate their intentions to comply with the restrictions under each
scenario. There were three cases for them to consider, each with a different duration of the extension:

6

“by a few weeks”, “by a few months”, “indefinitely, until deemed necessary”. In each scenario,
participants would select one of five options: “I would significantly increase my isolation”, “I would
somewhat increase my isolation”, “I would continue in my current behavior”, “I would somewhat
reduce my isolation”, “I might decide not to comply with the rules”. We presented the scenarios in
random sequence to avoid ordering effects. This design allows us to determine whether the duration of
the extension affects intentions to comply with stay-at-home measures. Further, we can assess whether
any given extension represented a surprise (positive if the extension is shorter than what the respondent
expected, negative otherwise) or was close to individuals’ expectations. The survey also included a
module with questions about the respondents’ socio-demographic characteristics.

3. Data and descriptive statistics
Characteristics of the sample
Table 1 reports the summary statistics of the socio-demographic characteristics of the sample, both
overall and for each survey wave. 39.7% of respondents live in one of the five regions 7 where the
disease initially spread on a larger scale (i.e., the “Red Zone” – see Appendix A). 17.2% reside in
Lombardia, the region that experienced the largest number of COVID-19 cases and deaths. 32.8% of
participants are older than 60, and as such, are in the sub-population at highest risk of severe effects
from COVID-19. 8 We also report summary statistics on the number of social-isolation behaviors that
respondents reported having adopted. On average, respondents adopted 4.3 of the 6 recommended
behaviors listed in the survey, and 46% of the sample reported adopting all six recommended
behaviors. 9 Table C1 in Appendix C shows these statistics for various relevant sub-groups.

7

The five regions were Lombardia, Veneto, Marche, Piemonte, Emilia-Romagna.
See: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/older-adults.html.
9
The six recommended behaviors listed in the survey were: “I try to keep a safe distance from people”, “I do not
go to crowded places”, “I go to supermarkets as seldom as possible”, “I no longer meet with friends”, “I no longer
meet with relatives who do not live with me”, and “I do not leave home except in an emergency”. Due to a coding
error, in the second wave the survey firm coded this question as single-response instead of multiple-response. We
have thus discarded the question from wave 2. See Appendix Tables C2 and C3 for details.
8

7

Awareness of end date of stay-at-home provisions
To achieve widespread compliance, awareness of a policy’s provisions is crucial. A large majority of
respondents reported accurately the date that the Italian government had announced as the deadline for
the stay-at-home measures as of the date of the survey (i.e., April 3, April 13 and May 3 for the first,
second and third wave, respectively). The share of respondents who reported the correct date was 77.2%
overall (73.5% in wave 1, 64.7% in wave 2, and 93.4% in wave 3; see Table C4 in the Appendix). 10
These findings indicate that in spite of a large share of the population being knowledgeable about the
relevant deadlines, between 25%-30% of the population was either confused or not well informed about
the timeline of the measures.

TABLE 1: Characteristics of the survey respondents

Women
Age
Completed high school
College degree
Lives alone
Lives with parents
Married
Has children
Employed
Economically comfortable
Facing economic difficulties
Compliance with social-isolation measures
Adopting all social-isolation measures
Age 60+
Lives in Red Zone
Lives in Lombardia
N

Full sample

Wave 1

Wave 2

Wave 3

51.9%
50.7
65.9%
19.5%
14.1%
12.4%
62.6%
63.6%
51.7%
45.0%
55.0%
4.3
46.1%
32.8%
39.7%
17.2%
2697

51.9%
50.7
66.2%
19.2%
13.2%
11.7%
63.3%
64.1%
53.1%
44.6%
55.4%
4.5
49.9%
32.3%
41.7%
17.6%
894

51.9%
51.1
66.4%
20.1%
14.4%
11.7%
64.2%
63.1%
51.9%
45.7%
54.3%
NA
NA
33.7%
37.3%
17.8%
891

51.9%
50.3
64.9%
19.2%
14.9%
13.7%
60.4%
63.5%
49.9%
44.6%
55.4%
4.1
42.2%
32.5%
39.8%
16.3%
912

Notes: The table reports the average age of participants as well as percentages of participants with
certain characteristics. Red Zone refers to the following regions: Emilia Romagna, Lombardia, Marche,
Piemonte, Veneto. The variable “economically comfortable” indicates respondents who reported that
their household income allows them to live “comfortably” or “without concerns”. The variable “Facing
economic difficulties” identifies respondents who reported that they “are having economic difficulties”,
“make to the end of the month with much struggling”, or “are poor and their income does not allow
them to make it to the end of the month”. “Compliance with social-isolation measures” is the number
of social-isolation measures respondents report having adopted, and “adopting all social-isolation
measures” is the percentage of respondents who reported adopting all recommended measures (see
Appendix Tables C2 and C3 for details). We used sampling weights (provided by SWG) to compute
these statistics.
10
The proportions are similar among red-zone residents and those living in the rest of the country (77.3% vs.
77.2%) and among respondents younger than 60 and older than 60 (76.9% vs. 77.6%).

8

Respondents’ expectations about possible extensions of stay-at-home measures
As shown in Figure 2, the distribution of expectations about the duration of possible extensions of the
stay-at-home measures was different across the three waves. In the first wave (conducted in the early,
ascending, stage of the epidemic), only 2.8% of respondents believed that the lockdown would end on
the official date (April 3). 42.7% expected the government to extend the provisions by a few weeks,
20.4% by a few months, and 34.1% for an indefinite time. In the second wave (during the “plateau”
portion of the epidemiological curve in the country), again only a few responded expected the measures
to end at the (new) official date (April 13), but many more believed the extension to last only a few
weeks compared to wave 1 (70.9%), and fewer expected longer extensions. In the third wave, we
observe an increase in this trend with nearly 40% of respondents expecting that the lockdown would
actually end on the (new) date (May 3), almost half believing it would last only a few more weeks, and
a small minority expecting extensions by months or an undetermined time. 11 The shift in expectations,
with an increasing share of respondents expecting an earlier end of the social distancing rules, followed
at least in part the evolution of the epidemic and the actual policy. Considerable heterogeneity remained,
however, within each wave about how long the measures would remain in place.

11
These proportions are similar among residents of red-zone and non-red zone regions, and among respondents
younger than 60 and those older than 60 (see Table C5 in the Appendix)

9

FIGURE 2: Expected end date of self-isolation measures
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

All waves
End as planned

Wave 1
Extended by a few weeks

Wave 2
Extended by a few months

Wave 3
Extended indefinitely

Notes: The graph reports the sampling-weighted proportions of respondents who reported their
expectation that the self-isolation measures would end as planned, or be extended by a few weeks, a
few months, or until necessary. The design-based F statistic for equality of distribution of expectations
between the three waves is 73.1 (p<0.001).

4. Analyses
Figure 2 shows that there is a discrepancy between the duration of the self-isolation measures expected
by citizens and that announced by the government. The analyses we present in this section offer insights
as to how individuals respond to government communication, and the extent to which they rely on their
own beliefs. Analyzing expectations as reference points is also informative as to the nature of
preferences; in particular, we can test whether positive or negative “surprises” (i.e., the duration of selfisolation restrictions is shorter or longer than expected, respectively) have a similar or asymmetric effect
on intentions to comply. We first report some descriptive graphical evidence and then turn to regression
analyses.

Announced lockdown extensions and self-isolation intentions
In Figure 3 we report the distribution the respondents’ intentions to comply with stay-at-home
restrictions under the three scenarios of potential extensions to the date announced by the government
at a given time: “a few weeks”, “a few months”, or “indefinitely”. Because extreme compliance
intensions were infrequent, we grouped intentions to comply categories into three: “maintain”, “reduce”
10

(combining “would reduce self-isolation” and “would consider no longer respecting the rules”), and
“increase” (“increase somewhat” and “increase greatly” self-isolation efforts) 12. Most respondents
(between 63% and 70%) in all scenarios indicated that they intended to “maintain” their current selfisolation efforts, with a decline in case of longer extensions. The proportion of respondents who
intended to increase self-isolation is similar across the three scenarios (between 17.2% and 17.7%).
Conversely, the share of respondents who would reduce it increases with the length of the expected
extensions, going from 12.4% in the scenario where the lockdown is extended by a few weeks to 19.5%
in the case of indefinite extension. There are also differences across waves, with a drop in the proportion
of respondents who intend to increase their compliance and a rise in those decreasing it in more recent
waves (see Appendix for details). Intentions to comply are thus sensitive to the hypothesized duration
of lockdown extensions. This could be due to the cost of isolation increasing with its duration. As a
longer lockdown is plausibly connected to more severe epidemiological environments, also its benefits
could increase with duration, but not necessarily as steeply as the cost.

FIGURE 3: Self-isolation intentions, by hypothesized duration of lockdown extension
70%

Percentage of respondents

60%

Maintain self-isolation

50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

Increase self-isolation
Reduce self-isolation

0%

A few weeks
A few months
Indefinitely
Length of hypothesized extension of stay-at-home measures

Notes: The graph reports the sampling-weighted proportion of respondents who stated their intention
to increase, maintain, or reduce their compliance with self-isolation measures, by hypothesized
extension scenarios. “Increase self-isolation” corresponds to the intention to either “increase
substantially” or “increase somewhat” self-isolation; “Reduce self-isolation” includes the options
“reduce somewhat” or “consider not complying with restrictions”; “Maintain self-isolation” indicates
intention to “continue with current self-isolation behavior”. The design-based F statistic for the test of
equality of distribution in the five (mis)match cases is 21.9 (p<0.001).
12

We report the full distributions in Appendix Figure C1.
11

Expectation on extensions and self-isolation intentions
To investigate the extent to which intentions to comply with the lockdown depended on individual
expectations about how long the measures would be in place, we defined a measure of match (or
mismatch) between expectations and extension scenarios (see Table 2). A “match” occurs when the
extension scenario coincides with the respondents’ expectations. Mismatch cases can be positive or
negative: “shorter“ and “much shorter” indicate instances where the scenario hypothesizes that the
measures will end sooner than the respondent expects, whereas “longer” and “much longer” denote
cases in which the hypothesized extension dates end later than a respondent’s expectation. 13

TABLE 2: (Mis)match between expectations and hypothesized length of
extension of stay-at-home measures

Expected end of stay-at-home measures

Scenario
Extended by a
few weeks

Extended by a
few months

Extended
indefinitely
(until necessary)

End on
announced date

longer

much
longer

much
longer

Extended by a
few weeks

match

longer

much
longer

Extended by a
few months

shorter

match

longer

Extended
indefinitely
(until necessary)

much
shorter

shorter

match

Notes: The rows of this table report the lockdown extension scenarios presented to the respondents; the
columns refer to the respondents’ expectations about the duration of the lockdown. We indicate as a
“match” the cases in which the expectations corresponded to the hypothesized extensions. “Shorter”
and “much shorter” correspond to cases where the hypothesized duration of the measures is less than
the expected duration; “longer” and “much longer” indicate that the scenario hypothesizes the measures
to end later than expected.

13

Potentially, we could create a further category for the combination “end on announced date”-“extended
indefinitely”, but we consider the shock of an indefinite extension not too different between those expecting an
immediate end and those expecting a few weeks extension and, therefore, keep them in the same category.
12

Figure 4 shows the distribution of self-isolation intentions by the (mis)match between expectations
and hypothesized extension scenario. The sampling-weighted averages show that the proportion of
respondents who report a willingness to increase compliance with self-isolation measures decreases as
the hypothesized extension of the measures gets longer than the respondents expected. Conversely, the
more negative the surprise between scenario and expectations, the higher is the proportion of individuals
expressing the intention to reduce their level of compliance. For extreme mismatches (where the
scenario is much longer than expectations), the share of respondents who indicate they would reduce
compliance is higher than the share of those who would increase it. We find similar patterns in each
wave (see Figure C2 in Appendix C). We also observe an asymmetry between positive surprises, which
are not associated with changes in compliance intentions, and negative ones, for which we find a
reduction in compliance intentions. This is consistent with reference-dependent preferences, with
expectations acting as reference points, and with individuals placing more weight on negative than
positive news.

FIGURE 4: Self-isolation intentions, by (mis)match between expectations and extension scenarios
70%

Percentage of respondents

60%

Maintain self-isolation

50%
40%
30%

Increase self-isolation

20%
10%

Reduce self-isolation
0%

Much shorter

Shorter

Matching

Longer

Much longer

Length of hypothesized extension, compared to expectations

Notes: The graph reports the sampling-weighted proportion of respondents who stated their intention
to increase, maintain, or reduce their compliance with self-isolation measures, by (mis)match between
the hypothesized extension scenarios and their expectation about this extension. “Increase selfisolation” corresponds to the intention to either “increase substantially” or “increase somewhat” selfisolation; “Reduce self-isolation” includes the options “reduce somewhat” or “consider not complying
with restrictions”; “Maintain self-isolation” indicates intention to “continue with current self-isolation
behavior”. The design-based F statistic for the test of equality of distribution in the five (mis)match
cases is 18.29 (p<0.0001).
13

Regression analyses
We investigate the statistical significance of these differences, and their robustness to controls, with
multinomial regressions analyses. The outcome variable is the choice between increasing, maintaining
(the default option) and reducing compliance. The covariates on which we focus are the different
extension scenarios, the expectations about extensions that the respondent reported, and the type of
mismatch between scenarios and expectations. Additional covariates include indicators for each wave,
and the set of socio-demographic features reported in Table 1. Table 3 reports the parameter estimates
in relative-risk-ratio transformations. For each specification, the first column displays the estimated
coefficients for the option to increase compliance, and the second the estimates for the option to reduce
compliance.
The estimated coefficients from specification (1) indicate that respondents, on average, were
significantly more likely to express the intention to reduce their compliance when presented with a
scenario that implied an extension longer than a few weeks. They were also less likely to report a
willingness to increase (and more likely to decrease) compliance in wave 3. In specification (2) we
included indicators of the respondents’ expectations, setting “the lockdown will end as planned” as the
omitted category. Respondents who expected that the government would extend the duration of the
lockdown were less likely to report the intention to reduce compliance compared to those who expected
the lockdown to end on the announced date (without any large or statistically significant differences
across groups who expected different extensions). In specification (3) we add among the covariates the
deviations from the extension scenarios, with “extension matching expectations” as the omitted
category. The results confirm the descriptive evidence from Figure 4. Respondents who experienced
negative surprises were significantly less likely to report the intention to increase compliance, and
(especially) more likely to report the intention to reduce it, compared with the “extension matching
expectations” case. Positive surprises imply reactions in the opposite direction, although these effects
are weaker and, in most cases, not statistically significant. Wald tests for differences between the
estimated coefficients on the positive and negative surprise indicators provide further evidence of the

14

significance of the asymmetric effect of deviations of extension scenarios from expectations. 14,15 Thus,
the most significant reaction (statistically and in size) to the discrepancy between extension scenarios
and expectations is the intention to reduce compliance when the hypothesized extension is longer than
expected, while the reaction to shorter than expected extensions is negligible. These findings are
consistent with expectations serving as reference points, and loss aversion triggering a stronger reaction
in the loss domain.
Because expectations about the duration of the lockdown measures vary, we can further investigate
whether all types of expectations are equally relevant reference points. Some respondents believed that
the isolation restrictions would end at the officially announced dates. This was more frequent in the
third wave. Because the official date was plausibly salient, a question is whether it was also a stronger
reference point. This question is also relevant for policy, if announcing a specific end date generates a
salient reference that is consequential for compliance intentions. Here we focus on the negative surprise
effect because it is stronger and more consistent. In specification (4), we report estimates from
regressions where the covariates include interaction terms between the indicators for the hypothesized
extension being longer than the expectations, and the different expectations. Given the increased detail
of the analysis, we grouped the expectation-mismatch indicators for “shorter” and “much shorter”, and
for “longer” and “much longer” into only two categories (“shorter” and “longer”, respectively). The
estimates show that the negative reactions to expectation mismatches are particularly strong for those
who expected an end of the lockdown at the announced date (who are more likely to reduce
compliance), as well as for those who expected an extension by a few weeks (who are less likely to
increase compliance). The non-significant effects for those expecting the lockdown to be extended by

14

In Appendix Table C6, we show that the results are robust to controlling for respondents’ baseline levels of
compliance, both using a binary indicator for whether the respondents reported complying with all six listed
social-isolation behaviors (as seen in Table 1, this splits the sample approximately in half), and using the number
(count) of social-isolation measures respondents report having adopted.
15
In Appendix Table C7, we present results from specifications that include indicators for scenarios and
expectations both directly and in deviations from the scenarios. Although there is some variation in deviations for
each level of expectations, this variation is many cases limited to one or two categories, which makes the
interpretation of the coefficients on the expectations-scenario deviations indicators problematic. To mitigate the
concern, in Table C6 we present results after aggregating “shorter” and “much shorter” into one category
(“shorter”) and “longer” and “much longer” into one category (“longer”). Although the estimated coefficients are
smaller in magnitude, our main result that negative surprises lead to reduced compliance is robust to this
alternative specification.
15

a few months suggest that the difference between an extension by a few months and an indefinite one
may not be very strong.

TABLE 3: Self-isolation intentions: Multinomial Logit estimates
(1)
Increase
Reduce
Option:
compliance compliance
Scenario

A few months
Until Needed

1.105*
(0.0579)
1.092
(0.0684)

1.638***
(0.105)
1.780***
(0.128)

A few weeks
Expectations

A few months
Until needed

(2)

(3)

(4)

Increase
Reduce
compliance compliance

Increase
Reduce
compliance compliance

Increase
Reduce
compliance compliance

1.106*
(0.0582)
1.093
(0.0687)

1.651***
(0.107)
1.798***
(0.131)

0.759
(0.188)
1.081
(0.305)
1.150
(0.316)

0.441***
(0.0850)
0.425***
(0.114)
0.387***
(0.113)

Much shorter
Length of
hypothesized
extension, relative to
expectations:

Shorter
Longer
Much longer

1.296***
(0.129)
1.508**
(0.243)

1.234
(0.161)
1.095
(0.225)

1.378*
(0.266)
1.106
(0.131)
0.865
(0.0886)
0.686**
(0.121)

1.026
(0.285)
0.993
(0.163)
1.535***
(0.212)
2.032***
(0.454)

Shorter
Length of
hypothesized
extension relative to
expectations * Longer * Expect lockdown to
expectations end on announced date
Longer * Expect lockdown to
be extended by a few weeks
Longer * Expect lockdown to
be extended by a few months
Wave:

Wave 2
Wave 3

Adjusted Wald test
Longer - Shorter
of differences Much longer - much shorter
(F-stat)
Observations
F-statistic
N. respondents

0.759*
(0.119)
0.572***
(0.0937)

0.910
(0.159)
2.299***
(0.350)

7,917
6.7
2,639

0.853
(0.137)
0.616**
(0.116)

0.882
(0.172)
1.592**
(0.306)

7,917
7.1
2,639

0.824
(0.130)
0.665**
(0.116)

0.826
(0.160)
1.856***
(0.330)

2.21
4.59**

3.97**
2.45
7,917
6.2
2,639

1.340***
(0.111)
1.371***
(0.162)

1.489***
(0.138)
1.606***
(0.187)

1.150
(0.141)

1.038
(0.183)

1.019
(0.249)
0.709***
(0.0882)
1.002
(0.195)

2.664***
(0.557)
1.258
(0.177)
1.165
(0.277)

0.831
(0.132)
0.599***
(0.112)

0.872
(0.166)
1.574**
(0.298)

7,917
6.7
2,639

Notes: The baseline option is “maintain current behavior”, the omitted scenario is “a few weeks”, and
the omitted wave is Wave 1. We report the estimates as relative risk ratios. Each respondent selected
one option from each of three questions, therefore there are up to three observations per individual in
the regression sample. All regressions include, among the covariates, gender, age, education, whether
the respondent lives alone or with her/his parents, marital status, whether the respondent has children,
whether s/he is currently employed, whether the respondents’ household is currently facing economic
difficulties, and whether they live in one of the “Red Zone” regions. The regressions include sampling
weights. Linearized standard errors are in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

16

5. Discussion
Announcements belong in the policymakers’ toolkit to affect citizens’ behavioral response to policies.
In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, governments heavily relied on citizens’ willingness to
comply with social-distancing measures to reduce the spread of the virus. Achieving full compliance
via strong formal enforcement (e.g. fines, geo-tracking) is not only controversial in democratic
countries but also costly to implement. Hence, persuading the public to self-isolate is a critical
mechanism.
To maximize the effectiveness of temporary isolation efforts, authorities must manage public
expectations about when such measures will be relaxed or lifted. Our findings show that expectations
about the duration of social isolation measures influence the public’s intention to comply. Importantly,
people’s willingness to comply in case of an extension depends on how the length of this extension
compares with their own expectations. Negative surprises (i.e., lockdown measures will be in effect for
a longer time than expected) are associated with a lower willingness to increase compliance. These
results are consistent with and contribute to a growing literature that explores the role of expectations
as reference points, and the asymmetric effect of positive and negative deviations of realized scenarios
from expectations.
One caveat of our study is that we measure intentions to comply with social-distancing restrictions,
rather than actual behavioral change due to extensions of the measures. As such, social desirability bias
could be a concern, as people may be inclined to understate the extent into which they are considering
reducing their effort, attenuating our estimates of a negative surprises. However, respondents’ identities
were unknown to the researchers, and the fact that even in the middle of the epidemic more than half of
participants admitted not complying with some of the social distancing measures suggests that social
desirability may not be a crucial concern in this context, as recent evidence shows (Jensen, 2020).
Because the evolution of policy responses to COVID-19 in Italy resembles that of other countries,
our results may extend beyond the national boundaries and have implications for policy announcements
by other governments around the world. More broadly, our findings provide insights to public
authorities on how to manage people’s expectations in public health emergencies that require prolonged
or intermittent lockdown measures.
17

References
Abeler, J., Falk, A., Goette, L., & Huffman, D. (2011). “Reference points and effort provision”.
American Economic Review, 101(2), 470-92.
Akesson, J., Ashworth-Hayes, S., Hahn, R., Metcalfe, R.D. and Rasooly, I. (2020). “Fatalism, Beliefs,
and Behaviors During the COVID-19 Pandemic”, (No. w27245). National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Allen, E. J., Dechow, P. M., Pope, D. G., & Wu, G. (2017). “Reference-dependent preferences:
Evidence from marathon runners”. Management Science, 63(6), 1657-1672.
Baldwin, R and B Weder di Mauro (2020), Mitigating the COVID Economic Crisis: Act Fast and Do
Whatever It Takes, VoxEU.org eBook, CEPR Press.
Barrios, J. M., Benmelech, E., Hochberg, Y. V., Sapienza, P., & Zingales, L. (2020). “Civic capital and
social distancing during the covid-19 pandemic” (No. w27320). National Bureau of Economic
Research.
BBC News (2020): Coronavirus: Europe looking to extend virus lockdowns, BBC News, March 19,
2020. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-51959243
Brooks, S.K., Webster, R.K., Smith, L.E., Woodland, L., Wessely, S., Greenberg, N. and Rubin, G.J.
(2020). The psychological impact of quarantine and how to reduce it: rapid review of the evidence.
The Lancet.
Bonezzi, A., Brendl, C.M. and De Angelis, M. (2011). Stuck in the middle: The psychophysics of goal
pursuit. Psychological science, 22(5), pp.607-612.
Camerer, C., Babcock, L., Loewenstein, G., & Thaler, R. (1997). “Labor supply of New York City
cabdrivers: One day at a time”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2), 407-441.
Craig, A. C., Garbarino, E., Heger, S. A., & Slonim, R. (2017). “Waiting to give: stated and revealed
preferences”. Management Science, 63(11), 3672-3690.
Cryder, C. E., Loewenstein, G., & Seltman, H. (2013). “Goal gradient in helping behavior”. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 49(6), 1078-1083.
Davies, G. and Diver, T. (2020): “UK coronavirus lockdown: what are the new rules and what does it
mean
for
daily
life?”.
The
Telegraph,
March
25
2020.
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2020/03/25/uk-coronavirus-lockdown-rules-advicegovernment/
Durante, R. and Gulino, G., 2020. Asocial capital: Civic culture and social distancing during COVID19.
Exley, C. L., & Terry, S. J. (2019). “Wage elasticities in working and volunteering: The role of reference
points in a laboratory study”. Management Science, 65(1), 413-425.
Ferguson, N., Laydon, D., Nedjati Gilani, G., Imai, N., Ainslie, K., Baguelin, M., Bhatia, S., Boonyasiri,
A., Cucunuba Perez, Z.U.L.M.A., Cuomo-Dannenburg, G. and Dighe, A. (2020). “Report 9: Impact
of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand”.
Imperial College London.
France 24 (2020): “France’s coronavirus death toll tops 1,000, lockdown likely to be extended”. March
23 2020. https://www.france24.com/en/20200324-france-s-scientific-council-says-coronaviruslockdown-should-last-at-least-six-weeks
Galluzzo, M. (2020). “Coronavirus, Conte: «Blocco totale e chiusura delle scuole saranno prorogati.
Tutela per le aziende strategiche»”, Il Corriere della Sera, March 20, 2020.
https://www.corriere.it/politica/20_marzo_19/coronavirus-conte-blocco-totale-chiusura-scuolesaranno-prorogati-tutela-le-aziende-strategiche-33d5ea34-695a-11ea-913c-55c2df06d574.shtml
Heath, C., Larrick, R.P. and Wu, G. (1999). “Goals as reference points”. Cognitive psychology, 38(1),
pp.79-109.

18

Hessler, P. (2020): Life on Lockdown in China, The New Yorker, March 23, 2020.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2020/03/30/life-on-lockdown-in-china
Huang, S.C., Zhang, Y. and Broniarczyk, S.M. (2012). So near and yet so far: The mental representation
of goal progress. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 103(2), p.225.
Jensen, U. T. (2020). “Is self-reported social distancing susceptible to social desirability bias? Using
the crosswise model to elicit sensitive behaviors”. Journal of Behavioral Public Administration,
3(2).
Kahneman, D., and Tversky, A. (1979). “Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. In
Handbook of the fundamentals of financial decision making: Part I” (pp. 99-127). Econometrica,
47(2), 263-292.
Kelly, Theresa F; Milkman, Katherine L (2013). “Escalation of Commitment”. In Kessler, Eric H (ed.).
Encyclopedia of Management Theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, pp. 256–259.
doi:10.4135/9781452276090.n78.
Kőszegi, B., & Rabin, M. (2006). “A model of reference-dependent preferences”. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 121(4), 1133-1165.
Louro, M.J., Pieters, R. and Zeelenberg, M. (2007). “Dynamics of multiple-goal pursuit”. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 93(2), p.174.
Maharaj, S. and Kleczkowski, A. (2012). “Controlling epidemic spread by social distancing: Do it well
or not at all”. BMC Public Health, 12(1), p.679.
Papageorge, N.W., Zahn, M.V., Belot, M., van den Broek-Altenburg, E., Choi, S., Jamison, J.C. and
Tripodi, E. (2020). Socio-Demographic Factors Associated with Self-Protecting Behavior during
the COVID-19 Pandemic (No. 13333). Institute of Labor Economics (IZA).
Staw, B.M. (1981). “The escalation of commitment to a course of action”. Academy of management
Review, 6(4), pp.577-587.
Thakral, N., & Tô, L. T. (2017). “Daily labor supply and adaptive reference points”. American
Economic Review.
Tversky, A., and Kahneman D. (1992). "Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative representation of
uncertainty." Journal of Risk and uncertainty 5, no. 4, 297-323.
Watanabe, T. and Yabu, T. (2020). “Japan’s Voluntary Lockdown”. Covid Economics: Vetted and RealTime Papers, Issue 46, 1-31, 1 September 2020, CEPR Press.
Wenner, L. M. (2015). “Expected prices as reference points—theory and experiments”. European
Economic Review, 75, 60-79.
Yang, S. and Kubota, Y. (2020). “Spreading Coronavirus Prompts Lockdown of More Chinese Cities”.
The Wall Street Journal, January 23, 2020. https://www.wsj.com/articles/spreading-coronavirusforces-lockdown-of-another-chinese-city-11579774393

19

APPENDIX

Appendix A: Detailed chronology of COVID-19 events and policy responses in Italy

The Government of Italy declared a six-month long state of emergency to respond to the COVID-19
outbreak on January 31, 2020, after blocking air traffic from China the day before. Cases of contagion
in the northern regions of the country rose more rapidly than in the rest of the country, which led to a
series of national and local government measures being implemented concurrently. In the most affected
region, Lombardia, the government suspended most public activities, including economic and
educational ones, in ten villages in Lombardia, with similar measures being adopted in one village in
Veneto region the following day. On February 23, further tightening of restrictions in these villages
were applied, including a prohibition to access or leave the area or hold any type of meeting for the
following fourteen days.
On the same day, several regions in the North of Italy suspended upcoming public events, and closed
schools and museums, until Sunday, March 1 for Lombardy, Veneto, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, and Emilia
Romagna, and February 29 for Piemonte, with the provision that the deadline might change as the
“epidemiological scenarios” developed.
On February 24, other northern regions adopted similar isolation measures, such as Liguria and the
Province of Trento, followed by the central region of Marche (announcing a preliminary deadline for
March 4). On March 1, the Government issued a decree suspending public events and closing schools
until March 8 in Lombardia, Veneto and Emilia Romagna and in some provinces of Marche and Liguria.
On March 4, the closure of schools was extended to the whole country until March 15.
On March 8, the government implemented a total lockdown and banned individual movements with an
exception for work or health reasons or for necessity (e.g. purchasing of food and medicines) in the
whole of Lombardia and in selected provinces in Emilia Romagna, Veneto, Marche and Piemonte, for
a total of 14 provinces in the North of the country. The following day the government extended these
measures to the whole country. These restrictions were announced to remain in place until April 3. On
March 11th, the government also ordered the closure of most retail shops until March 25, with the
exception of grocery shops and pharmacies. This included restaurants, bars, and most personal services
(e.g. hairdressers).
ii

On March 22, the government announced that the originally scheduled end date for the closure of
commercial activities (March 11) was extended to April 3, and further suspended commercial and
industrial activities, and prohibited individual movements outside the town of domicile, with an
exception of work or health reasons or for absolute necessity.
On April 1, the government extended a total lockdown to the whole country until 13 April, and on April
10 it was prolonged until May 3.
On April 26, the government announced a starter plan for the so-called “phase 2”, that would start from
4 May. Due to the “Phase 2”, movements across regions would still be forbidden, while the ones
between municipalities would be allowed only for work and health reasons, as well as for visits to
relatives. Re-opening of manufacturing industries and construction sites are allowed too.
On May 13, the government announced schools would remain closed until September.

On May 16, the Prime Minister announced the Government plan for the easing of restrictions.
Due to the plan, most businesses could reopen, and free movement was granted to all citizens within
their Region; inter-regional travel was not permitted, unless it is for absolute necessity. Swimming
pools, gyms and then theatres and cinemas could also reopen.
On June 3, the government allowed unrestricted travel to and from EU countries and between Italy's
regions. The inter-regional and foreign travel ban remained in place until after Italy's June 2 Republic
Day holiday, avoiding any mass travel over that long-holiday weekend.

iii

TABLE A1. Timeline of COVID-19 epidemic and policy responses in Italy

Date

Event

30-Jan-20

Italy closes flights from China

31-Jan-20

First two cases of COVID-19 diagnosed in Rome

31-Jan-20

Government declares state of emergency

21-Feb-20

First cases of community transmission reported in Lombardia and Veneto; first
COVID-19 death (in Vo', Veneto)

21-Feb-20

Most public activities suspended in outbreak areas in Lombardia and (the following
day) in Veneto

23-Feb-20

Complete lockdown of outbreak areas in Lombardia and Veneto

24-Feb-20

Schools closed in Lombardia, Veneto, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Emilia Romagna and
(on the following days) Liguria and Marche

4-Mar-20

Schools closure extended to the whole country, announced until March 15

8-Mar-20

Lockdown (“stay at home” measures) declared for Lombardia and 14 Provinces in
Veneto, Emilia Romagna, Piemonte and Marche

9-Mar-20

Lockdown (“stay at home” measures) extended to the whole country until April 3rd ;
schools closure extended to the whole country, announced until April 3rd

iv

11-Mar-20

Government ordered closure of most retail stores (exceptions included groceries and
pharmacies), restaurants and bars, as well as most personal services until March 25th

19-Mar-20

Italy surpasses China as the country with the most reported COVID-19 deaths

22-Mar-20

Government suspended all non-essential economic activities until April 3rd. It also
prohibited individual movements outside people's town of domicile (with the
exception of work- and health-related reasons or in case of absolute urgency). All
these measures are put in place until April 3

1-Apr-20

Lockdown extended to the whole country until April 13

10-Apr-20

Lockdown extended to the whole country until May 3

26-Apr-20

Government announced a starter plan for the so-called "phase 2", that would start
from May 4

4- May-20

“Phase 2” started: movements across regions would still be forbidden, while the ones
between municipalities would be allowed only for work and health reasons, as well
as for visits to relatives. Re-opening of manufacturing industries and construction
sites

13-May-20

Government announced schools would remain closed until September

16-May-20

The Prime Minister announced the Government plan for the easing of restrictions.
Due to the plan, most businesses could reopen, and free movement was granted to all
citizens within their Region; movement across Regions was still banned for nonessential motives.

3-Jun-20

Government allows travels to and from Italy and between the country's regions

v

Appendix B: Survey questions
List of survey questions.
Original Italian (English translation below)
1. Per prevenire il contagio, quali di questi comportamenti quotidiani sta adottando?
[Rotazione tipo: random]
a. mi lavo le mani molto spesso
b. vado in giro con la mascherina
c. non stringo più la mano a nessuno
d. cerco di stare a distanza dalle persone
e. non frequento luoghi affollati
f.

vado il meno possibile nei supermercati

g. non mi incontro più con gli amici
h. non mi incontro più con i parenti che non vivono con me
i.

non esco di casa salvo urgenze

[Fine rotazione]
j.

nessuno di questi

k. preferisco non rispondere

2. Il Governo ha annunciato una serie di misure temporanee di autoisolamento per fronteggiare
l’emergenza coronavirus, il cosiddetto decreto “io sto a casa”. Si ricorda fino a che data resteranno in
vigore queste misure?
[Inserire data: dd/mm/yyyy]

3. La data di scadenza delle misure “io sto a casa” annunciata dal Governo è il [3 aprile/13 aprile/3
maggio]. Secondo Lei queste misure:
a. Termineranno nella data prevista
b. Verranno prorogate di qualche settimana
c. Verranno prorogate di qualche mese
vi

d. Verranno prorogate a tempo indefinito, fino a quando sarà ritenuto necessario

[Le prossime tre domande vengono presentate in ordine casuale]
4. Se le misure di autoisolamento dovessero essere prorogate di qualche settimana oltre la scadenza del
[3 aprile/13 aprile/3 maggio], quale di queste opzioni descrive meglio ciò che lei pensa di fare:
a. Aumenterei significativamente il mio autoisolamento
b. Aumenterei in qualche misura il mio autoisolamento
c. Continuerei con i miei comportamenti attuali
d. Ridurrei in qualche misura il mio autoisolamento
e. Potrei decidere di non rispettare più le regole

5. Se le misure di autoisolamento dovessero essere prorogate di qualche mese oltre la scadenza del [3
aprile/13 aprile/3 maggio], quale di queste opzioni descrive meglio ciò che lei pensa di fare:
a. Aumenterei significativamente il mio autoisolamento
b. Aumenterei in qualche misura il mio autoisolamento
c. Continuerei con i miei comportamenti attuali
d. Ridurrei in qualche misura il mio autoisolamento
e. Potrei decidere di non rispettare più le regole

6. Se le misure di autoisolamento dovessero essere prorogate a tempo indefinito oltre la scadenza del
[3 aprile/13 aprile/3 maggio],fino a quando sarà ritenuto necessario, quale di queste opzioni descrive
meglio ciò che lei pensa di fare:
a. Aumenterei significativamente il mio autoisolamento
b. Aumenterei in qualche misura il mio autoisolamento
c. Continuerei con i miei comportamenti attuali
d. Ridurrei in qualche misura il mio autoisolamento
e. Potrei decidere di non rispettare più le regole
[Fine randomizzazione]
vii

ENGLISH TRANSLATION
1. To prevent contagion, which of these everyday behaviors are you adopting? [items a) through i)
presented in random order]
a) I very often wash my hands
b) I walk around with a mask
c) I don't shake hands anymore
d) I try to keep a safe distance from people
e) I do not go to crowded places
f) I go to supermarkets as seldom as possible
g) I no longer meet with friends
h) I no longer meet with relatives who do not live with me
i)

I do not leave home except in an emergency

j)

None of these

k) I prefer not to answer

2. The Government announced and enacted a series of policies to address the COVID19 emergency, in
particular the presidential decree known as "I stay at home". Do you remember until what date the social
isolation measures are in place?
[enter date here]

3. The "Stay at home" measures are set to end on [April 3 / April 13 / May 3]. In your opinion, these
measures:
a. will actually end on the announced date
b. will be extended by a few additional weeks
c. will be extended by a few additional months
d. will be extended indefinitely, until deemed necessary
[the next three questions three questions are in random order for each respondent]

viii

4. If the self-isolation measures are extended by a few additional weeks after [April 3 / April 13 / May
3], which of these options best represents what you plan to do:
a. I would significantly increase my isolation
b. I would somewhat increase my isolation
c. I would continue in my current behavior
d. I would somewhat reduce my isolation
e. I might decide not to comply with the rules

5. If the self-isolation measures are extended by a few additional months after [April 3 / April 13 / May
3], which of these options best represents what you plan to do:
a. I would significantly increase my isolation
b. I would somewhat increase my isolation
c. I would continue in my current behavior
d. I would somewhat reduce my isolation
e. I might decide not to comply with the rules

6. If the self-isolation measures are extended indefinitely after [April 3 / April 13 / May 3], until deemed
necessary, which of these options best represents what you plan to do:
a. I would significantly increase my isolation
b. I would somewhat increase my isolation
c. I would continue in my current behavior
d. I would somewhat reduce my isolation
e. I might decide not to comply with the rules

ix

Appendix C: Additional Figures and Tables
TABLE C1: Socio-demographic characteristics, by sub-group

Women
Age
Completed high school
College degree
Lives alone
Lives with parents
Married
Has children
Employed
Economically comfortable
Facing economic difficulties
Compliance with social-isolation measures
Adopting all social-isolation measures
Age 60+
Lives in Red Zone
Lives in Lombardia
N

Respondents
Age 18-59

Respondents
Age 60+

Respondents in Red
Zone regions

Respondents in the
rest of the country

50.3%
41.0
65.7%
23.8%
12.6%
18.2%
57.2%
51.5%
68.4%
45.3%
54.7%
4.2
44.0%

55.3%
70.7
66.1%
10.7%
17.2%
0.3%
73.7%
88.2%
18.1%
44.2%
55.8%
4.4
50.5%

51.7%
50.5
67.3%
19.5%
14.1%
12.4%
63.2%
64.4%
49.8%
42.7%
57.3%
4.2
45.0%
32.3%

52.4%
51.0
63.6%
19.5%
14.2%
12.2%
61.7%
62.3%
54.6%
48.5%
51.5%
4.3
47.7%
33.6%

39.2%
16.3%
1,835

40.6%
19.2%
862

1,648

43.4%
1,049

Notes: The table reports the average age of the participants belonging to various sub-categories. Red
Zone includes residents of the following regions: Emilia Romagna, Lombardia, Marche, Piemonte,
Veneto. The variable “economically comfortable” is equal to 1 if respondents reported that their
household income allows them to live “comfortably” or “without concerns”, whereas “Facing economic
difficulties” is equal to 1 if the respondent replied that they “are having economic difficulties”, “make
to the end of the month with much struggling“, or “are poor and their income does not allow them to
make it to the end of the month”. “Compliance with social-isolation measures” is the number of socialisolation measures respondents report having adopted, and “adopting all social-isolation measures is a
dummy variable indicating respondents who reported adopting all recommended measures (see
Appendix Table C2 for details). We used sampling weights to adjust these statistics.

x

TABLE C2: Compliance with COVID-19 preventive and social distancing measures
% of respondents adopting each preventive and social distancing measure

(i) I wash my hands very often
(ii) I walk around with a mask
(iii) I don't shake hands anymore
(iv) I try to keep a safe distance from people
(v) I do not go to crowded places
(vi) I go to supermarkets as seldom as possible
(vii) I no longer meet with friends
(viii) I no longer meet with relatives
(ix) I do not leave home except in an emergency
None of these
I prefer not to answer

Wave 1

Wave 3

78.6%
42.1%
72.1%
74.0%
75.2%
71.1%
72.5%
67.1%
80.2%
0.9%
1.3%

69.3%
69.5%
64.0%
68.5%
68.8%
65.7%
64.7%
59.5%
75.4%
1.1%
1.2%

% adopting all nine preventive and social distancing measures (i)-(ix)
Wave 1
Full sample
29.1%

Wave 3
Full sample
37.6%

% adopting all six social distancing measures (iv)-(ix)

N. respondents

Wave 1
Full sample
49.9%

Wave 3
Full sample
42.2%

885

904

Notes: We used sampling weights (provided by SWG) to compute these statistics.

xi

TABLE C3: Compliance with COVID-19 preventive and social distancing measures, by sub-groups
% of respondents adopting each preventive and social distancing measure
Wave 1
>60 years old
Red zone
(i) I very often wash my hands
84.3%
74.8%
(ii) I walk around with a mask
47.5%
41.1%
(iii) I don't shake hands anymore
75.6%
75.0%
(iv) I try to keep a safe distance from people
77.0%
75.8%
(v) I do not go to crowded places
74.1%
78.0%
(vi) I go to supermarkets as seldom as possible
71.4%
73.2%
(vii) I no longer meet with friends
73.5%
72.0%
(viii) I no longer meet with relatives
70.8%
66.9%
(ix) I do not leave home except in an emergency
88.3%
78.4%
None of these
1.6%
1.6%
I prefer not to answer
0.1%
0.3%

Wave 3
Red zone
>60 years old
70.7%
66.1%
71.4%
71.4%
69.5%
64.0%
70.7%
68.8%
69.1%
68.6%
69.5%
65.0%
64.2%
63.9%
59.3%
61.9%
78.5%
80.3%
0.0%
1.1%
1.6%
1.5%

% adopting all nine preventive and social distancing measures (i)-(ix)
>60 years old
35.9%

Red zone
29.2%

>60 years old
42.3%

Red zone
38.6%

>60 years old
55.3%

Red zone
51.5%

>60 years old
45.3%

Red zone
43.5%

310

355

267

353

% adopting all six social distancing measures (iv)-(ix)

N. respondents

Notes: We used sampling weights (provided by SWG) to compute these statistics.

xii

TABLE C4: Knowledge of end date of current stay-at-home measures

Full sample

Wave 1

Wave 2

Wave 3

77.2%
76.9%
77.6%
77.3%
77.2%

73.5%
76.5%
67.3%
77.0%
73.5%

64.7%
61.5%
71.0%
62.7%
64.7%

93.4%
92.4%
95.5%
92.8%
93.4%

% reporting correct date:
Overall
Age 18-59
Age 60+
Red zone residents
Residents outside red zone

TABLE C5: Expected end date of self-isolation measures, by sub-groups

% of respondents reporting the stay-athome measures would (be) …

Wave 1

End as planned
Extended by a few weeks
Extended by a few months
Extended indefinitely

2.0%
43.8%
21.1%
33.0%

End as planned
Extended by a few weeks
Extended by a few months
Extended indefinitely

3.3%
41.9%
19.9%
34.9%

End as planned
Extended by a few weeks
Extended by a few months
Extended indefinitely

2.5%
41.2%
22.5%
33.8%

End as planned
Extended by a few weeks
Extended by a few months
Extended indefinitely

3.2%
45.8%
16.2%
34.8%

xiii

Wave 2
Residents of "red zone" regions
3.8%
73.8%
9.2%
13.2%
Residents of non-red zone regions
2.7%
69.2%
14.0%
14.1%
Respondents ages 18-59
3.9%
68.6%
13.5%
14.1%
Respondents ages 60+
1.7%
75.5%
9.6%
13.3%

Wave 3
39.6%
49.8%
4.6%
6.0%
40.1%
44.5%
7.1%
8.4%
40.4%
46.0%
6.8%
6.9%
38.9%
47.9%
4.6%
8.6%

TABLE C6: Self-isolation intentions, controlling for baseline levels of compliance with socialisolation measures
(2)

(3)

Reduce
Increase
compliance compliance

Increase
Reduce
compliance compliance

(1)
Increase
Reduce
Option:
compliance compliance
Scenario

A few months
Until Needed

1.339**
(0.158)
1.704***
(0.318)

1.070
(0.148)
0.907
(0.191)

Much shorter
Length of
hypothesized
extension, relative to
expectations:

Shorter
Longer
Much longer

1.293**
(0.149)
1.707***
(0.315)

1.078
(0.152)
0.901
(0.194)

1.373
(0.320)
1.091
(0.155)
0.837
(0.100)
0.553***
(0.112)

0.831
(0.227)
0.915
(0.169)
1.539***
(0.230)
2.287***
(0.544)

Shorter
Length of
hypothesized
extension relative to
expectations * Longer * Expect lockdown to
expectations end on announced date
Longer * Expect lockdown to
be extended by a few weeks
Longer * Expect lockdown to
be extended by a few months
Compliance

Wave:

Wave 3

Adjusted Wald test
Longer - Shorter
of differences Much longer - much shorter
(F-stat)
Observations
F-statistic
N. respondents

1.387***
(0.135)
1.491***
(0.174)

1.107
(0.162)

0.934
(0.174)

0.676
(0.182)
0.711**
(0.109)
1.057
(0.253)

2.528***
(0.567)
1.216
(0.187)
1.026
(0.283)

0.666**
(0.108)

0.663**
(0.106)

0.673**
(0.110)

0.663**
(0.107)

0.612***
(0.109)

1.515**
(0.300)

0.702**
(0.125)

1.765***
(0.314)

0.628***
(0.110)

1.720***
(0.312)

0.165
0.017

0.016
0.02

1.76
5.58**

5.13**
5.27**

5,280
5.4
1,760

1.267**
(0.118)
1.362**
(0.195)

5,229
5.4
1,743

5,229
5.5
1,743

Notes: The baseline option is “maintain current behavior”, the omitted scenario is “a few weeks”, and
the omitted wave is Wave 1. We report the estimates as relative risk ratios. Each respondent selected
one option from each of three questions, therefore there are up to three observations per individual in
the regression sample. The control variables include gender, age, education, whether the respondent
lives alone or with her/his parents, marital status, whether the respondent has children, whether s/he is
currently employed, whether the respondents’ household is currently facing economic difficulties, and
whether they live in one of the “Red Zone” regions. “Compliance” is an indicator variable for whether
respondents reported adopting all six social-isolation emasures listed in the survey (see Appendix Table
C2). The regressions include sampling weights. Linearized standard errors are in parenthesis. ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
xiv

TABLE C7: Self-isolation intentions: Multinomial Logit estimates, alternative specification
(1)

Scenario

A few months
Until Needed

Expectations

Increase
compliance
1.254***
(0.102)
1.328**
(0.159)

(2)
Reduce
compliance
1.256**
(0.130)
1.302**
(0.168)

A few weeks
A few months
Until needed

Length of
hypothesized
extension, relative to
expectations:

Shorter

Wave

Wave 2

Longer

Wave 3

Adjusted Wald test of
differences (F-stat)

Longer - Shorter

Increase
compliance
1.059
(0.0716)
0.997
(0.0946)

Reduce
compliance
1.446***
(0.112)
1.521***
(0.137)

0.766
(0.192)
1.169
(0.347)
1.334
(0.414)

0.475***
(0.0917)
0.508**
(0.137)
0.515**
(0.171)

1.160
(0.143)
0.811*
(0.0930)

1.049
(0.186)
1.679***
(0.246)

0.827*
(0.0865)
1.021
(0.0928)

0.980
(0.147)
1.305**
(0.150)

0.808
(0.127)
0.636***
(0.108)

0.841
(0.160)
1.964***
(0.327)

0.853
(0.137)
0.616**
(0.116)

0.881
(0.172)
1.593**
(0.306)

3.27*

3.39*

1.82

2.16

Control variables
Observations
F-statistic
N. respondents

Yes

Yes

7,917
6.4
2,639

7,917
6.5
2,639

Notes: The baseline option is “maintain current behavior”, the omitted scenario is “a few weeks”, and
the omitted wave is Wave 1. We report the estimates as relative risk ratios. Each respondent selected
one option from each of three questions, therefore there are up to three observations per individual in
the regression sample. The control variables include gender, age, education, whether the respondent
lives alone or with her/his parents, marital status, whether the respondent has children, whether s/he is
currently employed, whether the respondents’ household is currently facing economic difficulties, and
whether they live in one of the “Red Zone” regions. The regressions include sampling weights.
Linearized standard errors are in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

xv

TABLE C8: Self-isolation intentions: Multinomial Logit estimates, by area and age
Sample

Scenario

Shorter
Longer
Much longer

Wave

Wave 2
Wave 3

Adjusted Wald test
of differences
(F-stat)

Outside red zone

Ages 18-58

(1)

(2)

(3)

Increase
compliance
A few months 1.751***
(0.304)
Until Needed 2.280***
(0.628)
Much shorter

Length of
hypothesized
extension, relative to
expectations:

Red zone

Longer - Shorter
Much longer - much shorter
Control variables
Observations
F-statistic
N. respondents

Ages 60+
(4)

Reduce
compliance
1.302
(0.244)
1.026
(0.296)

Increase
compliance
1.106
(0.134)
1.252
(0.247)

Reduce
compliance
1.186
(0.208)
1.137
(0.317)

Increase
compliance
1.387***
(0.170)
1.538**
(0.297)

Reduce
compliance
1.163
(0.159)
0.979
(0.209)

Increase
compliance
1.136
(0.191)
1.514
(0.435)

Reduce
compliance
1.336
(0.370)
1.276
(0.566)

2.565***
(0.778)
1.528**
(0.301)
0.699**
(0.123)
0.441***
(0.128)

0.857
(0.361)
1.022
(0.258)
1.434*
(0.298)
2.010**
(0.630)

0.961
(0.239)
0.953
(0.140)
0.968
(0.123)
0.839
(0.184)

1.135
(0.395)
0.996
(0.208)
1.624***
(0.295)
2.085**
(0.633)

1.497*
(0.345)
1.201
(0.163)
0.869
(0.111)
0.745
(0.156)

0.720
(0.211)
0.912
(0.189)
1.597***
(0.236)
2.219***
(0.527)

1.214
(0.424)
0.903
(0.215)
0.851
(0.141)
0.551*
(0.170)

1.682
(0.803)
1.140
(0.280)
1.485
(0.430)
1.892
(0.886)

0.798
(0.206)
0.703
(0.207)

0.658*
(0.162)
1.623**
(0.394)

0.867
(0.174)
0.667*
(0.142)

0.975
(0.262)
2.052***
(0.509)

0.746
(0.139)
0.612**
(0.118)

0.737
(0.146)
1.783***
(0.337)

1.041
(0.311)
0.804
(0.288)

1.009
(0.415)
1.912*
(0.718)

8.06***
11.14***

1.38
2.01

1.11
0.11

2.69
1.11

3.46*
2.85*

7.58***
6.31**

1.61
0.03

0.02
0.34

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

3,108
4.1
1036

4,809
3.8
1603

5,364
4.7
1788

2,553
3.4
851

Notes: The baseline option is “maintain current behavior”, the omitted scenario is “a few weeks”, and
the omitted wave is Wave 1. We report the estimates as relative risk ratios. Each respondent selected
one option from each of three questions, therefore there are up to three observations per individual in
the regression sample. The control variables include gender, age, education, whether the respondent
lives alone or with her/his parents, marital status, whether the respondent has children, whether s/he is
currently employed, whether the respondents’ household is currently facing economic difficulties, and
whether they live in one of the “Red Zone” regions. The regressions include sampling weights.
Linearized standard errors are in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

xvi

FIGURE C9: Self-isolation intentions, by hypothesized duration of lockdown extension

Notes: The chart reports the share of respondents who indicated their intention to maintain, increase or
reduce their compliance with self-solation provisions, separately by the different extension scenarios.
We used sampling weights to compute these statistics (SWG provided the weights).

xvii

FIGURE C10: Self-isolation intentions, by (mis)match between expectations and extension scenarios,
by wave

Notes: “Increase self-isolation” corresponds to the intention to either “increase substantially” or
“increase somewhat” self-isolation; “Reduce self-isolation” includes the options “reduce somewhat” or
“consider not complying with restrictions”; “Maintain self-isolation” indicates intention to “continue
with current self-isolation behavior”. We used frequency weights to compute these statistics (SWG
provided the weights). The graph also reports confidence intervals and the value of the design-based Fstatistics from a test of differences in distributions.

xviii

