                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE BRAZILIAN BOMBSHELL? THE LONG-TERM IMPACT OF THE 1918 INFLUENZA
                PANDEMIC THE SOUTH AMERICAN WAY

                                       Amanda Guimbeau
                                        Nidhiya Menon
                                        Aldo Musacchio

                                      Working Paper 26929
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26929


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We thank Marcella Alsan, James Feigenbaum, Carola Frydman, Eric Hilt, Robert Margo, and
Edson Severnini, and participants at the NBER-DAE 2019 Summer Institute, the EHA 2019
Meetings, the LACDEV 2019 Conference, the LACEA-LAMES 2019 Conference, Northeastern
University, and the Ph.D. seminar series at Brandeis for comments and suggestions. We thank
Dani Castillo, Andre Lanza, Pedro Makhoul, Stephanie Orlic, and Uros Randelovic for excellent
research assistance. This project was made possible by a Provost Research Grant and funds from
the Brazil Initiative at Brandeis University. The usual disclaimer applies. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Amanda Guimbeau, Nidhiya Menon, and Aldo Musacchio. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Brazilian Bombshell? The Long-Term Impact of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic the South
American Way
Amanda Guimbeau, Nidhiya Menon, and Aldo Musacchio
NBER Working Paper No. 26929
April 2020
JEL No. I15,J10,N36,O12

                                          ABSTRACT

We analyze the repercussions of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic on demographic measures, human
capital formation, and productivity markers in the state of Sao Paulo, Brazil's financial center and
the most populous city in South America today. Leveraging temporal and spatial variation in
district-level estimates of influenza-related deaths for the period 1917-1920 combined with a
unique database on socio-economic, health and productivity outcomes constructed from historical
and contemporary documents for all districts in Sao Paulo, we find that the 1918 Influenza
pandemic had significant negative impacts on infant mortality and sex ratios at birth in 1920 (the
short-run). We find robust evidence of persistent effects on health, educational attainment and
productivity more than twenty years later. Our study highlights the importance of documenting
the legacy of historical shocks in understanding the development trajectories of countries over
time.

Amanda Guimbeau                                  Aldo Musacchio
Brandeis University                              Brandeis International Business School
415 South Street MC 032                          415 South Street MC 032
Waltham, MA 02453                                Waltham, MA 02453
amanda2016@brandeis.edu                          and NBER
                                                 aldom@brandeis.edu
Nidhiya Menon
Brandeis University
415 South Street Waltham,
MA 02453
nmenon@brandeis.edu
1    Introduction

The long reach of history in shaping economic development is well understood. From colonial
institutions to slavery, that the past matters in charting the present trajectories of countries is
now widely accepted. However, relatively little has been written on the scarring effects of historical
health shocks. Although there has been significant interest in the impact of health events since
Almond (2006) studied the long-term effects of the greatest epidemic of modern history - the
1918 influenza pandemic - which recently crossed its centennial, we still are not clear how impacts
may differ when we look beyond cohort controls and importantly, when we analyze effects in the
context of developing countries. This is the gap we address in this paper. The 1918 influenza
pandemic, by its sheer magnitude and features, provides a unique natural experiment to test
a range of hypotheses related to the short and long-run consequences of exposure to diseases,
and offers an interesting framework to study the effects of an extraordinary mortality shock on
demographic and other outcomes.

We study repercussions of the 1918 “Spanish Flu” on demographic, human capital and productiv-
ity outcomes in the State of Sao Paulo, Brazil, in the short- and long-runs. Although today Sao
Paulo is Brazil’s financial center and South America’s most populous city, in the early twentieth
century, it was far from such. Given the lack of resources for remedial action and the relatively
more primitive health care infrastructure, it is likely that the pandemic’s immediate and lingering
effects were more harmful in poorer nations like Brazil that were marked by social inequalities
and a nascent health system. Moreover, the pandemic coincided with the ending years of the
First World War. It is thus hard to disentangle the detrimental impacts of the 1918 flu from
the widespread destruction caused by the War, particularly when we focus on the main actors
involved such as the United States. Brazil’s contribution to the Allied war effort began in 1917
and was minimal, and the country did not experience the level of destruction that those in the
North endured. The First World War is thus less of a confounding factor in the historical Brazilian
context.

Records reveal that in Sao Paulo (city), the disease caused 5,331 deaths in the short period
between mid-October and mid-December 1918 (Massad et al., 2007), and infected up to 350,000
people, two-thirds of the population of Sao Paulo (city) (Bassanezi, 2013, Barata, 2000, Bertolli,
2003). As we show below, the pandemic’s duration and intensity differed significantly across
geographical markers of districts (the spatial unit of our analysis) in the State of Sao Paulo.
We exploit this spatial variation to link the number of influenza-related deaths to a range of
outcome variables over time. We accomplish this using detailed district-level historical data on
vital statistics, health, education, and productivity variables. We complement this data with
information drawn from official statistical reports on the pre-existing human capital framework
that was in place at the time the disease arrived in Sao Paulo.


                                                  1
Our study considers two time horizons: 1920 (the short-run) and 1940 (the long-run). The
primary sources used are the Brazilian censuses from 1920 and 1940. Using two stage least
squares methods, we instrument for respiratory deaths normalized per 1000 people, our proxy for
influenza-related deaths during the pandemic, with average temperature and rainfall in October.
The “Spanish Flu” arrived in Sao Paulo in late September 1918 and as we discuss in detail
below, air temperature (sunlight) reduces the incidence of influenza whereas rainfall, by increasing
humidity, has the opposite effect. We find that as of 1920, infant mortality and still births
increased whereas sex ratios at birth declined. This is entirely consistent with expectations as
fetuses and infants are particularly susceptible to health shocks. Moreover, male fetuses are
relatively more vulnerable than female fetuses, leading to excess male mortality in response to
negative health shocks of this nature (Sanders and Stoecker, 2015). Furthermore, we find that
short-run agricultural productivity, as measured by the volume of coffee, rice and maize per capita,
declined in 1920.

Turning next to the long-run, we consider impacts on literacy rates in 1940, one of the canonical
indicators of human capital. We begin by estimating effects on two different age groups (20-29
and 30-39 years), positing that the cohort aged 20-29 years was directly exposed to the pandemic
(either in utero or at a very young age) while the other cohort was not. In sum, our findings
indicate that the pandemic led to the deterioration of literacy, especially for women. This is
consistent with other results that show that female educational levels are relatively more affected
after natural disasters (Neumayer and Plumper, 2007, Caruso, 2015, Caruso and Miller, 2015).
Alternatively, we find an increase in male literacy rates for the cohort that was directly exposed to
the pandemic, consistent with positive selection resulting from excess male mortality (which is in
accordance with existing empirical findings that the long-term effects of early-life shocks involve
boys’ culling and girls’ scarring). Further, these results are broadly consistent with gender-
disaggregated results from the 1940 census that do not demarcate cohorts, and with methods
that use cohort-level variation using the 1960, 1970 and 1980 Brazilian censuses in a framework
similar to Almond (2006) and Beach et al. (2018). In terms of health, respiratory deaths from the
pandemic have a significant impact on the normalized number of inpatient hospital admissions in
1940. We find that productivity was also affected - the primary sector’s output per employee and
per establishment declined as of 1940.

Our paper contributes to research that documents the path-dependency of human capital, in-
equality, poverty and development in response to historical epidemics and shocks (Alsan, 2015,
Bleakley, 2010, Clay et al., 2018). This literature focuses on the deep roots of economic develop-
ment and seeks to understand how past episodes explain variations in contemporaneous growth
rates, stocks of civil/social capital and political outcomes. However unlike previous work, our
study benefits from the fact that Brazil was not a major actor in the First World War, and from
the fact that given its location in the Southern Hemisphere, the 1918 Pandemic arrived in Sao



                                                 2
Paulo in the Spring. These factors make the context of our study unique, and allow us to distill
results from an environment that is cleaner in many ways from other research that has concen-
trated on the developed world. To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first study of the
1918 pandemic’s impact on a range of demographic, human capital and productivity outcomes in
a developing country that uses both cohort and geographical variation with rich contemporary
controls for geography, immigration, health and sanitation to investigate the ways in which this
unanticipated and intense health shock changed the trajectory of development for a major loca-
tion in Brazil. The highly disaggregated nature of our historical climate data further allows us to
design a strategy that overcomes endogeneity concerns. We extract the relevant data using lati-
tude and longitude coordinates from the Climate Change Knowledge Portal (World Bank Group),
and assemble a novel dataset that combines geographical conditions with archival micro-data on
the spatial and temporal distribution of respiratory deaths and historical institutions and context
during the pandemic years. Our use of information at such a granular level to compile a rich
database is a strength of our paper that is a significant improvement on existing research. Our
results indicate impacts that are on average of the same sign but larger than those estimated on
comparable outcomes in developed countries. An important exception is our gender-disaggregated
results on education which indicate an increase in male literacy in the immediate aftermath of the
pandemic and twenty years later. We discuss how positive selection and segmented labor markets
may be explanations for this result which is not in keeping with other studies that have considered
the immediate and long-term human capital consequences of the 1918 pandemic. Taken together,
our research highlights more comprehensively than other studies what economic historians mean
when they say that the 1918 influenza pandemic forever changed the social, economic and cultural
landscape of countries.

The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 discusses relevant literature and Section 3 describes
the historical background of the pandemic in Sao Paulo, Brazil. Section 4 describes the data and
provides the summary statistics on vital, geographical, demographic and economic characteristics.
Section 5 describes the empirical methodology, and Section 6 details results from the short-term
analysis. Sections 7 outlines results from two decades after the event, and Section 8 describes
robustness and falsification tests. Section 9 concludes.



2    Literature

Several studies explore the historical roots of comparative development and use major demo-
graphic events, geopolitical turning points, or changes in the institutional environment, to explain
existing disparities between nations and in-country variation in economic outcomes.                 1   Acemoglu
  1
    These include Huillery (2009) which investigates the long-term impact of colonial public investments in French
West Africa; Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) that traces mistrust to the slave trade in Africa; Putterman and Weil


                                                        3
et al. (2001) demonstrates that the disease environment faced by European settlers matters for
institutional legacies and thus, for long-term economic development. Beach and Hanlon (2017)
using wind patterns for identification, find that British industrial coal use in 1851-60 had signif-
icant mortality effects. These results provide further support for findings in Hanlon (2019) that
long-run city growth in Britain in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries was negatively affected
by local industrial coal use.

Looking specifically at the pandemic of 1918, Almond (2006) evaluates empirically whether ex-
posure to this health event had repercussions later in life. Using US census microdata from
1960-1980, the study finds that cohorts that were in utero during the pandemic have lower so-
cioeconomic status and lower levels of education, health, and reduced employment outcomes when
seen in the future. These results support the fetal origins hypothesis 2 . In a related paper, Almond
and Mazumder (2005), using data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP)
from 1984-1996, find that birth cohorts in utero during the 1918 Pandemic have poorer health
outcomes almost 65-80 years after the event. Beach et al. (2018) use linked data from WWII en-
listment records and federal censuses, and an individual-level panel dataset in a framework that
accounts for fixed-effects, observed parental characteristics, and a wide set of controls to find that
that the evolution of human capital was impaired by the pandemic. Using data from Taiwan, Lin
and Liu (2014) conclude that the 1918 birth cohorts are shorter as teenagers, have less education,
and are more prone to various diseases. These results are in line with those in Chul Hong and
Yun (2017) which uses data from colonial Korea. Richter and Robling (2013) and Cook et al.
(2018) are other studies that evaluate the impact of the Spanish Flu on multiple generations.

Studies that measure the aggregate effects of the pandemic on earnings, human capital accumula-
tion and economic growth include Karlsson et al. (2014) which finds that regions more burdened
by the pandemic in Sweden had higher future poverty rates, and Percoco (2016) which uses mor-
tality rates across Italian regions to find that exposure to the flu lowered educational attainments
for those who were in utero and in early childhood. Donaldson and Keniston (2016) analyze the
impact of the event in colonial India and obtain results consistent with Malthusian growth theories
- Indian districts heavily burdened had higher fertility rates in the aftermath of the shock, and
there is also evidence of increased investments in child quality (literacy rates for men/boys rose).
Bakken and Husoy (2016) match 1912-1920 data on influenza mortality and other demographic
estimates to the Norwegian 1960 census and find that exposure to prenatal influenza lead to signif-
icant declines in the years of education for men, with a larger effect in the poorest municipalities.
Considering Brazil specifically, Nelson (2010) examines the impact of the pandemic on later life
(2010) which studies the role of human capital in long-run development; and Dell (2010) and Glaeser et al. (2004).
Guiso et al. (2016) shows that Italian cities with self-government in the Middle Ages have relatively high levels
of civic capital today, and Rocha et al. (2017) exploits variation induced by the state-sponsored settlement policy
during the historical episode of mass migration in Brazil to evaluate path dependency in human capital formation.
   2
     The hypothesis that insults to the developing fetus, nutritional and otherwise, have lingering effects; attributed
to Barker (1995).


                                                          4
outcomes (education, employment and wages) using labor surveys from 1986 to 1998. In keeping
with previous work, those who were immediately impacted by this mortality shock suffered in the
long-run along these dimensions.

Our study complements the research discussed above by evaluating a whole spectrum of out-
comes that span demographic measures, educational outcomes, health variables and productivity
measures, over different time-lines. Importantly, we are able to control for contemporaneous
socio-economic, infrastructural and regional characteristics from the time the pandemic arrived
in Sao Paulo, as well as a comprehensive set of controls from 1872 that help us account for possi-
ble pre-trends in the data. Previous data limitations have meant that studies have been able to
consider only a few outcomes and controls at best. We are more fortunate in this regard. The
disaggregated nature of our historical data matched with censuses from 1920 and 1940 enables us
to analyze the consequences of the 1918 influenza pandemic in Brazil in an exhaustive manner.



3    Historical Background

Sometimes described as the “greatest medical pandemic of modern times”, the 1918 influenza
pandemic resulted in global mortality estimates ranging from 20 to 100 million within the span of
a few months (Alonso et al., 2016). The pandemic reached Brazil in the beginning of Spring, on
14th September 1918. Demerara-an English-flagged ship, entered the port of Recife, a northern
Brazilian city, and then anchored in the harbor city of Santos, Sao Paulo (Massad et al., 2007).
The sailors on board Demerara were sick since they had been directly exposed in Dakar, Senegal,
a stop on their way back from Europe (Alonso et al., 2016). A few days after the arrival of the
ship in Santos, the influenza virus arrived in the interior parts of the country and many cases were
reported in Rio de Janeiro and Sao Paulo, and in other cities in the northeast. The epidemic’s
pace and intensity could not be contained and it spread rapidly to the interior districts.

Evidence suggests that Brazilian authorities did not anticipate the deadly effects of the pandemic.
The information that reached the country warning about the severity of the flu overseas did not
receive due importance. Hence when it arrived, it easily overwhelmed public authorities. The
few measures in place proved useless when confronted with the outbreak of a severe public health
crisis, as seen by newspapers extracts from the time (Figure 1 and Figure 2). Prices of foodstuff
(including milk, meat, and lemons) and medicines (mostly quinine-considered to be a powerful
drug for any illness) quickly surged as shortages set in (Hochman, 2016). Improvised hospitals and
healthcare posts had to be established in many cities that were trying to keep up with rising death
rates. Sao Paulo (city) reported 116,771 cases of influenza, a prevalence rate of 22.32% (Nelson,
2010), for an estimated population of 523,194 inhabitants, and 5,331 deaths in the short period
between mid-October and mid-December 1918 (Massad et al., 2007). The Brazilian president


                                                 5
Francisco de Paula Rodrigues Alves, newly elected for a second term in 1918, succumbed to the
flu in January 1919. Some studies estimate that approximately 350,000 (two-thirds of Sao Paulo’s
population) might have been infected (Bassanezi, 2013, Barata, 2000, Bertolli, 2003). Our data
suggest that in 1918 and 1919, when the pandemic was at its peak, the percentage of deaths
attributed to influenza-related causes stood at 52.6% and 53.8%, respectively.

To keep these numbers in perspective, Pennsylvania, Maryland and Colorado in the US, with
influenza deaths of 883.1, 803.6 and 776.5 per 100,000 of the population, respectively, had some
of the highest mortality rates in 1918.3 Garrett (2007) explains that the first wave in the US
occurred in March 1918 and lasted through summer of 1918. The second wave in Fall of 1918 was
worse. Unlike the US, there was only one wave of the pandemic in Brazil. In Figure 3, we show
the scale of respiratory deaths per thousand people for the state of Sao Paulo relative to that of
US cities in 1918.    4



The municipality Capital (in Sao Paulo), for which monthly data is available from 1917-1920
from Annual Statistical Reports, provides a snapshot of the situation5 . Figure 4 shows mortality
patterns in this region. Compared to the same months in 1917, there were 514 and 5,274 more
deaths in October and November 1918, respectively; with the total number of deaths up by 87.3%
in this municipality. In Figure 5, we show the monthly total deaths per 100,000 of the population
from January 1917 to December 1919. The mortality shock due to the pandemic is evident. Figure
6 demonstrates that both neo-natal and post-natal mortality (measured as deaths per 1000 live
births) also peaked in the Capital in October 1918. In Figure 7, we aggregate the district-level
data up to the municipality level for the period 1917-1920, and show the spatial variation in
influenza-related death rates using the 1920 boundaries for the state of Sao Paulo.

The pandemic resulted in a higher mortality rate among prime-age adults, creating a ‘W’-shaped
age-profile distribution of affected groups 6 . A reason proposed for this pattern is that young male
adults in particular might have been more vulnerable given their relatively higher participation
rates in the labor force, and their disproportionate exposure to other diseases such as tuberculosis.
Another explanation from the medical literature is that the “cytokine storm,” that causes an
   3
      Mortality rates reported in (Garrett, 2007) are drawn from Mortality Statistics in 1920 and include influenza
and mortality estimates.
    4
      Crosby (1989) indicates that the highest mortality rate in the US was more than 10 out of 1000 people in New
York city. Our data indicates that in Sao Paulo, the comparable estimate is almost 10 out of 1000 people (when
deaths due to unknown causes are also considered). The average for US cities stood at 5.8 out of 1000. (Clay et al.,
2019) notes that variation in mortality across U.S. cities were related to several factors including pre-pandemic
levels of infant mortality, illiteracy and air-pollution.
    5
      The Capital area is representative of the State of Sao Paulo for the purpose of our analysis and includes the
following sub-regions: Se, Mooca, Consolacao, Bom Retiro, Cambuci, Santa Cecilia, Perdizes, Bela Vista, Vila
Mariana, Bras, Penha de Franca, Ipiranga, Santana, Lapa, Nossa Senhora do O, Sao Miguel, Butanta, Osasco,
Liberdade, Belenzinho, Santa Efigenia.
    6
      The 1918 Flu killed relatively younger men and women aged 15-44, unlike other influenza epidemics that
typically kill mostly young children and older cohorts resulting in a U-shaped distribution.




                                                         6
excess production of immune cells and their related compounds, cytokines, is evident in healthy
young adults aged 20-40 years old during a flu infection, and this strong immune reaction results
in premature death (Loo and Gale, 2007, Kobasa et al., 2004). Children and seniors with weaker
immune systems are less affected as the risk is lower that their immune systems will overreact.7
Given its sudden, unanticipated arrival in Spring in the Southern Hemisphere, and with its short
duration of about ten weeks, existing studies posit random assignment of the infection in Brazil
(Nelson, 2010).

In response to the onset of the pandemic, public health authorities designed campaigns to dissem-
inate information on preventive and curative measures.8 These included isolation, good personal
hygiene, no extra work that could result in extreme fatigue, and quarantine measures in several
areas. Furthermore, there was overall confusion as statements released by medical establishments
that conveyed that the epidemic was mostly benign was in dissonance with published data that in-
dicated an exponential growth in the number of victims. Hospitals quickly ran short of medicines
and a full blown public health crisis ensued in Sao Paulo as Brazilian authorities struggled to keep
pace.



4       Data and Summary Statistics

Using historical and archival records, we construct a unique database on health outcomes related
to major disease categories and socioeconomic indicators for districts in the state of Sao Paulo
in the early decades of the twentieth century. We complement the data on district-level deaths
by cause with measures of infrastructure, demographic information and geographic variables. We
accomplish this by digitizing statistical reports and by matching these to Brazilian regional census
data from 1920 onwards to obtain a panel of information. Our spatial unit of analysis is at the
district level-a disaggregated territorial stratification of the state of Sao Paulo.9 Use of districts
gives us 350 unique geographical observations at the district-level for the period 1912-1921, which
we combine with other historical and contemporary data from 1872, 1912-1921, and 1940.

An important consideration while creating our dataset is ensuring that standardized boundaries
are tracked over time. The boundaries of many districts and municipalities changed considerably
    7
     Unfortunately, due to data limitations, we are unable to compare prevalence rates across different age groups.
    8
     Failure to comply with these measures may explain why different areas in Sao Paulo were impacted differently
by the virus. For instance, Bassanezi (2013) reveals that two municipalities, Campinas and Riberao Preto, that had
suffered from yellow fever in the late nineteenth and early twentieth century, acted on these measures propitiously
(Bertucci-Martins, 2005). Sorocaba, relatively smaller than Campinas and Riberao Preto, and with less experience
in epidemics, struggled more as they failed to adopt the right initiatives.
   9
     A district in Brazil is an administrative unit within a municipality. We choose to use district-level data rather
than municipality-level data for three reasons. First, the data on vital statistics for 1917-1921 is available at the
district-level, and second, using districts provides a larger sample size. Third, use of districts allows a more refined
analysis of realities at a very microeconomic level.


                                                           7
over the time period of our analysis.10 We use official territorial and administrative maps that
provide information on the evolution of districts over time to match the data in a consistent
manner.

We begin by describing the key variables of our analysis, and the source(s) from which they are
obtained. Table A4 in the Appendix provides details on other variables used in this study.



4.1    Deaths by Cause and Vital Statistics

The Sanitary Authority, created in 1892, was responsible for ensuring the collection of reliable
health statistics in Sao Paulo. These statistics are publicly available from 1901-1928 (Bassanezi,
2013). The Annual Statistical Reports of Sao Paulo contain the vital statistics required for our
analysis. More specifically, we obtain deaths by cause for 14 major disease categories, allowing us
to construct our key variable of interest: deaths rates from respiratory infections from 1912-1921,
our best proxy for influenza-related deaths.11 The Annual Statistical Report also provides infor-
mation on economic and financial statistics including municipalities’ receipts and expenditures,
which we use as controls in some of our models. We also obtain the initial shares of influenza-
related deaths for 1915 in the Annual Statistical Report of Sao Paulo (1915), for which deaths
by cause are available for 180 municipalities only. Further, we use the Demographic Studies: The
Population of Sao Paulo in the last decade: 1907-1916 to obtain pre-pandemic population statis-
tics for most municipalities. The nationwide influenza-related deaths are constructed from the
yearly statistical reports of 1917-1921.

We use the in-patient hospital and asylum admissions rates in 1940 (obtained from Annual Sta-
tistical Report of 1940 ) as a medium run measure of health. We use per capita municipality
expenditures on hospitals and health from the same source as additional controls.



4.2    Climate Data

The Annual Statistical Reports of Sao Paulo provide few meteorological observations. For in-
stance, the 1917 report provides monthly temperature for less than 65 regions and the monthly
precipitation for less than 35 municipalities. Atmospheric pressure, humidity level and detailed air
temperature-related statistics are only available at the aggregate level. Given these limitations,
we compile our climate data using averages from the World Bank Climate Change Knowledge
Database, where we extract relevant data on temperature and rainfall in October from 1901-1930,
  10
     The first census of 1872 contains data on 88 municipalities; by the 1940 census reports, the number of munici-
palities reached 350.
  11
     For reasons explained in the next section, we also collect data on other vital statistics. These data are further
complemented with information from a special official Sanitary Report in 1918.


                                                          8
using latitude and longitude coordinates of districts (these data are not available for October on
an annual basis)12 . However, models include district-level averages for temperature and rainfall.
This means that we use deviations in these measures from their trend; but these deviations are
of a more aggregate nature given the data constraints we face. Further, we collect long-term
averages for the period 1901-2016 and use deviations of October’s average (over 1901-1930) tem-
perature and precipitation from these long-term trends as a robustness check. These results are
reported in Table A6 and show that although these deviations have the expected sign, they have
low predictive power (the F-statistic is smaller than 10). We also carry out other falsification
tests as detailed in the next section.



4.3    Sanitary and Health Infrastructure

We collect information on the number of doctors, chemists and midwives, and the number of people
with mental and physical deficiencies (per 1000 inhabitants) as of 1872, and match these to the
1920 district-level data for use as proxies for historical health indicators in a period before the
pandemic struck. Information on water and sewage systems is obtained from the Sanitary Service
Report of the State of Sao Paulo: Annual Demographic and Sanitary Statistics Section (1920).
This report is also used to obtain the number of hospitals and old-age homes and specialized
maternity hospitals for use as controls when the outcomes are child death, or still births, or deaths
caused by specific diseases. The 1910 Annual Statistical Report of Sao Paulo (Volume II) is used
to obtain the pre-pandemic public expenditures on cleaning, waste disposal, and maintenance of
sanitary conditions in 132 municipalities.



4.4    Geography and Railroads

We control for altitude, latitude and longitude in our models. Altitude and related data are col-
lected from the different volumes of The Encyclopedia of Brazil Municipalities (IBGE 1957,1958)
for Sao Paulo.

The dummy for the presence of railway in the district is created from the Secretariat Report
of Agriculture, Commerce and Public Works of the State of Sao Paulo; Coffee: Statistics of
Production and Commerce (1920). We know the number of railway companies and stations in
1920, and the year in which the railway network was established. Distance to capital (both in a
  12
     This is an online platform provided by the World Bank Group that provides access to climate change data.
Amongst many other services, it provides spatial and temporal averages of rainfall and temperature for the periods
1901-1930, 1931-1960, 1961-1990, 1991-2016, and 1901-2016. As acknowledged on the website, the temperature and
precipitation data is obtained from the Climate Research Unit (CRU) of the University of East Anglia, reprocessed
by the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) of the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
(UCAR).


                                                        9
straight line and more precisely) comes from the same 1920 report and from the Ipeadata (the
Institute of Applied Economic Research in Brazil).



4.5    Productivity

The 1920 Census of Agricultural and Industrial activities is the source for our productivity mea-
sures in 1920. We calculate productivity measures at the municipality level by combining data
on establishment size (measured by the number of employees and by size), production of different
commodities, and the characteristics of small scale and large scale business from the 1940 census
for Sao Paulo.

Data on the number of people employed in schooling activities (school workforce) is obtained from
the 1940 census (Parte XVII – Sao Paulo, Volume 1). The Annual Statistical Report of 1940
is used to obtain the total municipality expenditure on education13 , and the budget share that
accrues to school supplies, materials and to teachers.

The 1940 census (Parte XVII – Sao Paulo, Volume 3 ) is used to obtain total expenditure
per establishment for the primary sector (and for the subsectors agriculture, farming and live-
stock), and the number of plows used per establishment, which is a proxy for capital utiliza-
tion/mechanization. We also compute expenditures per agricultural establishment on new seeds,
fertilizers and insecticides, and on salaries and the acquisition of new machinery and animals in
1939. These variables are used as controls in the agricultural productivity models.



4.6    Census Data

We use the 1872, 1920, and 1940 censuses for the State of Sao Paulo to estimate the short-term
and long-term effects. The first round of 1872 allows us to obtain pre-pandemic initial conditions.
In addition to those noted above, other variables that we obtain from this Census include the
share of foreigners, the share of literate people, the share of people who were slaves, population
density, and race. Controling for initial conditions is important to ensure that we have a baseline
for the degree of development, urbanization, infrastructure, social aspects, health-service, and
the sanitary environment before the Flu Pandemic struck (that is, these variables help to control
for pre-trends that may exist in the data).14 . The 1920 census is used to compute demographic
and economic variables.15 The 1940 census is used to construct longer-run measures, as has been
  13
     These data allow us to calculate the share of total municipality expenditures devoted to the Secretary of
Education and Public Health.
  14
     Note that we use these measures in proportions.
  15
     Amongst others, we calculate sex ratios for Brazilians and foreigners, and literacy rates by age groups and
gender.


                                                      10
detailed above.



4.7   Summary Statistics

Tables 1 and 2 present summary statistics for the dependent variables and selected explanatory
variables in our analysis. Variables in Panel A of Table 1 are the dependent variables in the
short-run of the pandemic and include infant mortality, still births, the literacy rate for males and
females, the sex ratio at birth, amongst others. Focusing on a few, the mean value for the infant
mortality rate is 0.02 and that for still births per total births is 0.05. As expected, male literacy
is higher than female literacy. The mean sex ratio at birth in 1920 was 121 (out of 100), with a
standard deviation of 82 (out of 100), suggesting that in some districts at least, the levels were
far from the natural rate of 105 out of 100. Panel B of Table 1 report statistics for the long-run
variables of interest. These include educational measures disaggregated by gender, and health
measures including hospital admissions.

Table 2 reports summary statistics for the variables used as controls in the models. These are
arranged by panels that focus on deaths by cause, geography, variables from the 1872 census, and
other measures. Our key variable of interest is in Panel A of Table 2 - respiratory deaths per 1000
inhabitants - which has a mean of 1.74 and a standard deviation of 2.03 for the period 1917-1920.
Average October’s temperature was 68.43 Fahrenheit with a standard deviation of 3.76; while
average October’s precipitation was 124.15 mm (standard deviation 8.39mm). We note the high
standard deviation for health and sanitation municipality expenditure in 1910, and the adult sex
ratio in 1920 had a mean of 112 (out of 100) with a standard deviation of 59 (out of 100). Overall,
the data provides evidence of the relatively low levels of development in most districts during the
time period under analysis. Further, these statistics reveal that there was significant geographical
variation in these measures, especially in those pertaining to literacy, health and infrastructure.



5     Estimation Methodology

Our methodology follows two broad steps. First we use the 1960-1980 Brazilian Census data from
IPUMS to replicate the methodology in Almond (2006). Of course, since these Census data are
not as detailed as the US Census, we are limited in the outcomes we can estimate. Moreover,
given data limitations, we assume that the current place of residence is the same as their birth
place/place of residence when the pandemic arrived in Brazil. There is also some evidence that
year of birth may be mis-reported in the 1960 Census. In particular, 1920 is reported as the
year of birth by people who may have been born earlier. Since we condition on 1919 similar to
Almond (2006), we have a conservative bias in our results (we underestimate effects). Within


                                                 11
this broad framework of using cohorts, we also replicate the methodology of Beach et al. (2018)
which combines cohort controls with parental characteristics. Again we are limited in what we
can do given the information in the Brazilian Census data. The results from these cohort models
are reported in Section A1 of the Appendix and resonate broadly with those from our preferred
spcecification.16

Second, as we believe that relying on cohorts alone are not sufficient given the dramatic transfor-
mation that Brazil was undergoing in these years, we use our rich disaggregated data compiled
from various historical and contemporary sources to study the long-term consequences of the
pandemic. This is our preferred specification which is described in detail below. Moving beyond
the Censuses alone also allow us to analyze a wide range of demographic, human capital and
productivity outcomes.



5.1    Empirical Specification

We examine the impact of the 1918 Flu Pandemic using the following model:

                                                                0
                              yd = β0 + β1 F lud + β2 Xd0 + β3 Xd0 + β4 R + d                                  (1)

where yd is the outcome of interest for district d in either 1920 or 1940. F lud is the respiratory
death rates in district d (from 1917-1920).17 Xd is a vector of district-level controls including
geographic variables such as altitude, latitude, longitude, and other controls including the distance
to capital, a dummy for the presence of a railway, and the interactions of these variables.18 Xd0 is
a vector of initial conditions obtained from the 1872 census that includes the share of foreigners,
the share of literate people, the number of doctors, chemists and midwives, population density, the
share of people who were slaves (during the pre-abolishment era), the share of people of different
races, and employment in different economic sectors. R denotes region fixed-effects. d is the
idiosyncratic error term. The coefficient of interest is β1 , the impact of respiratory death rates on
the outcome of interest.

There are several reasons why respiratory deaths may not be exogenous. First, measurement error.
Official published data may understate true death rates, particularly during the peak of the health
crisis between October and December 1918. This may have happened unintentionally as in the
confusion that followed the initial outbreak, doctors had little time to make accurate entries.
Further, as Richter and Robling (2013) note, panicked and overwhelmed doctors probably chose
to make optimal use of their time by treating long lines of frail patients, and focusing on curative
  16
     In addition to literacy rates, we estimate models where the outcome is high school completion rates. The latter
are not reported in the paper but are available on request.
  17
     When we estimate the short-run impact on 1920 variables, the sample is restricted to 1917-1919.
  18
     Other controls are added in 1940, depending on the outcome of interest.


                                                        12
work rather than working on long descriptive death reports required by government officials.
Others probably struggled to provide the right diagnosis and to assign the cause of death. Figure
8 shows the spatial variation in death rates caused by respiratory infections (left map) and by
unknown causes (right map) only in 1918. The maximum value for respiratory deaths per 1000
of the population was 4.5 while that of unknown causes stood at 45. This suggests that many
cases were recorded as deaths caused by unknown diseases given the difficulty of recognizing the
symptoms and the public health crisis triggered by the pandemic19 .

Second, omitted variables may be simultaneously correlated with respiratory deaths and the out-
comes we consider. We control for all that the data allow us to do. In particular, to control for
the mortality gradient by socio-economic class, sanitary conditions, literacy, and nutrition, we
include controls related to health, demography, human capital, levels of economic development,
sanitary infrastructure (including water and sewerage), and the municipality’s public health ex-
penditure. Models further include a set of demographic and economic initial conditions from the
1872 census (as in Rocha et al. (2017)) to control for differences in baseline conditions, and for
existing pre-pandemic trends.20

The natural selection that results from excess male mortality in response to aggregate health
shocks of this nature is evident in our study. As we note above, female fetuses are more resilient
to shocks in utero (Noymer and Garenne, 2000, Hamoudi and Nobles, 2014, Sanders and Stoecker,
2015). We rely on positive selection of male fetuses to explain some of our results that follow, and
assume that net of all the controls we include, the distribution of births by gender is not further
distorted by unobservables.



5.2    Instrumental Variable

Our preferred specification uses an instrumental variables approach that relies on the fact that
seasonal patterns and average environmental conditions observed across regions in the month of
October can explain part of the variation in the prevalence of viral respiratory infections and
influenza-related diseases.21 In doing so, we draw on the medical and epidemiological literature
  19
     In results not reported, there is evidence that in comparison to 1915, the variance of the distribution of deaths
caused by unknown reasons (per 1000) rose between 1917 and 1920, whereas the first two moments of the distribution
for respiratory death rates remain mostly the same between 1915 and 1917-1920. The mean for the distribution
of unknown death rates also remains about the same between 1915 and 1917-1920. Given that these distribution
parameters remain about the same, we conclude that the measurement error is classical in nature.
  20
     In Table A3 in the Appendix, we show the sample mean differences for selected geographic, climatic, demo-
graphic, economic and health initial characteristics for two sets of regions. These are those with above and below
median flu exposure as measured by respiratory death rates between 1917 and 1920. All the variables where these
means are statistically different are included in our analyses.
  21
     Donaldson and Keniston (2016) use climatic variations in their instrumental variables method and rely on
measured absolute humidity while controlling for normal October absolute humidity of the district. As we note
above, we are limited in our ability to use climatic variables from October 1918 alone given data availability.



                                                         13
that the incidence of an influenza epidemic depends largely on climatic conditions (Polozov et al.,
2008, Tamerius et al., 2013, Slutsky and Zeckhauser, 2018). In particular Slutsky and Zeckhauser
(2018) notes that sunlight protects against the flu, implying that there should be negative asso-
ciation between temperature and respiratory deaths. If temperature does not decline beyond a
certain level (about 21 Celsius or so), rainfall increases the incidence of the flu (Tamerius et al.,
2013). We rely on (only) October’s temperature and precipitation that is calculated as the average
over 1901-1930. Our regressions also include controls for average temperature and rainfall in the
district to ensure that these instruments are plausibly exogenous. We present tests of instrument
validity and instrument sensitivity (where the 1901-1930 measure is relative to the 1901-2016
average) below.

Figure 9 shows the spatial variation in average October’s temperature and precipitation, respec-
tively. The mean temperature for all districts is 68.43 Fahrenheit and the mean precipitation is
124.15 mm. In order to ensure that these 1901-1930 averages are accurate, we collect data for
the few observations available in the Annual Statistical Report of 1917 to obtain a mean of 68.54
Fahrenheit and 119.4 mm for October’s temperature and precipitation, respectively, which are
close. Panels A and B of Figure 10 portray binscatter plots (with geographical controls) for respi-
ratory death rates and October’s rain and temperature. Panel A focuses on the period 1917-1920
while Panel B uses only 1918 data. Both panels show that October’s rain and temperature impact
predicted respiratory death rates; the empirical results that follow confirm that respiratory deaths
are inversely related to temperature and positively related to precipitation.

The first stage regression for respiratory death rates is:

                                                                        0
           F lud = αo + α1 OctT empd + α2 OctRaind + α3 Geogd + α4 Ini72d + α5 R + ud                        (2)

where OctT empd and OctRaind denote average October’s temperature and precipitation for each
district; Geogd is a vector of geographical controls including average temperature and rainfall
in the district, and Ini72d is a vector of baseline socioeconomic characteristics. R are region
dummies, and ud is the standard idiosyncratic error term. Results for the first stage regressions
are shown in Table 3.

Table 3 (columns (1)-(3), for our period 1917-1920) reports that temperature has a negative
effect while precipitation has a positive effect on respiratory death rates. In columns (2) and
(3), the results remain unaltered with the inclusion of district-level controls. The estimates on
temperature and rainfall (along with the full set of controls) explain about 44.3% of the variation
in respiratory death rates. Moreover, the F-statistic on identifying instruments are above the rule-
of-thumb threshold value of 10. To ensure that our instruments affect our outcomes of interest only
However, we follow Donaldson and Keniston (2016) in using levels of the climate variables without including their
interactions.



                                                       14
through their effects on respiratory deaths in 1917-1920 (test for relevance), we report regressions
in columns (4)-(6) of Table 3 that show that October’s mean temperature and precipitation have
no impact on respiratory death rates in the 1913-1915 time period.22 Our conservative estimates
are from the saturated specifications in columns (3) and (6) of Table 3. In the robustness section
that follows, we show that our instruments have no direct impacts on the outcomes that we
evaluate in 1920 and 1940, thus underlining that they satisfy the exclusion restriction.

October’s temperature and rainfall are the instruments in all cases except when the outcome
is agricultural productivity. This is because studies have documented the possible relationship
between climatic conditions and agricultural output in the Age of Mass Migration (Hatton and
Williamson, 1998, Solomou and Wu, 1999). Instead, we construct another instrument based
on Acemoglu and Johnson (2007) and Percoco (2016). This instrument relies on the baseline
regional distribution of deaths by respiratory infections in each district in t < 1917, and leverages
the surge in influenza deaths during the pandemic years of 1917-1920. Let AggF lut denote the
aggregate number of deaths from influenza in Sao Paulo in year t. Let s̄d1915 be the proportion of
deaths caused by influenza in a baseline period in district d. We choose the year 1915 as baseline
as data are available for a representative number of districts in that year. We can reasonably
assume that the baseline distribution of deaths by respiratory infections in each district and
Sao Paulo’s aggregate influenza mortality rate in a later year t are exogenous. So, as Percoco
(2016) demonstrates, this instrument controls for any bias that results from the endogenous spatial
distribution of the pandemic. For t > 1915, we impute the respiratory deaths as (s̄d1915 ×AggF lut ).
We standardize this value by popdt , the population of district d in year t. Equation 3 shows
IV Respdt , this constructed instrument for respiratory deaths:

                                                                AggF lut
                                         IV Respdt = s̄d1915                                                     (3)
                                                                 popdt

Equation 3 exploits two sources of variation: the cross-sectional variation in the proportion of
deaths caused by influenza for each district in 1915, and the time-series variation induced by
changes in the aggregate mortality rate. The validity of the instrument rests on the assumption
that the district-specific characteristics that determined s̄d1915 do not independently predict the
future spatial distribution of the disease, that is, s̄d1915 should impact respiratory deaths only
through its effect on IV Respdt . This assumption may be violated however if the baseline pro-
portion in 1915 is correlated with future changes in population, literacy rates, or income. Or
  22
     As another falsification test, Table A5 in the Appendix reports the first stage regression results using April’s
temperature and rainfall, conditional on the same set of controls used for the preferred first stage regression on
October’s climate instruments. We also test for the relevance and strength of April’s instruments holding October’s
temperature and precipitation constant. The results suggest that April’s instruments are weak for both 1917-1920
and 1913-1915 as the F-statistic remains below 5. We obtain similar results when temperature and rainfall for May
or June are used instead. Further, as noted above, Table A6 in the Appendix reports the first stage regressions
with deviations of October’s mean temperature and precipitation from their long-term averages over the 1901-2016
time period. As is clear, the F-statistic is below the required benchmark level.



                                                         15
the district-specific features that determined the baseline weight affect the evolution of social and
economic conditions during the pandemic years. To net out such influences, we interact a dis-
trict’s pre-pandemic initial characteristics with year dummies. We do likewise for the geographic
variables. Further, we use the per capita public expenditures on cleaning, waste disposal and
maintenance of good sanitary conditions available for 132 municipalities in 1910 to ensure the
assumption on which the validity of the instrument rests, holds. The first stage regression (as a
function of the identifying instrument only) is shown in equation 4, with results reported in Table
4:
                                      F ludt = γ0 + γ1 IV Respdt + ωdt                                         (4)

Table 4 indicates that this synthetic instrument is strong with F-statistics above the required
threshold of 10. Morever, the coefficient on the constructed instrument IV Respdt is positive and
significant, and robust to the inclusion of fixed-effects, and district-level geographical, health and
initial controls. However, compared to the climatic instrumental variables discussed above, using
the predicted influenza mortality rate in equation 3 reduces the sample size. Hence we use this
constructed instrument only for agriculture-related outcomes.

Finally standard errors are clustered at the micro/mesoregion level in all our models.23 The
underlying intuition is that neighboring districts and municipalities share similar unobservable
features, and most 1920 census districts belonged to larger stratifications sharing common initial
conditions.24



6        Short-term Effects in 1920

6.1      Demographic Indicators

We begin our analysis by evaluating the pandemic’s immediate impact on infant mortality, sex
ratios at birth, and on the normalized number of still births. Panel A in Table 5 reports results
for the infant mortality rate in 1920. Both OLS and 2SLS methodologies yield positive and sig-
nificant coefficients in all specifications, with and without the inclusion of region fixed-effects and
initial and region-level controls (including dummies for the presence of water and sewage systems,
hospitals, nursing homes, specialized maternity hospitals, geographic controls, literacy rates, and
other demographic controls). The IV estimates are larger than the OLS results indicating that
the latter are downward biased, possibly due to attenuation bias in the presence of classical mea-
surement error.25 In the fully saturated model, all else equal, a unit increase in respiratory death
    23
     We have information on 13 meso-regions and 57 micro-regions of Brazil in our sample.
    24
     Bertrand et al. (2003) notes the importance of clustering standard errors at the largest sensible aggregation.
  25
     Throughout our analysis, the IV coefficients are larger in magnitude than the OLS estimates. This indicates
that attenuation bias from measurement error is substantial in our case. Note that the standard errors are also


                                                        16
rates increased infant mortality by 0.019. Given the mean value of infant mortality in the our
sample, this is a 0.09% increase. Our estimates of the impact of the pandemic on still birth rates–
loss of the baby before the 20th week of pregnancy in 1920–are presented in Part B of Table 5.
The instrumental variable effects in Panel B indicate that, all else equal, there was a significant
increase in still birth rates by 21 log points, a 0.41% increase.

Table 6 reports results for sex ratios at birth in 1920. Controlling for adult sex ratios in 1920, the
share of people of different races, the initial normalized number of midwives, and the presence of
water, sewage systems, hospitals, nursing homes and specialized maternity hospitals, as well as
geographic controls, we find a negative impact on sex ratios as reported in Panel B columns (1)
to (3). In keeping with the intuition that male fetuses are relatively more vulnerable to shocks
as compared to female fetuses, the IV results indicate that sex-ratios declined (by about 40.74%
relative to the mean), that is, relatively fewer males were born in the immediate aftermath of the
pandemic.26



6.2    Literacy Rates

There is substantial evidence that health shocks can have long-lasting consequences on educational
attainment (Currie and Stabile, 2006, Currie, 2009, Parman, 2013). We test this hypothesis by
estimating the impact of influenza deaths on male and female literacy rates for different age
groups. The 1920 census reports literacy figures for those who can read and write, but we do
not know whether formal schooling took place.27 Intuitively, we do not expect to find significant
impacts for younger age groups in 1920, especially those who have yet to start schooling. But
this might not be the case for older age-groups. Table 7 shows that this is indeed the case. The
2SLS results shown in Panel B of this table suggest that there is no effect on male and female
literacy rates (of all age groups) but that the literacy rate for males aged 15 and above rose in the
short-run whereas the coefficient for females while positive, is measured with error. This is similar
to the impact on male literacy in Donaldson and Keniston (2016). An explanation for this may
be the fact that since men are more likely to be in the labor market, and since relatively weaker
prime-age men (possibly from the lower classes) died in greater numbers, the average literacy rate
increased as a consequence of this type of differential selection.
larger for the IV coefficients relative to the OLS coefficients, as is usually true in 2SLS analyses.
  26
     It is hard to reconcile the size of this coefficient with the impact on infant mortality rates as by definition,
children have to be born to count as part of the sex ratio.
  27
     The 1920 census provides the number of literate and illiterate individuals at the district level.




                                                         17
6.3      Agricultural Productivity

We focus on the agricultural sector and our outcomes of interest in 1920 are the output of coffee,
rice and maize in tons, normalized by total population to obtain per capita values. The results
are reported in Table 8. There are immediate sizeable effects on per capita volumes of coffee, rice,
and maize in 1920, indicating that the pandemic caused a decrease in agricultural productivity.28
The 2SLS estimate for per capita coffee production translates into a 21% decline relative to the
mean while those for per capita rice production and per capita maize production represent a 47%
and 25% decline relative to their respective means.29



7        Long-term Effects in 1940

7.1      Literacy Rates

As discussed above, we use the 1940 census to study impacts beyond the immediate short-run.30
The Census of 1940 included 7 questionnaires related to literacy. Compared to 1920, however,
questions were not limited only to the ability to read and write. We are therefore able to compute
average municipality’s literacy rate for people receiving some form of instruction. Given the
evidence in Musacchio et al. (2014) that Sao Paulo experienced a rapid increase in the number
of schools, students and teachers during the 1889-1930 period, we control for the share of total
municipality expenditure allocated to education and health in 1940, the number of teachers (per
person aged 10 and above), the share of total education expenditure spent on school supplies
and on teachers’ salaries. Other controls for initial conditions, share of people who were slaves,
race measures and the urbanization rate as well as controls for altitude are also included in these
regressions.

In Table 9 which reports a broad cohort style analysis, we find that female literacy was negatively
impacted in districts with greater influenza exposure whereas male literacy rates were positively
affected.31 For the age group 20-29 years old, the cohort that was directly impacted by the 1918
    28
      Table A7 in the Appendix shows that wages for coffee workers rose.
    29
      In order to explain the impact on coffee in 1920, we collected data on coffee production in 1917/1918 and
1918/1919, and compared the means of these based on a binary variable that represented the intensity with which
regions were affected by the pandemic (a binary variable that takes a value of 1 if the district reports respiratory
death rates that were above the median death rate for all districts in the sample). We find that areas with above
median respiratory death rates produced on average 17.5% more coffee in 1917/1918 and 11.7% more in 1918/1919.
Thus relatively more coffee-producing regions were hardest hit by the pandemic. We are unable to do likewise for
rice or maize. However, the fact that these crops are relatively more labor-intensive than coffee may explain the
larger size of the coefficients in columns (2) and (3) in comparison to that in column (1).
   30
       The 1940 census provides municipality-level data.
   31
      We should be clear that we do not know whether these individuals were born in these districts or they were in
the district when enumerated during the Census.


                                                        18
pandemic, we find that respiratory death rates from 1917-1920 lead to a significant fall in literacy
rate for females. No such effect is found for female aged 30-39 years old who were already eight
years old or older when the pandemic arrived. Alternatively, we find that there is a significant
positive increase in male literacy rate for those aged 20-29 and 30-39 years old (the F-statistic for
those in the 30-39 age group gives us little confidence in this result though). The 2SLS coefficient
for 20-29 year old males indicates a 7.80% rise in literacy rates relative to the mean.

In Table 10, we further explore the pandemic’s effects on literacy rates for broader age groups
and on alternative measures of educational attainment. We estimate the impact on males and
females aged 5 and above and aged 18 and above in columns (1) to (4) and again find a significant
positive impact on the male literacy rate in column (1) and no effect on the female literacy rate
in column (2) of Table 10. The estimated effects in columns ((3) and (4) for the older age group
is similar. These results lend credence to the hypothesis that the 1918 pandemic had long-lasting
repercussions on human capital.

We provide several explanations for the positive impact on male literacy in the aftermath of the
pandemic. First, as noted above, excess male mortality in response to health shocks of this nature
implies that the males that are born are positively selected. This could play a role in understanding
the positive literacy coefficient. Further, investing in males/boys at the expense of females/girls is
entirely consistent in poor country contexts where labor markets may be segmented for example.
Second, positive impacts on men/boys have been found in other contexts. In the aftermath of the
2004 tsunami in Indonesia for example, Frankenberg et al. (2013) find that literacy rates for males
rose. Other studies where male literacy has been found to have increased include Donaldson and
Keniston (2016) and Parman (2013). Third, an increase in male literacy rates are also found when
we apply the Almond (2006) baseline model to the Brazilian IPUMS data from 1960-1980. Finally,
the education parameters that other researchers have considered and where negative impacts have
been found are high school graduation rates and years of schooling. Although not inconsistent
with literacy rates, these variables are different.



7.2   Hospital Admissions

We compute hospital in-patient admissions per 1000 inhabitants and the normalized number of
people with disabilities admitted to nursing homes and asylums from the 1940 Census. The results
are reported in Table 11. While we find no statistical significance for the nursing homes/asylum
admissions, we find that respiratory deaths have a positive significant impact on the in-patient
hospital admissions rates up to two decades after the pandemic’s arrival in Sao Paulo. The 2SLS
coefficient in column (1) indicates a 33.03% increase in this measure relative to the mean.




                                                  19
7.3      Agricultural Productivity

Table 12 reports the results for aggregate measures of productivity for the primary sector in
1940. We calculate the value of primary sector’s output per employee (columns 1 and 2) and per
establishment (columns 3 and 4), in logs. The results indicate that there are measurable drags on
labor productivity from the pandemic up to twenty years after the event.32 A one unit increase
in respiratory deaths (per 1000) leads to a 0.45 log point decline in the value of the primary
sector per employee. We obtain a coefficient of similar magnitude for the value per establishment.
Relative to the averages for these measures of productivity, these impacts on productivity are
significant.33



8        Robustness Checks

We conduct specification checks to verify the robustness of these results. As noted above, Table
A5 in the Appendix reports the first stage regression results using April’s temperature and rainfall,
conditional on the same set of controls used for the preferred first stage regression on October’s
climate instruments. The results suggest that April’s instruments are weak for both 1917-1920
and 1913-1915 as the F-statistic remains below 5. We obtain similar results when temperature
and rainfall for May or June are used instead. Further, Table A6 in the Appendix reports the
first stage regressions with deviations of October’s mean temperature and precipitation from
their long-term averages over the 1901-2016 time period. As is clear, the F-statistic is below
the required benchmark level. Next, we test to ensure that the sample of births in the flu-years
are representative. We rely on male and female literacy rates in 1872 as a measure of parental
characteristics, and compare these to the rates in 1920 in order to rule out selection on parental
observables. The test of differences in means between the 1872 and 1920 literacy rates cannot
reject that these are the same (p = 0.41). We then generate an indicator variable that takes a
value of 1 if a district in 1918 had flu exposure above the median value in the sample (that is, if
respiratory deaths per 1000 inhabitants exceeded 1.21 in 1918). We then test for differences in
sample means in literacy rates across these two groups. These results are reported in Table 13.
Again, test results indicate that the samples are comparable along this dimension.34
    32
      We added additional controls including a proxy for mechanization and capital utilization–the number of plows
used per establishment, disaggregated forms of expenditure per agricultural establishment on new seeds, fertilizers
and insecticides, on salaries, and on the acquisition of new machinery and animals in 1939.
   33
      Table A8 in the Appendix reports different measures of productivity in 1940 for small-scale and large-scale
businesses in farming, agriculture, and livestock. The results indicate that by 1940, there had been declines in land
productivity as measured by the value of the agricultural sector per hectare of cultivated land. The disaggregated
analysis indicates that the negative effect on labor productivity is stronger for the agricultural sector relative to
livestock and farming.
   34
      Given data constraints, we have no other variable to benchmark parental characteristics.




                                                         20
In Table 14, we carry out falsification tests by demonstrating that the respiratory death rate
during a non-pandemic year (1915) has no impact on outcome variables either in 1920 or in 1940.
All 2SLS (and OLS) coefficients are statistically zero for sex ratios and literacy rates in 1920,
and literacy rates in 1940. Further, since our empirical strategy relies on the predicted mortality
instrument, we show in Table 15 that the baseline weight (s̄d1915 ), the share of total deaths caused
by influenza-related causes in 1915, has no direct predictive power for economic variables before
the 1918 pandemic or in the years we consider. Since we do not have data on a lot of variables
between 1915 and 1920, we use still births in 1915 and wages in 1915. The last two columns of
Table 15 provide further supporting evidence by demonstrating that the constructed weight has
no direct impact on productivity outcomes in 1920 or 1940. This strengthens the case that the
constructed cross-sectional baseline weight acts only through its effect on respiratory death rates
during the pandemic years.

Finally, in order to ensure that the instruments have no direct effects on the outcomes we study,
we regress the instruments - October’s mean temperature and precipitation - on outcomes from
1920 and 1940. These results are reported in Table 16. Net of fixed effects, region-level and initial
period controls, the estimates in Table 16 indicate that the instruments have no direct impacts.35



9         Conclusion

We use data from the 1872, 1920, and 1940 Brazilian censuses for more than 300 geographical
units in the State of Sao Paulo, Brazil, to study the impact of the 1918 influenza pandemic across
different time horizons. We match these data to district-level deaths by cause during the pandemic
years (1917-1920), and combine this matched dataset with an array of historical and geographical
information drawn from several archival documents. We show that the pandemic had significant
short-run demographic, literacy and productivity impacts in 1920. We then study dynamics on
literacy rates, in-patient hospital admissions, and productivity in 1940, to demonstrate lasting
effects. These results are robust to a variety of falsification and specification checks. Our results
underline that historical determinants of development can have persistent effects on outcomes,
and that a comprehensive understanding of the legacy of health shocks provides scope for targeted
present-day policy-making in order to ameliorate some of the negative consequences.




    35
         Results for the full set of outcomes are available on request.


                                                              21
References
Acemoglu, D. and S. Johnson (2007). Disease and development: The effect of life expectancy on economic growth.
  Journal of Political Economy 115 (6), 925–985.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson (2001). The colonial origins of comparative development: An empirical
  investigation. American Economic Review 91 (5), 1369–1401.

Almond, D. (2006). Is the 1918 influenza pandemic over? long-term effects of in utero influenza exposure in the
  post-1940 us population. Journal of Political Economy 114 (4), 672–712.

Almond, D. and B. Mazumder (2005). The 1918 influenza pandemic and subsequent health outcomes: An analysis
  of sipp data. American Economic Review 95 (2), 258–262.

Alonso, W., F. Nascimento, R. Acuna-Soto, C. Schuck-Paim, and M. Miller (2016). The 1918 influenza pandemic
  in florianopolis: A subtropical city in brazil. Vaccine 29, B16–B20.

Alsan, M. (2015). The effect of the tsetse fly on african development. American Economic Review 105 (1), 382–410.

Bakken, M. and S. Husoy (2016). The long term impact of the 1918 influenza pandemic in norway. Master’s Thesis.

Barata, R. (2000). Cem anos de endemias e epidemias. Ciencia & Saude Coletiva 5 (2), 333–345.

Barker, D. (1995). Fetal origins of coronary heart disease. BMJ 311, 171–4.

Bassanezi, M. (2013). Uma tragica primavera. a epidemia de gripe de 1918 no estado de sao paulo, brasil. ESTADO
  DE SAO P , 73.

Beach, B. and W. Hanlon (2017). Coal smoke and mortality in an early industrial economy. The Economic
  Journal 128 (615), 2652–2675.

Beach, B., J.Ferrie, and M.Saavedra (2018). Fetal shock or selection? the 1918 influenza pandemic and human
  capital development. National Bureau of Economic Research. (No. w24725).

Bertolli, F. (2003). A gripe espanhola em sao paulo, 1918: epidemia e sociedade, sao paulo, paz e terra. Colecao
  Sao Paulo 5.

Bertrand, M., E. Duflo, and S. Mullainathan (2003). How much should we trust differences-in-differences estimates?
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, 249–275.

Bertucci-Martins, L. (2005). Entre doutores e para os leigos: Fragmentos do discurso medico n influenza de 1918.
  Historia, Ciencias, Saude-Manguinhos 12 (1).

Bleakley, H. (2010). Malaria eradication in the americas: A retrospective analysis of childhood exposure. American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (2), 1–45.

Caruso, G. (2015). Intergenerational transmission of shocks in early life: Evidence from the tanzania great flood of
  1993. SSRN 2560876 .

Caruso, G. and S. Miller (2015). Long run effects and intergenerational transmission of natural disasters: A case
  study of the 1970 ancash earthquake. Journal of Development Economics 117, 134–150.

Chul Hong, S. and Y. Yun (2017). Fetal exposure to the 1918 influenza pandemic in colonial korea and human
  capital development. Seoul Journal of Economics 30 (4), 353–383.

Clay, K., J. Lewis, and E. Severnini (2018). Pollution, infectious disease, and mortality: Evidence from the 1918
  spanish influenza pandemic. The Journal of Economic History 78 (4), 1179–1209.



                                                        22
Clay, K., J. Lewis, and E. Severnini (2019). What explains cross-city variation in mortality during the 1918 influenza
  pandemic? evidence from 440 u.s. cities. Economics & Human Biology 35, 42–50.

Cook, C., J. Fletcher, and A. Forgues (2018). Multigenerational effects of early life health shocks. National Bureau
  of Economic Research (No. w25377).

Crosby, A. (1989). America’s forgotten pandemic: The influenza of 1918.

Currie, J. (2009). Healthy, wealthy, and wise: Socioeconomic status, poor health in childhood, and human capital
  development. Journal of Economic Literature 41 (1), 87–122.

Currie, J. and M. Stabile (2006). Child mental health and human capital accumulation: The case of adhd. Journal
  of Health Economics 25 (6), 1094–1118.

Dell, M. (2010). The persistent effects of peru’s mining mita. Econometrica 78 (6), 1863–1903.

Donaldson, D. and D. Keniston (2016). Dynamics of a malthusian economy: India in the aftermath of the 1918
  influenza. Unpublished Manuscript..

Frankenberg, E., B. Sikoki, C. Sumantri, W. Suriastini, and D. Thomas (2013). Education, vulnerability, and
  resilience after a natural disaster. Ecology and Society 18 (2), 16.

Garrett, T. (2007). Economic effects of the 1918 influenza pandemic.

Glaeser, E., R. L. Porta, F. L. de Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2004). Do institutions cause growth?          Journal of
  Economic Growth 9 (3), 271–303.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2016). Long-term persistence. Journal of the European Economic Associ-
  ation 14 (6), 1401–1436.

Hamoudi, A. and J. Nobles (2014). Do daughters really cause divorce? stress, pregnancy, and family composition.
  Demography 51 (4), 1423–1449.

Hanlon, W. (2019). Coal smoke, city growth, and the costs of the industrial revolution. The Economic Journal ,
  forthcoming.

Hatton, T. and J. Williamson (1998). The age of mass migration: Causes and economic impact. Oxford University
  Press.

Hochman, G. (2016). The sanitation of brazil: Nation, state, and public health, 1889-1930. University of Illinois
  Press.

Huillery, E. (2009). History matters: The long-term impact of colonial public investments in french west africa.
  American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (1), 176–215.

Karlsson, M., T. Nilsson, and S. Pichler (2014). The impact of the 1918 spanish flu epidemic on economic perfor-
  mance in sweden: An investigation into the consequences of an extraordinary mortality shock. Journal of Health
  Economics 36, 1–19.

Kobasa, D., A. Takada, K. Shinya, M. Hatta, P. Halfmann, S. Theriault, H. Suzuki, H. Nishimura, K. Mitamura,
  N. Sugaya, and T. Usui (2004). Enhanced virulence of influenza a viruses with the haemagglutinin of the 1918
  pandemic virus. Nature 431 (7009), 703.

Lin, M. and E. Liu (2014). Does in utero exposure to illness matter? the 1918 influenza epidemic in taiwan as a
   natural experiment. Journal of Health Economics 37, 152–163.

Loo, Y. and M. Gale (2007). Influenza: Fatal immunity and the 1918 virus. Nature 445 (7125), 267.

Massad, E., M. Burattini, F. Coutinho, and L. Lopez (2007). The 1918 influenza a epidemic in the city of sao
  paulo, brazil. Medical Hypothesis 68 (2), 442–445.

Musacchio, A., A. Fritscher, and M. Viarengo (2014). Colonial institutions, trade shocks, and the diffusion of
 elementary education in brazil, 1889-1930. Journal of Economic History 74 (3), 730–766.


                                                         23
Nelson, R. (2010). Testing the fetal origins hypothesis in a developing country: Evidence from the 1918 influenza
  pandemic. Health Economics 19 (10), 1181–1192.

Neumayer, E. and T. Plumper (2007). The gendered nature of natural disasters: The impact of catastrophic events
  on the gender gap in life expectancy. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 97 (3), 551–566.

Noymer, A. and M. Garenne (2000). The 1918 influenza epidemic’s effects on sex differentials in mortality in the
  united states. Population and Development Review 26 (3), 565–581.

Nunn, N. and L. Wantchekon (2011). The slave trade and the origins of mistrust in africa. American Economic
  Review 101 (7), 3221–3252.

Parman, J. (2013). Childhood health and sibling outcomes: The shared burden and benefit of the 1918 influenza
  pandemic. NBER Working Paper No. w19505 .

Percoco, M. (2016). Health shocks and human capital accumulation: The case of the spanish flu in italian regions.
  Regional Studies 50 (9), 1496–1508.

Polozov, I., L. Bezrukov, K. Gawrisch, and J. Zimmerberg (2008). Progressive ordering with decreasing temperature
  of the phospholipids of influenza virus. Nature Chemical Biology 4 (4), 248.

Putterman, L. and D. Weil (2010). Post-1500 population flows and the long-run determinants of economic growth
  and inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (4), 1627–1682.

Richter, A. and P. Robling (2013). Multigenerational effects of the 1918-19 influenza pandemic in sweden. Swedish
  Institute for Social Research 5.

Rocha, R., C. Ferraz, and R. Soares (2017). Human capital persistence and development. American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 81 (1), 51–57.

Sanders, N. and C. Stoecker (2015). Where have all the young men gone? using sex ratios to measure fetal death
  rates. Journal of Health Economics 41, 30–45.

Slutsky, D. and R. Zeckhauser (2018). Sunlight and protection against influenza. National Bureau of Economic
   Research No. w24340 .

Solomou, S. and W. Wu (1999). Weather effects on european agricultural output, 1850-1913. European Review of
  Economic History 3 (3), 351–373.

Tamerius, J., J. Shaman, W. Alonso., K. Bloom-Feshbach, C. Uejio, A. Comrie, and C. Viboud (2013). Environ-
  mental predictors of seasonal influenza epidemics across temperate and tropical climates. PLoS Pathogens 9 (3),
  e1003194.




                                                       24
                Figure 1: A Newspaper Extract in October 1918




Notes: This extract conveys that the government was criticized for its lack of involvement
during the pandemic in 1918. Translated headline: the government’s input of very little value
until now. Source: Biblioteca Nacional.




                                           25
         Figure 2: Headline of the Correio da Manha in October 1918




Notes: This extract conveys that the government needed help from medical experts and stu-
dents at the peak of the Spanish Flu outbreak in October 1918. Translated headline: The
government appeals to doctors, chemists and students to help public health during this period
of emergency. Source: Collections of the Morning Mail in the Brazilian Digital Newspaper
Archive.




                                           26
   Figure 3: Respiratory Death Rates for US Cities and Sao Paulo (State)



             0.012                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.012
                                     Respiratory deaths per thousand people, Sao Paulo state vs. US cities, 1918

             0.010                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.010



             0.008                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.008
                           Avg. for US Cities = 0.58%
                           (5.8 per 1,000)
             0.006                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.006



             0.004                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.004



             0.002                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.002



             0.000                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.000
                                                 Jersey City, NJ
                                   Atlanta, GA
                     SAO PAULO R




                                                                                      Spokane, WA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Washington, DC
                                                                                                    Milwaukee, WI




                                                                                                                                                                                          New Haven, CT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       New York, NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nashville, TN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              New Orleans, LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Philadelphia, PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SAO PAULO R+UNKN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Pittsburgh, PA
                                                                   Grand Rapids, MI



                                                                                                                    Minneapolis, MN
                                                                                                                                      Indianopolis, IN
                                                                                                                                                         Fall River, MA
                                                                                                                                                                          Worcester, MA


                                                                                                                                                                                                          Kansas City, MI


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            San Francisco, CA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Boston, MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Baltimore, MD
Notes: Source for US cities data is Crosby (1989). The green bar on the left shows the
influenza-related death rates proxied by respiratory deaths only while the green bar on the
right includes both deaths caused by respiratory and unknown causes.




                                                                                                                                                                                                 27
      Figure 4: Monthly Deaths for 1917 and 1918 for Sao Paulo (City)




Source: Annual Statistical Reports Vol. 1 (1917, 1918, 1919) for the Sao Paulo (City)




                                           28
Figure 5: Monthly Total Deaths per 100,000 of the Population (January 1917-
December 1919)




  Source: Authors’ calculations from the Annual Statistical Reports Vol. 1 (1917, 1918, 1919)
  for the Municipality Capital (Sao Paulo City)




                                            29
Figure 6: Monthly Neo-Natal and Post-NeoNatal Influenza-Related Mortality Rate
(Deaths per 1000 Live Births for January 1917-December 1919)




  Source: Authors’ calculations from the Annual Statistical Reports Vol. 1 (1917, 1918, 1919)
  for the Municipality Capital (Sao Paulo City)




                                            30
Figure 7: The Spatial Variation in Influenza-Related Deaths per 1000 of the Popu-
lation in Sao Paulo (State), 1917-1920




  Source: Authors’ calculations from the Annual Statistical Reports Vol.1 (1917, 1918, 1919, 1920). The
  data is aggregated up to the municipality level for each year during this period. The 1920 boundaries
  are used to consider the variation.




                                                 31
Figure 8: The Spatial Variation in Respiratory and Unknown Deaths per 1000 of the
Population in Sao Paulo (State), 1918




         Figure 9: Average October’s Rain and Temperature, 1901-1930




                                       32
Figure 10: Binscatter Plots for Respiratory Death Rates and October’s Rain and
Temperature




  Notes: Panel A (top: 1917-1920) and Panel B (Bottom: 1918/1919 only). Regressions condi-
  tion on geographical controls that include altitude, longitude and latitude.




                                           33
             Table 1: Summary Statistics for Dependent Variables


                                                 Mean                      Standard Dev
                                                  (1)                           (2)


Panel A: Variables in 1920
Infant mortality (per live births)                 0.02                          0.03
Still births (per total births)                    0.05                          0.03
Literacy rate (total)                              0.23                          0.08
Literacy rate (male)                               0.28                          0.09
Literacy rate (female)                             0.18                          0.08
Sex ratio at birth (Male babies/Female babies)    1.21                           0.82
Coffee production per capita (tons)                0.31                          0.45
Coffee production per establishment (tons)        14.88                         14.16
Rice production per capita (tons)                 0.29                          0.59
Rice production per establishment (tons)          5.58                          8.06
Maize production per capita (tons)                 1.19                          2.13
Maize production per establishment (tons)         19.67                         12.68
Panel B: Variables in 1940
Share receiving instruction and literate:
Male (age 7-14)                                    0.82                         0.089
Female (age 7-14)                                  0.84                          0.10
Share receiving instruction and literate:
Male (age 5-39)                                    0.82                          0.09
Female (age 5-39)                                  0.85                          0.35
Literacy rate:
Male (10-19 years)                                 0.52                          0.14
Female (10-19 years)                               0.48                          0.15
Male (20-29 years)                                 0.59                          0.13
Female (20-29 years)                               0.41                          0.14
Male (30-39 years)                                 0.58                          0.13
Female (30-39 years)                               0.32                          0.12
Male (Age 5 and above)                             0.49                          0.12
Female (Age 5 and above)                           0.35                          0.12
Inpatient Hospital Admissions (per 1000)           3.79                         15.19
Inpatient Asylum Admissions (per 1000)             6.18                         14.48
Value of primary sector per emp. (cr$1000)       1009.03                       490.85
Value of primary sector per est. (cr$1000)       9470.19                       7815.85
Notes: See Appendix 1 for data description and sources. Authors’ calculations.




                                                   34
  Table 2: Summary Statistics for Control Variables


                                                          Mean     Standard Dev
                                                           (1)          (2)


Panel A: Deaths by Cause (Per 1000)
Respiratory                                                1.74         2.03
Central Nervous System                                     0.74         0.96
Skin-related                                               0.14         0.17
Puerperal Sepsis                                           0.28         0.26
Circulatory system                                         1.37         5.68
Digestive                                                  3.57         4.37
Panel B: Geography
Altitude (in meters)                                      615.56       192.02
Latitude                                                  -22.44        1.09
Longitude                                                 -47.75        1.31
Distance to Capital (in Km)                               236.34       113.60
October’s Temperature (Fahrenheit)                        68.43         3.76
October’s Precipitation (mm)                              124.15        8.39
Panel C: Variables from 1872 Census
Literacy rate                                              0.18         0.09
Share of foreigners                                       0.03          0.03
Share of slaves                                            0.18         0.10
Share of race Branca                                      0.53          0.11
Share of race Parda                                        0.24         0.06
Share of race Preta                                       0.19          0.08
Share emp. in agriculture                                 0.64          0.11
Share emp. in manufacturing                               0.13          0.05
Share with physical/mental diseases                       11.56         6.02
Doctors (per 1000)                                        0.26          0.36
Chemists (per 1000)                                        0.18         0.22
Midwives (per 1000)                                        0.35         0.50
Population density (per sq.Km)                            12.55         8.80
Panel D: Other Controls
Health & sanitation exp. per capita (1910)                199.73       422.09
Dummy for frost intensity (1919)                           0.71          0.45
Railway station dummy (1920)                                0.70         0.46
Water & sewerage system dummy (1920)                       0.20          0.40
No. hospitals&nursing homes (1920)                         1.67          1.03
Taxes out of revenue (%,1920)                              0.34          0.16
Sex ratio of adults (1920)                                 1.12          0.59
Share of foreigners (1920)                                 0.13          0.10
Share of male foreigners (1940)                            0.06          0.04
Share of female foreigners (1940)                          0.06          0.05
Share of exp. on health&education (1940)                   0.61          0.12
Share of education exp. to school supplies (1940)          0.14          0.20
Share of education exp. to payment of teachers (1940)      0.81          0.49
Primary sector exp per est. (cr$1000,1940)                 7.91         13.36
Agriculture exp per est.(cr$1000,1940)                     5.82          7.06
Farming exp per est.(cr$1000,1940)                         7.75          8.19
Livestock exp per est. (cr$1000,1940)                      11.75        12.23
Number of plows per est.(1940)                             1.54          0.63
Share of est. exp on salaries(1940)                        0.70          0.41
Share of est. exp on new machinery(1940)                   0.04          0.03
Share of est. exp on new animals(1940)                     0.08          0.10
Share of est. exp on fertilizers(1940)                     0.10          0.09
Notes: See Appendix 1 for data description and sources.   Authors’ calculations.




                                      35
Table 3: First Stage Regressions: Dependent Variable is Respiratory Deaths (per
1000 of the Population)


                                                         For 1917-1920                          For 1913-1915
                                                (1)           (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)      (6)


           October’s Mean Temperature        -0.245***     -0.246***     -0.252***     -0.320      -0.290    0.0337
                                              (0.056)       (0.056)       (0.056)     (0.361)     (0.464)    (0.338)


           October’s Mean Precipitation       0.032**       0.032**      0.029**       0.167       -0.001     -0.077
                                              (0.013)       (0.013)      (0.013)      (0.128)     (0.109)    (0.0394)


           Region FE                            Yes           Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
           Initial Controls of 1872             No            Yes           Yes          No         Yes        Yes
           Geographical Control                 No            No            Yes          No         No         Yes
           F-Statistic                         10.24         10.24         10.53        1.08       2.69       3.135
           p-value for the F-Stat             [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.000]     [0.342]     [0.070]    [0.045]
           Observations                         939           937           933         414         413        410
           R-squared                           0.442         0.442         0.443       0.736       0.735      0.735


  Notes: The table reports OLS regressions with clustered standard errors. In Column (1), we consider both instruments
  with only municipality fixed effects. In Columns (2) and (3), the controls are added sequentially. These include altitude,
  population density, share of employment in agriculture, manufacturing and in services/retail, the share of people who were
  slaves, the share of white people, the share of foreigners, of literate people, the normalized number of people with a mental
  and physical disease, the number of doctors, chemists and midwives (per 1000 people). p-values for the F-statistics are
  reported for the identifying instruments and are in square brackets. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and *p < 0.10.

Table 4: First Stage Regressions for the Constructed Instrument : Dependent Vari-
able is Respiratory Deaths (per 1000 of the Population)


                                                             (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)


                     IVResp                               0.237***     0.230***      0.223***     0.220***
                                                           (0.043)      (0.051)       (0.049)      (0.069)


                     Region FE                               No            Yes          Yes          Yes
                     Year FE                                 No            Yes          Yes          Yes
                     District-level controls                 No            Yes          Yes          Yes
                     Initial Conditions of 1872              No            No           Yes          Yes
                     Initial Conditions x Year FE            No            No           Yes          Yes
                     1910 Heath and Sanitation Exp.          No            No           No           Yes
                     F-Statistic                            30.22         20.81        21.01        10.20
                     p-value for the F-Statistic           [0.000]       [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]
                     Observations                            853           544          544          353
                     R-squared                              0.053         0.190        0.245        0.367


  Notes: The table reports OLS regressions for the synthetic instrument (representing the interaction between the cross-
  sectional variation in the proportion of deaths caused by influenza in each district in 1915 and the time-series variation
  induced by changes in the aggregate mortality rate). Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the district
  level. We use the variation for the period 1917-1920 only. In column (2), we add the year fixed effects, the district level
  controls: altitude, latitude, longitude, the distance to the capital, a dummy for railway station, the interaction between
  distance and the railway dummy. In column (3), the initial conditions of 1872 include the number of doctors, chemists
  and midwives (all refer to the numbers in the given occupation per 1000 of the population); the normalized number of
  people with a mental and physical disease, the literacy rate and the share of foreigners, and we add the interaction between
  the initial conditions and the year FE. Finally, in column (4), we add the 1910 health and sanitation expenditure, also
  interacted with the years. p-values for the F-statistics are reported for the identifying instruments and are in square
  brackets. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and *p < 0.10



                                                             36
     Table 5: Short-Run Effects on Infant Mortality and Still Births in 1920


                                                                    (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)


             Part A: Dependent Variable: Infant Mortality


             OLS
             Norm. Respiratory Deaths                         0.009***      0.008***   0.001***   0.009***
                                                               (0.000)       (0.000)    (0.001)    (0.001)


             2SLS
             Norm. Respiratory Deaths                         0.017***      0.018***   0.020***   0.019***
                                                               (0.003)       (0.005)    (0.006)    (0.007)


             Region FEs                                             No        Yes         Yes        Yes
             Region-level controls                                  No        No          Yes        Yes
             Initial period controls from 1872                      No        No          No         Yes
             Mean for infant mortality                             23.31     23.31       23.31      23.31
             K-P F-stat (for infant mortality)                     51.33     30.39       28.07      21.14
             p-value for the F-stat (for infant mortality)        [0.000]   [0.000]     [0.000]    [0.001]
             Observations                                           443       443         305        305


             Part B: Dependent Variable: Log Still Births


             OLS
             Norm. Respiratory Deaths                              -0.001    0.028     0.063*     0.061**
                                                                  (0.023)   (0.019)    (0.029)    (0.029)


             2SLS
             Norm. Respiratory Deaths                              0.038     0.199     0.193*     0.214**
                                                                  (0.123)   (0.130)    (0.102)    (0.084)


             Region FEs                                              No       Yes         Yes        Yes
             Region-level controls                                   No        No         Yes        Yes
             Initial period controls from 1872                       No        No          No        Yes
             K-P F-stat (for log still births)                     34.16     20.19       24.36      51.97
             p-value for the F-stat (for log still births)        [0.000]   [0.001]     [0.000]    [0.001]
             Mean for log still births                              3.84      3.84        3.84       3.84
             Observations                                           603       603         399        399


Notes: The table shows the OLS results (Panel A) and 2SLS results (in Panel B with IVResp as instrument). Standard
errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the mesoregion level. We use the variation for the period 1917-1919 to
evaluate the effects on 1920 infant mortality and still biths. In Column (1), we consider the regression without fixed-
effects, controls and the initial controls of 1872. In Column (2), we add the region fixed-effects. In Column (3), the
controls include a dummy for the presence of water and sewerage systems and one for the presence of hospitals, nursing
homes and specialized maternity hospitals; the literacy rates for male and female aged 15 and above, region-level controls
including altitude, latitude, longitude, distance to the capital city, a dummy for the presence of a railway line, and
the interaction between distance and the railway dummy. In Column (4), we add the initial controls of 1872 and they
include the number of doctors, chemists and midwives (all refer to the numbers in the given occupation per 1000 of the
population), the normalized number of people with a mental and physical disease, share of people who were slaves, the
share of employment in agriculture, manufacturing, and in services/retail, population density. The K-P F-stat refers to
the Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic for weak instruments. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and *p < 0.10.




                                                             37
            Table 6: The Short-run Effects on Sex Ratios at Birth in 1920


                                                           Dependent Variable: Sex Ratio At Birth
                                                             (1)        (2)             (3)


                     Panel A: OLS
                     Norm. Respiratory Deaths              -0.054**     -0.048*           -0.044
                                                            (0.023)     (0.023)          (0.026)


                     Panel B: 2SLS
                     Norm. Respiratory Deaths              -0.479**    -0.470***        -0.497***
                                                            (0.221)     (0.143)          (0.173)


                     Region-level controls                   No            No              Yes
                     Initial period controls from 1872       No           Yes              Yes
                     Geographical controls                   No            No              Yes
                     K-P F-stat                             7.98         10.24            19.60
                     p-value for the F-Stat                [0.007]      [0.003]          [0.000]
                     Mean of Dependent Variable             1.22          1.22             1.22
                     Observations                            580          580              576


Notes: The table shows the OLS results (Panel A) and 2SLS results (in Panel B with October’s rain and precipitation
used as instruments). Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the mesoregion level. We use the variation
for the period 1917-1920 to evaluate the effects on 1920 sex ratios. In columns (1) we consider the regressions without
controls and fixed-effects. In columns (2) and (3), we also include region-level controls (altitude, the sex ratio in 1920 for
adults, a dummy for the presence of water and sewerage systems and one for the presence of hospitals, nursing homes
and specialized maternity hospitals), and the initial controls include the normalized number of midwives, the shares of
people of race Branca, Parda, Preta and Cabocla in 1872, the literacy rate. The K-P F-stat refers to the Kleibergen-Paap
F-statistic for weak instruments. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and *p < 0.10.

              Table 7: Literacy Rates by Gender and Age Groups in 1920


                                                         All Ages                       Ages 15 and Above
                                              Male        Female       Total        Male      Female    Total
                                              (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)


       Panel A: OLS
       Norm. Respiratory Deaths             0.010***     0.011***     0.011***     0.012***   0.013***    0.013***
                                             (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.004)     (0.003)


       Panel B: 2SLS
       Norm. Respiratory Deaths               0.021        -0.025      0.001       0.097**     0.009      0.064**
                                             (0.025)      (0.021)     (0.022)      (0.039)    (0.023)     (0.031)


       Region-level controls                   Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
       Initial period controls from 1872       Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
       Geographical Controls                   Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
       K-P F-stat                              4.64        4.64         4.64        4.64        4.64         4.64
       p-value for the F-Stat                [0.032]      [0.032]     [0.032]      [0.032]     [0.032]     [0.032]
       Mean of Dependent Variable             0.281        0.164       0.226        0.418       0.221       0.326
       Observations                            669          669         669          669         669         669


Notes: The table reports the OLS results in Panel A and the 2SLS results in Panel B. The instruments used are October’s
rain and October’s precipitation. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the mesoregion level. We use
observations for the period 1917-1919. The initial controls of 1872 include altitude, the normalized number of people with
a mental and physical disease, the literacy rate, the share of foreigners, the share of workers in agriculture, manufacturing
and services, the share of people who were slaves, the share of people of race “Branca” (white), population density. The
K-P F-stat refers to the Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic for weak instruments. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and *p < 0.10.


                                                           38
                           Table 8: Results for Agricultural Productivity in 1920


                                    Coffee Production Per Capita       Rice Production Per Capita        Maize Production Per Capita
                                                (1)                               (2)                               (3)


 Panel A: OLS
Norm. Respiratory Deaths                         0.003                              -0.014                          0.007
                                                (0.008)                            (0.009)                         (0.025)


 Panel B: 2SLS
Norm. Respiratory Deaths                       -0.067**                           -0.137***                       -0.295***
                                                (0.031)                            (0.043)                         (0.101)


Region FEs                                        Yes                                Yes                             Yes
Region-level controls                             Yes                                Yes                             Yes
Initial period controls from 1872                 Yes                                Yes                             Yes
K-P F-stat                                       22.61                              24.42                           23.59
p-value for the F-Stat                          [0.001]                            [0.001]                         [0.001]
Mean of dependent variable                       0.319                              0.289                           1.200
Observations                                      383                                401                             404


 Notes: The table shows the OLS results (Panel A) and 2SLS results (in Panel B with IVResp as instrument). Standard
 errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the regional level. We use the variation for the period 1917-1919 to evaluate
 the effects on 1920 productivity measures. Region-level controls include the geographical characteristicts (altitude, latitude,
 longitude), distance to capital city, the literacy rates for male and female in 1920, a measure for frost intensity (a dummy
 that takes a value of one if more than three frost periods were reported). The initial controls of 1872 include the share of
 foreigners, share of people who were slaves, the share of employment in agriculture, manufacturing, and in services/retail,
 population density, the share of people of race “Branca”. The K-P F-stat refers to the Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic for
 weak instruments. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and *p < 0.10.

                          Table 9: Literacy Rates by age groups in 1940


                                                             20-29 years old         30-39 years old
                                                             Male     Female          Male    Female
                                                              (1)       (2)            (3)      (4)


                      Panel A: OLS
                      Norm. Respiratory Deaths             0.010**      0.004*        0.002     -0.003
                                                           (0.004)      (0.002)      (0.008)   (0.007)


                      Panel B: 2LS
                      Norm. Respiratory Deaths             0.046**     -0.047***     0.054**    0.023
                                                           (0.022)      (0.017)      (0.021)   (0.025)


                      Region-level Controls                   Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes
                      Initial period controls from 1872       Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes
                      Geographical controls                   Yes         Yes          Yes       Yes
                      K-P F-stat                             12.45       11.20         8.90      6.83
                      p-value for the F-Stat                [0.002]     [0.003]      [0.006]   [0.014]
                      Mean of Dependent Variable             0.588       0.414        0.584     0.322
                      Observations                            506         506          506       506


 Notes: The table reports the OLS results in Panel A and the 2SLS results in Panel B. We use observations for respiratory
 death rates for the years 1917-1920 only. The instruments used are October’s rain and October’s precipitation. Standard
 errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the mesoregion level. The initial controls of 1872 include altitude, the
 normalized number of people with a mental and physical disease, the literacy rate, the share of foreigners, the share of
 workers in agriculture, manufacturing and services, the share of people who were slaves, the share of people of race “Branca”
 (white), population density. We also control for the share of total municipality expenditure allocated to education and


                                                             39
health in 1940; the number of teachers per person aged 10 and plus (teachers/Pop. Aged 10 above)*1000, the share of total
education expenditure allocated to school supplies and also to the payment of teachers in 1940. All regressions include
controls for the share of male and female foreigners in 1940. For the age groups 10-19 and 20-29, we also control for the
literacy rate of adults aged 30 and above. The K-P F-stat refers to the Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic for weak instruments.
***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and *p < 0.10.

 Table 10: Literacy Rates and Instruction, by Age Group and Gender in 1940


                                                Literacy Rate: Age 5 +          Literacy Rate: Age 18 +
                                                 Male        Female              Male         Female
                                                   (1)         (2)                 (3)          (4)


           Panel A: OLS
           Norm. Respiratory Deaths              0.012**        0.015**         0.013**          0.001*
                                                 (0.006)        (0.005)         (0.005)          (0.005)


           Panel B: 2LS
           Norm. Respiratory Deaths             0.081***          0.030         0.067***          0.009
                                                 (0.022)         (0.022)         (0.024)         (0.027)


           Region-level Controls                   Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
           Initial period controls from 1872       Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
           Geographical controls                   Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
           K-P F-stat                              7.77            7.77            7.77            7.77
           p-value for the F-Stat                [0.008]         [0.008]         [0.008]         [0.008]
           Mean of the dependent variable         0.489           0.348           0.521           0.322
           Observations                            674             674             674             674


Notes: The table reports the OLS results in Panel A and the 2SLS results in Panel B. The instruments used are October’s
rain and October’s precipitation. Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the mesoregion level. The
initial controls of 1872 include altitude, the normalized number of people with a mental and physical disease, the literacy
rate, the share of foreigners, the share of workers in agriculture, manufacturing and services, the share of people who were
slaves, the share of people of race “Branca” (white), population density. We also control for the share of total municipality
expenditure allocated to education and health in 1940; the number of teachers per person aged 10 and plus (teachers/Pop.
Aged 10 above)*1000. We use observations for the years 1917-1920 only. The K-P F-stat refers to the Kleibergen-Paap
F-statistic for weak instruments. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and *p < 0.10.




                                                           40
             Table 11: In-Patient Hospital Admissions (per 1000) in 1940


                                                                   Hospital    Asylum
                                                                     (1)         (2)


                                  Panel A: OLS
                                  Norm. Respiratory Deaths           -0.032      -0.090
                                                                    (0.073)     (0.143)


                                  Panel B: 2SLS
                                  Norm. Respiratory Deaths          1.291**      0.064
                                                                    (0.650)     (1.107)


                                  Region FEs                          Yes         Yes
                                  Region-level controls               Yes         Yes
                                  Geographical controls               Yes         Yes
                                  K-P F-stat                         10.37       0.90
                                  p-value for the F-Stat            [0.000]     [0.000]
                                  Mean of Dependent Variable         3.909       5.967
                                  Observations                        287         211


Notes: We use the variation for the period 1917-1920 to evaluate the effects on 1940 Inpatient Hospital Admissions.
Standard errors reported in parentheses are clustered at the micro regional level. The controls include altitude, latitude,
longitude, distance to the capital city, a dummy for the presence of railway. We also control for per capita total expenditure
on health and the share of total health expenditure devoted to hospitals in 1940, and the number of hospital and nursing
homes available. The K-P F-stat refers to the Kleibergen-Paap F-statistic for weak instruments. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05
and *p < 0.10.

   Table 12: Results for Aggregate Measures for the Primary Sector in 1940


                                                        Value per Employee      Value per Establishment
                                                          (1)       (2)          (3)           (4)


                Panel A: OLS
               Norm. Respiratory Deaths                  0.013       -0.037     0.064*          -0.014
                                                        (0.029)     (0.035)     (0.033)        (0.042)


                Panel B: 2SLS
               Norm. Respiratory Deaths                 -0.502*    -0.448***     -0.241       -0.472***
                                                        (0.286)     (0.172)     (0.311)        (0.170)


               Region FEs                                  Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes
               Region-level controls                       No          Yes         No            Yes
               Initial period controls from 1872s          No          Yes         No            Yes
               K-P F-stat                                 6.42        8.70        6.42          8.70
               p-value for the F-Stat                    [0.015]     [0.005]     [0.015]       [0.005]
               Mean of dependent variable (in log)        6.781       6.781       8.839         8.839
               Observations                                736         468         736           468


Notes: The table shows the 2SLS results (with IVResp as instrument). Standard errors reported are clustered at the
microregion level. We use the variation for the period 1917-1920 to evaluate the effects on 1940 agricultural productivity.
In Columns (1) and (3), we consider the regressions the value of yield per employee and per establishment with only
region FE. In Columns (2) and (4), we add the controls including altitude, latitude, longitude, distance to the capital city.
We also control for the 1940 literacy rates for male and female of age 5 and above, and for the 1920 share of foreigners.
Further, we include several other 1940 controls that could affect productivity. These controls include the expenditure per
establishment by agricultural, farming and livestock establishments; the number of plows per establishment, the amount
of expenditure on salaries, acquisition of machinery and of new animals, and on fertilizers per establishment. The initial
controls of 1872 include population density, the shares of employment in agriculture, manufacturing, retail/services, the
share of people of race “Branca”, the share of people who were slaves. The K-P F-stat refers to the Kleibergen-Paap



                                                           41
 F-statistic for weak instruments. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and *p < 0.10.

Table 13: Test of Sample Mean Differences in Literacy Rates for Districts in 1918


                                                       Respiratory Death Rates
                                              Below Median  Above Median
                                              Mean S.Dev Mean S.Dev        Diff.                 p-value
                          Literacy Rates:
                          Brazilian
                          Male                0.257     0.059        0.249    0.007    0.007     0.480
                          Female              0.174     0.060        0.160    0.007    0.014     0.174
                          Total               0.217     0.059        0.206    0.073    0.011     0.290
                          Foreigners
                          Male                0.562     0.153        0.524    0.149    0.038     0.083
                          Female              0.305     0.143        0.271    0.179    0.035     0.155
                          Total               0.461     0.152        0.425    0.155    0.035     0.120



     Table 14: Falsification Test Using 1915 Deaths from Respiratory Infections


                                      1920                     1920                                     1940
                                    Sex Ratios        Literacy Rate: All Ages          Literacy Rate (5+) Literacy Rate (18+)
                                    (At Birth)        Male    Female     Total          Male     Female     Male     Female
                                       (1)            (2)       (3)       (4)            (5)        (6)      (7)       (8)


Panel A: OLS
Norm. Respiratory Deaths              -0.028       0.008        0.009*       0.009*     0.079        0.011     0.010     0.011
                                     (0.050)      (0.005)       (0.005)      (0.004)   (0.008)      (0.008)   (0.008)   (0.006)
Panel B: 2SLS
Norm. Respiratory Deaths              -0.179       0.038         0.041        0.038     0.036        0.020    0.0685    0.0324
                                     (0.440)      (0.043)       (0.045)      (0.043)   (0.035)      (0.028)   (0.044)   (0.027)


Region FEs                             Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes
Region-level controls                  Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes
Initial period controls from 1872      Yes            Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes          Yes       Yes       Yes
K-P F-stat                             3.61           2.15       2.15         2.15      2.52         2.52      2.52      2.52
Mean of the dependent variable         1.22           0.28       0.18         0.23      0.49         0.35      0.52      0.33
Observations                           124            131        131          131       119          119       119       119


 Notes: We use the same controls, fixed-effects and instruments as for the original regressions showing the impact of
 respiratory deaths during the pandemic years on the different outcomes of interest. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and
 *p < 0.10.




                                                                42
 Table 15: Robustness Check for the Baseline Weight of the Constructed Instrument


                                                        1915                                1920                       1940
                                           Still Births           Log Wages          Productivity (coffee)    Value of primary sector
                                     (Per 1000 Live Births)      (Agricultural)      (per establishment)       (per establishment)
                                                (1)                   (2)                    (3)                        (4)


 Baseline Weight (s̄d1915 )                    22.014                   0.728                 1.743                      -0.879
                                              (24.883)                 (1.070)               (22.409)                   (1.360)


 Region FEs                                     Yes                     Yes                    Yes                       Yes
 Region-level controls                          Yes                     Yes                    Yes                       Yes
 Initial period controls from 1872              Yes                     Yes                    Yes                       Yes
 Mean of the dependent variable                44.19                   11.39                  14.71                      8.82
 Observations                                   157                     85                     499                       553


  Notes: We use the same geographical controls and region-level initial controls as for the original regressions showing the
  impact of respiratory deaths during the pandemic years on the different outcomes of interest. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05
  and *p < 0.10.


Table 16: Impact of October’s Temperature and Precipitation on 1920 and 1940
Outcomes


                                                       1920                                           1940
                                     Sex Ratios at birth    Log still births         Hospital Admissions       Literacy Rates
                                                                                                               Male     Female
                                        (1)            (2)       (3)           (4)     (5)              (6)     (7)       (8)


 October’s Mean Temperature           -0.026       -0.041       0.013       0.016     0.030         0.025      0.004       0.002
                                     (0.025)      (0.042)      (0.011)     (0.011)   (0.059)       (0.070)    (0.004)     (0.005)
 October’s Mean Precipitation         0.109        0.002        -0.000      -0.000    0.020        0.019*      0.001       0.000
                                     (0.009)      (0.015)      (0.004)     (0.005)   (0.008)       (0.009)    (0.001)     (0.002)
 Region FEs                            Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes      Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes
 Region-level controls                 Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes      Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes
 Initial period controls from 1872     Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes      Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes
 Observations                          500          105           490         164      379            96        553         553
 R-squared                            0.466        0.571         0.253       0.255    0.530         0.532      0.460       0.447


  Notes: The table shows the OLS regressions for the period 1917-1920 in columns (1), (3), (5) and (7), and for the year 1918
  only in columns (2), (4), (6) and (8). Meso-region fixed effects are used in all regressions. The controls include altitude,
  latitude, longitude, railway dummy, distance to capital, and all the initial period controls from 1872 used previously in
  the analysis. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and *p < 0.10.




                                                               43
                                                 A1        Appendix
In this section, we aim at estimating the effects of the 1918 Influenza Pandemic on specific cohorts using the IPUMS individual-
level data for Sao Paulo for the years 1960, 1970, 1980. In Table A1 and Table A2, we show the cohort regressions for the
following baseline specification used in Almond (2006):

    yic = β0 + β1 I(yob = 1919) + β2 yob + β3 yob2 + i

     where yic denotes the census outcome for individual “i” in year 1960, 1970, and 1980. Our two main outcomes of interest
pertaining to education are (i) whether the individual has completed high school or more, and (ii) whether the individual is
literate. yob denotes the year of birth. We restrict the sample to those born between 1912 to 1922 and characterize the 1919
birth cohort as the one that experienced the greatest exposure to the pandemic (as in Almond (2006)). In other words, those
born in 1919 are the “influenza treatment” group. We report the estimates for men, women, and non-whites, and focus on
β1 -our estimate of interest, which as Almond explains, measures the departure of outcomes for the 1919 birth cohort from
the quadratic cohort trend. While we are able to construct outcomes which closely mirror what Almond used, we are unable
to have similar sets of controls and other outcomes of interest which could be used to lend further strength to the hypothesis
that the 1919 birth cohort was negatively affected in several other ways. Our results in this setting suggest that there are no
effects on high school completion for all groups considered except for men in 1960 (with the effect statistically significant at
the 10% level only) and that there are possible selection effects on literacy rates (which mostly go away by 1980) as evidenced
by the positive coefficients for men and women in 1960 and 1970 in Table A1.

     Before proceeding with our region-level analysis of the effects of the Pandemic, we make a second attempt at using
individual-level data by using Beach et al. (2018) regression analysis. They include individual and parental controls in
addition to the cohort that Almond had, and consider the incidence of the flu at a more disaggregated level (cities).

    DD model: yibc = α0 + βb + γc + Σ1919                                        0
                                     b=1915 δb 1[birthyear = b] × f lu1918,c + ΓX + i

    We provide a simpler version of their model and assign the same aggregate value of influenza-related death rates in 1918
to people in the census for Sao Paulo only. We focus once again only on education and literacy outcomes. We restrict the
sample to those born between 1915 and 1919. The results are presented in Tables A3 and A4.




                                                              44
      Table A1: Regression Results for Literacy Rates, Sao Paulo: 1960, 1970 and 1980


                                   Men                                              Women                             Non-Whites
                     1960          1970               1980             1960         1970           1980            1960        1980


I(yob=1919)        0.025***       0.058***            0.015           0.033**      0.043***        0.015           -0.011        0.018
                    (0.009)        (0.009)           (0.010)          (0.013)       (0.011)       (0.012)         (0.028)       (0.027)


yob                 2.368**       -2.558**            -0.220           0.831         0.115       -5.944***         1.307       -6.103*
                    (0.963)        (1.148)           (1.336)          (1.290)       (1.350)       (1.550)         (2.853)      (3.388)


yob2               -0.001**       0.001**             0.000            -0.000        -0.000      0.002***          -0.000       0.002*
                    (0.000)       (0.000)            (0.000)          (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)         (0.001)       (0.001)


Constant          -2,271.701**   2,450.348**       204.805         -802.201        -113.941     5,691.090***     -1,261.366   5,837.162*
                    (923.417)    (1,100.310)     (1,280.369)      (1,236.735)     (1,293.861)    (1,485.584)    (2,735.046)   (3,248.281)


Observations        28,509         25,874            20,031           27,906        26,675        22,577           5,931        4,699


R-squared            0.001          0.002            0.003             0.002        0.002          0.003           0.004        0.009


 Robust standard errors in parentheses. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and *p < 0.10.

Table A2: Regression Results for Literacy Rates, Sao Paulo: 1960, 1970 and 1980


                                                               Dependent Variable: Literacy Rates
                                                          Men                                  Women
                                            1960            1970       1980       1960           1970              1980
       yob                               0.018***        0.010***      0.005    0.024***      0.019***          0.014***
                                          (0.002)         (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)           (0.003)
       Respiratory Deaths*yob1917          -2.179          -1.842      0.412     -3.043*     -5.463***          -3.932**
                                          (1.495)         (1.549)    (1.901)     (1.754)       (1.787)           (1.965)
       Respiratory Deaths*yob1918       -6.155***        -4.515***    -0.428    -4.977**      -4.260**          -4.968**
                                          (1.674)         (1.744)    (2.127)     (1.946)       (1.974)           (2.200)
       Respiratory Deaths*yob1919       -5.840***          0.922      1.944     -5.016**        -3.541            -3.656
                                          (1.936)         (1.928)    (2.398)     (2.301)       (2.244)           (2.488)
       Constant                        -33.850***       -18.309***    -8.673   -46.142*** -36.583***           -26.138***
                                          (4.445)         (4.523)    (5.720)     (5.032)       (5.105)           (5.818)


       Include controls                       Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes
       Observations                         23,588           22,051      16,161      23,194       22,711        18,252
       R-squared                             0.061           0.085        0.091       0.128        0.147         0.137


 Notes: Controls include indicator for race (white), whether anyone has completed high school in the household, whether
 individual is resident in the city, number of own family members in the household, number of own children in the household,
 number of own children under 5 years in the household, whether married and total income. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and
 *p < 0.10.




                                                                 45
Table A3: Differences in Sample Means for Selected Characteristics for Districts
With Above and Below Influenza-Related Deaths during 1917-1920


                                                       Below Median        Above Median
       Variables                                      Mean   Std Dev      Mean   Std Dev      Difference
       Municipality Expenditure (per capita)
       Cleaning and Waste Disposal                    258.89    611.61    152.40    125.80      106.49     ***
       Maintenance of Sanitary Conditions             110.12    106.07    110.59    124.29       -0.47
       Geographic and Climate
       Altitude (Meters)                              624.13    189.49    602.74    197.22       16.39
       Latitude                                       -22.23     1.05     -22.65     1.09        0.42      ***
       Longitude                                      -47.88     1.17     -47.63     1.39        -0.25     ***
       Distance to Capital                            260.06    108.58    209.41    112.51       50.65     ***
       October’s Temperature                          20.61      1.98     19.91      2.10        0.70      ***
       October’s Precipitation                        124.85     7.54     123.67     9.18         1.18      **
       Demographic
       Overall Median Age                              20.75    2.92       20.62      2.96        0.13
       Population Density                               9.56     6.53      10.62      8.38       -1.06      **
       Dependency Ratio                                88.91    21.23      89.70     21.66       -0.79
       Sex Ratio                                      109.93    6.77      108.66     8.32        1.27       **
       Share of Slaves                                  0.15     0.07       0.15      0.08        0.00
       Literacy Rate                                    0.22     0.11       0.21      0.10        0.02      **
       Economic
       Share of Employment in Agriculture              0.64      0.09      0.65      0.10        -0.00
       Share of Employment in Manufacturing            0.13      0.04      0.13      0.04         0.01      **
       Share of Employment in Services                 0.22      0.09      0.22      0.09        -0.11
       Health
       Physical or mental disease                     11.07      5.19      10.80     5.50        0.28
       Doctors                                        0.22       0.28      0.18      0.24        0.03       *
       Chemists                                       0.18       0.17       0.17     0.17        0.02
       Midwives                                       0.27       0.33       0.25     0.35        0.02


  Notes: This table shows the summary statistics and sample means differences for selected initial characteristics. The
  municipality expenditure per capita is for 1910, the geographic and climate variables are contemporary (1917-1920)
  and all other initial conditions are drawn from the 1872 census. The influenza-related deaths include deaths caused by
  respiratory and unknown causes. The median death rate is 8.11. ***p < 0.01 , **p < 0.05 and *p < 0.10.




                                                         46
