                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON GENDER EQUALITY

                                            Titan Alon
                                         Matthias Doepke
                                      Jane Olmstead-Rumsey
                                          Michèle Tertilt

                                       Working Paper 26947
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26947


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2020




This is a preliminary version of an evolving project—feedback highly appreciated. We thank
Fabrizio Zilibotti for early discussions that helped shape some of the ideas in this paper. Financial
support from the German Science Foundation (through CRC-TR-224 (project A3) and the
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz-Prize) and the National Science Foundation (grant SES-1949228) is
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Titan Alon, Matthias Doepke, Jane Olmstead-Rumsey, and Michèle Tertilt. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Impact of COVID-19 on Gender Equality
Titan Alon, Matthias Doepke, Jane Olmstead-Rumsey, and Michèle Tertilt
NBER Working Paper No. 26947
April 2020
JEL No. D10,E24,J16,J22

                                         ABSTRACT

The economic downturn caused by the current COVID-19 outbreak has substantial implications
for gender equality, both during the downturn and the subsequent recovery. Compared to
“regular” recessions, which affect men’s employment more severely than women’s employment,
the employment drop related to social distancing measures has a large impact on sectors with
high female employment shares. In addition, closures of schools and daycare centers have
massively increased child care needs, which has a particularly large impact on working mothers.
The effects of the crisis on working mothers are likely to be persistent, due to high returns to
experience in the labor market. Beyond the immediate crisis, there are opposing forces which
may ultimately promote gender equality in the labor market. First, businesses are rapidly adopting
flexible work arrangements, which are likely to persist. Second, there are also many fathers who
now have to take primary responsibility for child care, which may erode social norms that
currently lead to a lopsided distribution of the division of labor in house work and child care.


Titan Alon                                      Jane Olmstead-Rumsey
University of California San Diego              Northwestern University
Department of Economics, ECON 229               Department of Economics
9500 Gilman Dr. #0508                           2211 Campus Drive
Mail Code 0508                                  Evanston, IL 60208
La Jolla, CA 92093                              United States
titanalon@gmail.com                             janeolmsteadrumsey2015@u.northwestern.edu

Matthias Doepke                                 Michèle Tertilt
Northwestern University                         Department of Economics
Department of Economics                         University of Mannheim
2211 Campus Drive                               L7, 3-5
Evanston, IL 60208                              68131 Mannheim
and NBER                                        Germany
doepke@northwestern.edu                         tertilt@uni-mannheim.de
1       Introduction
It has by now become clear that the COVID-19 pandemic is not only a global
health emergency, but is also leading to a major global economic downturn. In
this paper, we provide some first results on how this economic downturn is going
to affect women and men differently, and what the main long-run repercussions
for gender equality may be.

We start by providing evidence that the effects of the current crisis on women ver-
sus men are likely to be sharply distinct from those of other economic downturns.
In recent recessions such as the one in 2008, job losses for men were much higher
than for women. One reason is that relatively more men work in industries heav-
ily affected by a “standard” downturn (such as manufacturing and construction),
while women’s employment is concentrated in less cyclical sectors such as health
care and education. In contrast, the current crisis has a big impact on service oc-
cupations with high female employment shares, such as restaurants and hospi-
tality.

An even more important channel for differential impacts on women and men is
that in the course of the pandemic, most US states along with other countries
have decided to close schools and daycare facilities. Worldwide more than 1.5
billion children are out of school right now.1 This has dramatically increased the
need for childcare. In addition, grandparent-provided childcare is now discour-
aged due to the higher mortality rate for the elderly, and given social distanc-
ing measures, sharing childcare with neighbors and friends is very limited also.
Thus, most families have no choice but to watch their kids themselves. Based on
the existing distribution of child care duties in most families, mothers are likely
to be more affected than fathers. Single mothers, of which there are many in the
United States, and who are often in a disadvantaged economic position to begin
with, will take the biggest hit.

Taken together, these factors suggest that the COVID-19 pandemic will have a
disproportionate negative effect on women and their employment opportuni-
ties.2 The effects of this shock are likely to outlast the actual epidemic. A sizeable
    1
        Estimated by UNESCO, as of March 25, 2020.
    2
        In terms of mortality from the disease itself, it appears men are slightly more at risk than

                                                   1
literature documents that earnings losses from job losses are highly persistent
(Stevens 1997) and much more severe when they occur in recessions (Davis and
von Wachter 2011). Workers who lose jobs now forgo returns to experience and
are likely to have less secure employment in the future (Jarosch 2015). The con-
sequences are not just limited to those who lose jobs, but also those who were
about to enter the labor market for the first time.3

Despite this gloomy outlook, we also believe that the COVID-19 crisis can bring
about some changes that have the potential to reduce gender inequality in the
labor market in the long term. We start by noting that today, a large part of
gender inequality in the labor market is related to an unequal division of labor in
the household. Even though the labor force participation of women is now close
to or equal to that of men in most industrialized countries, women continue to
provide a disproportionate share of housework (such as cooking and cleaning)
and childcare. A recent literature in labor economics has documented that the
gender pay gap is closely related to (expected and actual) child birth.4 From this
perspective, long-run progress towards more gender equality is likely to stem
primarily from changes in social norms and expectations that lead towards a
more equal division of labor within the home.

We can identify at least two channels through which the COVID-19 pandemic
is likely to accelerate changing social norms and expectations. One is on the
side of employers. Many businesses are now becoming much more aware of
the childcare needs of their employees and respond by rapidly adopting more
flexible work schedules and telecommuting options. Through learning by doing
and changing norms, some of these changes are likely to prove persistent. As a
result, in many places mothers and fathers alike will gain flexibility in meeting
the combined demands of having a career and running a family. Since currently
women are more exposed to these competing demands, they stand to benefit
disproportionately.
women (China Center for Disease Control 2020). If current efforts to contain the spread of the
epidemic are successful, however, many more people will be affected by the economic repercus-
sions of the pandemic rather than the disease itself.
   3
     See, for example, Altonji, Kahn, and Speer (2016), Oreopoulos, von Wachter, and Heisz (2012),
and Schwandt and von Wachter (2019).
   4
     See, for example, Kleven, Landais, and Søgaard (2019), Kleven et al. (2019), and Gallen (2018).


                                                 2
A second channel runs through social norms and role models in individual fam-
ilies. While in many cases mothers will pick up a large share of the additional
childcare (and home schooling) during the crisis, there will also be a sizeable
fraction of families where role models will be reversed. Many medical doctors
are women, as are most nurses. Other critical businesses that will continue op-
erating during the crisis include grocery stores and pharmacies, both of which
feature high female employment shares. A sizeable fraction of women working
in such areas are married to men who will either lose employment during the cri-
sis or will be able to work from home (e.g., many office workers). In such families,
many men will inevitably turn into the main providers of child care. The litera-
ture on policy changes that engineer a similar change (e.g., “daddy months” and
other forms of paternity leave) suggest that such a reallocation of duties within
the household is likely to have persistent effects on gender roles and the division
of labor.5

In this paper, we combine insights from the existing literature with data on the
distribution of women, men, and couples across occupations as well as time-use
data on the division of labor in the household to shed more lights on the channels
through which the COVID-19 pandemic affects gender inequality. Even though
we identify at least some channels that could ultimately have beneficial effects,
we emphasize that the short-run challenges posed by the crisis are severe, and
especially so for single mothers and other families with a lack of ability to com-
bine work with caring for children at home. We conclude by discussing policy
options that could be used to deal with these specific challenges.


2       The Effect of COVID-19 on Employment
The social distancing measures and stay-at-home orders imposed in many US
states and other countries during the COVID-19 crisis are having a large impact
on employment, leading to a sharp rise in unemployment and other workers
being given reduced hours or temporarily furloughed. In this section, we discuss
    5
   See for example Farré and González (2019) for evidence from Spain and for evidence from
Tamm (2019) for Germany that paternity leave leads a persistent increase in fathers’ involve-
ment in childcare. However, Ekberg, Eriksson, and Friebel (2013) do not find an effect of “daddy
months” in Sweden in father’s likelihood to take medical leave to care for children.


                                               3
how the impact of this contraction in employment on female versus male workers
differs from previous economic downturns.

2.1    Gender Differences in Usual Downturns

In economic downturns preceding the current crisis, including the large reces-
sion of 2008–2009, the employment of male workers was usually affected more
strongly than the employment of female workers. Doepke and Tertilt (2016) sum-
marize evidence on how employment varies over the business cycle for women
and for men. Table 1 (adapted from Doepke and Tertilt (2016)) shows that women’s
aggregate labor supply is less volatile overall compared to men (here total volatil-
ity is measured as the percentage standard deviation of the Hodrick-Prescott
residual of average labor supply per person). For cyclical volatility, i.e., the com-
ponent of overall volatility that is correlated with aggregate economic fluctua-
tions, the gap between women and men is even larger. For the period 1989–2014,
men account for more than three quarters of overall cyclical fluctuations in em-
ployment, and women for less than one quarter.6

Figure 2.1 (also from Doepke and Tertilt (2016)) provides a graphical illustration
of these results by displaying the cyclical component of hours worked for dif-
ferent groups from 1962 to 2014. It is apparent that male hours are much more
volatile than that of women, with married women having the lowest volatility in
hours worked.

The existing literature points out multiple reasons for why female employment
usually varies less over the cycle. One reason is insurance in the family—women’s
employment may be less affected by downturns precisely because some married
women increase their labor supply to compensate for unemployment or higher
unemployment risk of their husbands.7 One indication for the role of this chan-
nel is that in Table 1 and Figure 2.1, the cyclical volatility of labor supply is much
lower for married women (to whom the family insurance channel applies) com-
pared to women who are single. Still, within-family insurance is not the only
   6
     The role of women in aggregate fluctuations has changed substantially over time due to rising
female labor force participation; see, e.g., Albanesi (2020) and Fukui, Nakamura, and Steinsson
(2019).
   7
     See Ellieroth (2019) for a study documenting the quantitative importance of this mechanism.

                                                4
 Table 1: Volatility of Hours Worked in the USA, by Gender and Marital Status
                                        All                        Married                    Single
                            Total    Women         Men         Women        Men         Women          Men
                                                             1962–2014
  Total Volatility           1.25         1.04      1.46           1.04      1.25            1.33      2.33
  Cyclical Volatility        0.99         0.72      1.18           0.67      1.01            0.74      1.68
  Hours Share                            38.09    61.91           23.90     47.71           14.19    14.20
  Volatility Share                       27.22    72.78           16.20     48.98           10.64    24.17
                                                             1962–1988
  Total Volatility           1.35         1.19      1.48           1.26      1.36            1.37      2.44
  Cyclical Volatility        1.08         0.87      1.19           0.87      1.09            0.79      1.65
  Hours Share                            33.71    66.29           21.99     55.29           11.72    11.00
  Volatility Share                       27.14    72.86           18.02     56.29            8.67    17.02
                                                             1989–2014
  Total Volatility           1.15         0.87      1.47           0.79      1.16            1.30      2.25
  Cyclical Volatility        0.91         0.51      1.23           0.38      0.95            0.70      1.82
  Hours Share                            42.64    57.36           25.89     39.83           16.75    17.53
  Volatility Share                       23.68    76.32           10.80     41.51           12.88    34.81
Note: All data from Current Population Survey, March and Annual Social and Economic Supplements,
1962 to 2014. Total volatility is the percentage standard deviation of the Hodrick-Prescott residual of
average labor supply per person in each group. Cyclical volatility is the percentage deviation of the predicted
value of a regression of the HP-residual on the HP-residual of GDP per capita. Hours share is share of each
component in total hours. Volatility share is share of each group in the cyclical volatility of total hours.




                                                      5
      Figure 1: Cyclical Component of Hours by Gender and Marital Status



                                                    .05
             log_hrs cyclical component from hp filter
            −.05                 0




                                                          1960         1980                     2000            2015
                                                                              Survey year

                                                                 Males unmarried            Females unmarried
                                                                 Males married              Females married



Note: data on average weekly work hours for United States (Cyclical component is deviation from Hodrick-
Prescott trend, smoothing parameter 6.25. Source: Current Population Survey, March and Annual Social
and Economic Supplements, 1962 to 2014.


channel. We can see this, for example, by noting that there is also a large volatil-
ity gap between single women and single men.

A second important channel is the different sectoral composition of female and
male employment. In typical recessions, sectors such as manufacturing and resi-
dential construction are much more severely affected compared to, say, education
and health care. Men’s employment is on average more concentrated in sectors
with a high cyclical exposure, whereas women are highly represented in sectors
with relatively stable employment over the cycle. These facts are documented
in a recent paper by Coskun and Dalgic (2020). For example, they find that in
two sectors, “Government” and “Education and Health Services,” employment
is actually countercyclical. These two sectors account for 40 percent of women’s
employment, but only 20 percent of men’s employment. Conversely, the highly
cyclical sectors of “Manufacturing,” “Construction,” and “Trade, Transportation,
Utilities” account for 46 percent of male but only 24 percent of female employ-

                                                                               6
ment.

These two channels are not exhaustive, and neither are they independent—for
example, some women may choose to work in a countercyclical sector to com-
pensate for their husbands’ cyclical employment risk. But the bottom line is clear:
past downturns have affected men’s employment much more severely than that
of women.

2.2   Gender Differences Based on Sectors Most Affected by COVID-19

We now turn to what is different about the current downturn during the COVID-
19 pandemic. A principal difference is which sectors of the economy are likely to
be most affected. Two factors are especially important:

  1. Whether demand for the sector’s output is affected by stay-at-home orders
     (e.g., no impact on sectors deemed “critical,” such as pharmacies and gro-
     cery stores; large negative effect on sectors such as travel and hospitality).

  2. Whether the nature of the work in the sector allows for telecommuting or
     not (e.g., larger impact on manufacturing vs. higher education and business
     services).

To assess how women and men in the labor market are exposed to the crisis,
Table 2 provides an overview of how the dimensions of “critical” and “telecom-
mutable” matter for male and female workers. Using data from the American
Time Use Survey (ATUS) in 2017 and 2018, the table gives the fraction of workers
in a given occupation that say that they are able to telecommute and whether
they actually do telecommute. Occupations vary immensely by whether people
say they are able to telecommute—ranging from 3% for transportation and material
moving to 78% for computer and mathematical. The effective actual time that peo-
ple do telecommute in normal times is small, however, as the third column in the
table shows. For the current situation, however, the ability is a lot more relevant
than past behavior.

To get a sense of what fraction of men and women work in telecommutable jobs,
consider occupations where at least 50 percent of workers state they are able to

                                        7
   Table 2: Labor Force Across “Critical” and “Telecommutable” Occupations.
Occupation                                       Able to TC   Effective Annual TC   Employed Men   Employed Women   Critical Occupation

Transportation and Material Moving                  3%                  1               10%             2%                  X
Food Preparation and Serving                        4%                  2               4%              6%
Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance       4%                  4               4%              3%
Production                                          4%                  4               8%              3%
Healthcare Support                                  8%                13                1%              4%                  X
Construction                                        10%                 4               8%              0%
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry                      11%                 1               1%              0%                  X
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair               11%               10                6%              0%                  X
Extraction                                          13%                 1               0%              0%
Personal Care and Service                           13%               21                2%              6%
Protective Service                                  14%                 4               3%              1%                  X
Healthcare Practitioners and Technicians            16%               17                3%              10%                 X
Technicians                                         18%                 3               0%              0%
Office and Administrative Support                   26%               24                7%              19%
Sales and Related                                   33%               35                10%             10%
Education, Training, and Library                    37%               36                3%              10%
Community and Social Services                       46%               46                1%              2%
Life, physical, and social science                  54%               24                1%              1%
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media      57%               45                2%              2%
Management,business, science, and arts              63%               44                13%             9%
Legal                                               64%               35                1%              1%
Business operations specialists                     66%               60                2%              3%
Architecture and engineering                        67%               36                3%              1%
Financial specialists                               68%               37                2%              3%
Computer and Mathematical                           78%               66                4%              2%

Note: The table reports the share of individuals in each occupation reporting they were able to work from
home (column 1); the effective total days a year they actually did work from home (column 2); the share of
all employed men and women in each occupation (column 3-4); and whether the occupation seems critical
during the COVID-19 crisis. See the Appendix for an expanded set of results. Data Source: American
Time Use Survey 2017-2018; American Community Survey 2017-2018.




                                                                    8
telecommute. We find that that 28 percent of male workers but only 22 percent of
female workers are employed in these highly telecommutable occupations. These
numbers suggests that in terms of their occupations, more men than women will
easily adapt to the changed work environment during the crisis. Conversely,
more women will potentially face loss of employment, which is the opposite of
the pattern in normal economic downturns.

The picture is less clear if we use a lower threshold for telecommutable jobs. For
example, consider occupations where at least 25 percent of workers state that
they are able to telecommute. 49 percent of male employees but a full 63 percent
of female workers work in these occupations. Thus, if all workers in these occu-
pations could carry on during the crisis, women would have the advantage. In
reality, in each occupation only a fraction of jobs will be able to continue remotely,
and this fraction is likely to correlate with the fraction of workers who stated in
the pre-crisis survey that they have the ability to telecommute. In some occupa-
tions such as Office and Administrative Support and Education, Training, and Library,
many workers will now be able to work from home, while in others, such as Sales
and Related, include many sales jobs that cannot be done remotely (e.g. consider
a cashier at a department store).

We also classified occupations by whether they are critical in the current situa-
tion, especially health care workers. According to this (rough) classification, 17
percent of employed women work in critical occupations, compared to 24 per-
cent of all employed men. Hence, this second channel suggests once again that,
unlike in usual economic downturns, women will be less protected from employ-
ment loss during the downturn. It is possible that this classification overstates
women’s exposure. The true share for women in critical occupations is likely
higher once grocery store clerks are taken into account.8 The true share of men,
on the other hand, may be somewhat smaller since we classified men working in
“transportation and material moving” as critical. Clearly, some transportation is
needed to provide basic necessities such as food, and employment in food and
online business delivery is rising. But public transportation is being scaled back
   8
    To check this, a finer occupation classification is needed since the occupational category
“Sales and Related” also includes many retail sector workers and other sales personnel who can-
not work during the crisis.


                                              9
in many places.

The bottom line is that based on ability to telecommute and working in criti-
cal occupations, we do not observe the pattern of usual recessions that women
are more protected than men from employment loss. In fact, there are indica-
tions that women’s employment will suffer more during the crisis based on these
two factors. Even if the exposure of women and men in terms of their current
occupations should turn out to be about the same, this would still be a big devia-
tion from other recessions, where the employment consequences fell much more
heavily on men.

In addition to exposure to job loss based on occupation, people’s ability to con-
tinue working is also affected by the increase in child care needs during the crisis.
Here, without question, women’s exposure is much higher than that of men. We
turn to this factor in the next section.


3       The Effect of COVID-19 on Child Care Needs
In the previous section, we focused on the impact of COVID-19 on different oc-
cupations, and hence ultimately on the labor demand for different occupations.
Another salient aspect of the COVID-19 crisis is that it involves large-scale clo-
sures of daycare centers and schools, implying that children stay at home, where
they have to be cared for and (if possible) educated. This poses particularly se-
vere challenges for single parents. For parents who raise their children together,
the division of childcare will depend on how much work flexibility each parent
has in terms of working from home while also taking care of children. It will
likely also depend on the current division of childcare within each family. In this
section we characterize the family arrangements and work flexibility of parents
in US households as well as the current division of labor on childcare among
married couples.9
    9
   In the future we also plan to assess the extent to which different family types can access paid
family leave to perform childcare.




                                               10
3.1    Household Arrangements and Single Mothers’ Exposure to School and
       Daycare Closures

Types of family arrangements will play a large role in the current crisis for two
reasons. First, as in usual recessions, job loss will be less severe financially if there
is a second earner in the family. Second, the school closures are a large shock to
all families with children, and even more so if there is only one parent in the
household who has to deal with the sudden spike in child care needs.

To assess how many families are affected, Tables 3 and 4 summarize the distribu-
tion of living arrangements prior to the crisis. There are almost 130 million house-
holds in the United States. Slightly less than half are married couples (with and
without children), 17 percent are single-parent households (i.e., “Family, Female
Householder” and “Family, Male Householder”) and 35 percent are non-family
households, which are mostly singles living by themselves. There are around 15
million single mothers, accounting for just under 70 percent of all single parent
households.10

                     Table 3: Households by Type in United States

                  Total # of Households                      128,579     100%
                  Married Couples                              61,959     48%
                  Family, Male Householder                      6,480       5%
                  Family, Female Householder                   15,043     12%
                  Non-family, Male Householder                 21,582     17%
                  Non-family, Female Householder               23,515     18%
                 Note: Thousands in 2019. Source: US Census Bureau, Table HH-1.


Therefore, like in normal recessions, about half of all households have some pos-
sibility to insure job loss through spousal income—either because there is already
a second earner in the household, or because the spouse could enter the labor
force. What is very different from past recessions is the sudden spike in childcare
  10
     Note that the data in Table 3 for the “Family” categories includes families with children of
all ages, including those over 18 years old, as long as children live in the same household as the
parent.


                                               11
needs caused by the school and daycare closures. This will affect all households
with school-age children or below. Single parents (17 percent of all households)
will be particularly hard hit, and as Table 3 shows, there are more than 8.5 million
more single mothers than single fathers in the United States today.


         Table 4: Living Arrangements of Children in the United States

                     Total children under 18         73,525    100%
                     Two parents                     51,561      70%
                     Mother only                     15,764      21%
                     Father only                      3,234       4%
                     Other relatives                  2,319       3%
                     Non-relatives                      647       1%
               Note: Thousands in 2019. Source: US Census Bureau, Table ch1.


To get a clearer picture of the importance of school closures, note that there are
currently 73.5 million children under 18 in the United States (see Table 4). Of
these, 70 percent live in two-parent families, while most of the others live in
single-parent households. 21 percent of all children live only with their mother,
compared to 4 percent living with their father only. Thus, the current crisis will
affect mothers very disproportionately. If all schools in the US are closed for a
prolonged period, so that single mothers cannot work, then 21 percent of all chil-
dren are at risk of living in poverty. In normal times, many alternative forms of
childcare arrangements are used. However, many daycare centers have been or-
dered closed. Informal care performed by grandparents, other relatives, friends,
or neighbors is being discouraged or prevented by shelter-in-place orders to slow
down the spread of the virus. There is little room for alternative arrangements in
the COVID-19 crisis.

3.2   Childcare Provision Within Married Couples

Among married couples, who is likely to bear the majority of increased childcare
needs due to school and daycare closures? The answer to this question depends
on at least three things. First, the the current work arrangements within married

                                            12
couples (both members of the couple working versus just one member working)
will play a large role. Second, the division of the increased childcare needs will
also likely mirror existing disparities between men and women in hours spent
on childcare. Third, among dual-earner couples, the ability to telecommute and
whether one or both members of the couple work in critical sectors will also play
a role in determining how couples adjust to the increased need to spend time on
childcare. We explore each of these issues in turn in the remainder of this section.

Table 5 summarizes the distribution of family types across work arrangements
in the American Community Survey for married couples with children. Dual
full-time earner couples account for 44 percent of all couples with children. This
group is heavily affected by the rise in child care needs. Families with the tradi-
tional division of labor of the husband having a full-time job and the wife staying
at home will have to make far fewer adjustments to respond to the school clo-
sures. However, as the table shows, today this group accounts for only 25 percent
of married couples with children. Only 5 percent of couples are in the opposite
arrangement of the husband staying at home and the wife working full time, un-
derlining once again that more women than men will be strongly affected by the
rise in child care needs.

       Table 5: Distribution of couples with children by employment status

      Married Couples                                                  Wives

                                                    Not Employed        Part-Time      Full-Time
                               Not Employed               4%                1%             5%
          Husbands             Part-Time                  1%                1%             2%
                               Full-Time                  25%              15%            44%

Note: The table reports the share of couples by employment and full-time, part-time status of each spouse.
Not Employed includes unemployed individuals and those not in the labor force. Source: American Com-
munity Survey, 2017-2018.


The division of the increased burden of childcare between women and men will
depend not just on labor force status (which Table 5 summarizes), but also on
the existing division of labor. Even among couples who both work, one spouse

                                                   13
often provides the majority of child care. It is likely that any increase in child care
needs will fall disproportionately on this main provider.

Survey data from the ATUS shows that married women provide more childcare
than married men on average. Among all married couples with children, the
husbands provide 7.4 hours of child care per week on average, versus 13.3 hours
for the wives.11 Households with young children have higher childcare needs,
but the male vs. female ratio is almost the same: conditional on children up to
the age of 5, married men provide 10.9 hours of childcare, versus 19.8 hours per
week for married women. Of course, some of this gap arises because there are
more stay-at-home moms than stay-at-home dads. But even if we condition on
both spouses being employed full time, a large gap remains. Among the full
time employed, married men provide 7.2 hours of child care per week versus
10.3 hours for married women. Conditional on having at least one child up to
the age of 5, the numbers are 10.6 hours for married men versus 16.8 hours for
married women. Thus, married women provide close to 60 percent of child care
even among couples who work full time, and an even higher share if they have
young children, when childcare needs are the highest.12 Similarly, if attention
is restricted to the division of childcare hours performed during typical work-
ing hours for children of all ages (8AM-6PM, Monday through Friday), women
provide an even larger fraction, around 70 percent, of childcare during working
hours (Schoonbroodt 2018).

It appears likely that much of this uneven distribution of the burden of childcare
will persist during the current crisis; the factors that initially led to this arrange-
ments (which could include relative income, relative bargaining power, and the
influence of traditional social norms and role models, see Schoonbroodt 2018)
will continue to apply, and “retraining” one spouse on short notice may not be
practical. If we assume that the relative distribution of the burden stays at 60-40
and childcare needs rise by 20 hours/week during the crisis, full-time working
women would need to increase their childcare hours by 12 hours vs. 8 for men.
  11
    These numbers are based on time use data for the 16–65 population.
  12
    The observation that women provide the majority of childcare even if both spouses are work-
ing holds true across industrialized countries. However, the size of the gap between women’s and
men’s contributions varies substantially (Doepke and Kindermann 2019).


                                              14
In the absence of flexible work arrangements, another likely outcome is that one
spouse will temporarily have to quit work, which based on the existing division
of labor would again be much more likely to be the wife.

3.3   Employment Flexibility for Men vs. Women

In addition to the existing division of the burden of childcare, the impact of the
crisis will also depend on the relative flexibility of men’s and women’s work ar-
rangements, in particular the ability to telecommute. Table 6 shows that among
all individuals with kids, married women spent the most time telecommuting
in 2017 and 2018, averaging 41 days per year. Married men are best-equipped
to telecommute (45% are able to) but spend fewer days actually telecommuting
than married women. Single parents, both women and men, are much less able
to telecommute, driving home our earlier point that school closures will be ex-
tremely difficult for single parents, most of whom are women, to navigate while
continuing to work.

  Table 6: Telecommuting, for those with children by marital status and gender

                       Can Telecommute            Did Telecommute            Days Telecommute

 single men                     17%                        14%                          15
 single women                   21%                        18%                          19
 married men                    45%                        39%                          30
 married women                  42%                        38%                          41
Note: Table reports those who said they are able to telecommute (column 1); those that were able and did
telecommute (column 2); and the approximate days per year telecommuting, for those which were able.
Source: American Time Use Survey, 2017-2018.

When examining the reported reasons that parents telecommuted, married women
were the group most likely to report staying at home for personal reasons, which
would include managing childcare (Table 7). To summarize, this evidence shows
that women and men’s ability to telecommute is similar, but women have been
more likely to actually telecommute, in particular to deal with “personal” issues
such as child care, which once again underlines the uneven existing distribution
of labor in the household.

                                                  15
Table 7: Reason Working from Home, for those with children by marital status.

                            single men      single women        married men        married women

 catch-up work                  14%               23%                20%                  23%
 required                       11%               12%                13%                  14%
 coordinate personal            21%               26%                25%                  30%
 reduce commute                 14%                4%                 8%                  9%
 preference                     19%               15%                19%                  13%
 weather                        4%                 4%                 2%                  1%
 other                          1%                 1%                 2%                  1%
Note: The table reports the reasons given for working from home (for those who ever did work from home).
Source: American Time Use Survey, 2017-2018


In summary, the evidence suggests that women will be vastly more affected by
the rise in childcare needs that follows from closures of schools and daycare cen-
ters during the crisis. The 15 million single mothers in the United States will
be the most severely affected, with little potential for accessing other sources of
childcare under social isolation orders, and little possibility to continue working
during the crisis. Supporting these women and their children during the crisis is
among the most immediate and important policy challenges.

Even among couples raising their children together, there are clear indications
that women will be much more affected by rising childcare requirements. There
are already many more married women than men who are stay-at-home parents
and who are likely to pick up most of the increase in the workload. And among
the many couples with children who both work full time (44 percent of the total),
the women provide about 60 percent of childcare hours. In times of high child-
care needs (i.e. when children are young), the women’s share is even higher. It
is likely that much of this division of labor will persist. For some working mar-
ried women, this will mean that they will temporarily drop out of the labor force.
Others will continue to work from home—including, for example, mothers on
the tenure track at an academic institution—but they will be more impaired in
their ability to actually get work done compared to married men in the same sit-

                                                  16
uation. While these women are in a more favorable situation compared to single
mothers, they may still face severe setbacks in terms of career progression and
their future earnings potential.


4    The Effect of COVID-19 on Workplace Flexibility and Gender
     Norms
The discussion so far shows that the COVID-19 shock is likely to place a dispro-
portionate burden on women. Unlike regular recessions, the COVID-19 down-
turn is likely to reduce employment in sectors where women make up a large
fraction of the workforce. Perhaps even more importantly, women will be af-
fected by the increase in child care needs that stems from closings of schools and
daycare centers. This impact is the most severe for single mothers, who outnum-
ber single fathers by a large margin. In families where both parents are present,
mothers usually did the majority of child care before the crisis. If the relative
division of labor in the family persists during the crisis, this suggests that there
will be a disproportionate impact on women even for these families.

Nevertheless, there are also counteracting forces that may promote gender equal-
ity during the recovery from the current crisis. We believe that two channels are
likely to be important:

    1. More flexible work arrangements: Many businesses are currently adopt-
       ing work-from-home and telecommuting options at a wide scale for the first
       time. It is likely that some of these changes persist, leading to more work-
       place flexibility in the future. Given that mothers currently carry a dispro-
       portionate burden in combining work and child care duties, they stand to
       benefit relatively more than men from these changes. Goldin (2010) points
       to lack of flexibility in work arrangements and hours, particularly in finan-
       cial and business services, as one of the last sources of the gender pay gap.

    2. Changes in social norms and role models: Many fathers will now also
       shoulder additional child care and home-schooling responsibilities. In a
       sizeable number of families, fathers will temporarily turn into primary child


                                         17
      care providers. These changes are likely to push social norms towards more
      equality in the provision of child care and house work.

4.1   The Role of Workplace Flexibility

Consider, first, the role of more flexible work arrangements. If there is a persis-
tent increase in the ability to work from home for women and men alike, how will
the division of labor in the household change? We can get a sense of the potential
impact by comparing the time spent on child care between parents who can work
from home and those who cannot. Table 8 provides evidence on this by compar-
ing the average weekly childcare hours of husbands and wives conditional on the
occupation type of each spouse. Occupations are split into “Critical" (same clas-
sification as Table 2), “Tele", non-critical occupations where at least 50% of ATUS
respondents reported being able to telecommute, and “Non-Tele", non-critical oc-
cupations where fewer than 50% reported being able to telecommute. First of all,
we observe that husbands who don’t work and are married to women who do
carry the majority of childcare duties in their households (first three rows of the
last panel). They do a lot less childcare than women in the same situation (rows
4, 8, 12)—social norms still matter—but still, the result shows that availability for
child care has a large impact on the actual distribution.

More importantly, we observe a similar effect when we look at the impact of
telecommuting. Consider couples where the wife is not able to telecommute and
is either in the “Non-Tele” or “Critical” groups. In this case, if the husband is in
an occupation with a high ability to telecommute, weekly childcare hours of the
husband are about two hours higher per week compared to husbands in “Non-
Tele” occupations (6 vs. 4 hours, i.e. a 50 percent difference). Notice that being in
such an occupation does not imply that most of these men actually telecommute
on a regular basis. Nevertheless, the added flexibility of these jobs is reflected
in a much higher participation of men in childcare, as long as their wives do not
have the same flexibility.

Right now, many businesses are adopting work-from-home options on a large
scale. It is likely that a sizeable fraction of this additional flexibility will stay in
place after the actual crisis. Once businesses have invested in remote-working

                                          18
                     Table 8: Childcare by Family Occupational Group
          Family Group             Husbands Childcare      Wives Childcare    Husbands High Childcare
          (husband, wife)              (weekly hours)        (weekly hours)         (percent of group)

      (Non-Tele, Non-Tele)                   4                     7                      17%
         (Non-Tele, Tele)                    6                     8                      20%
       (Non-Tele, Critical)                  4                     7                      20%
   (Non-Tele, Not Employed)                  6                    12                      26%
         (Tele, Non-Tele)                    6                     8                      21%
            (Tele, Tele)                     6                     7                      23%
          (Tele, Critical)                   6                     5                      24%
      (Tele, Not Employed)                   6                    12                      24%
       (Critical, Non-Tele)                  3                     5                      12%
          (Critical, Tele)                   6                     7                      18%
        (Critical, Critical)                 5                     8                      18%
    (Critical, Not Employed)                 4                    17                      14%
   (Not Employed, Non-Tele)                  8                     6                      25%
      (Not Employed, Tele)                   9                     6                      27%
    (Not Employed, Critical)                 9                     4                      21%
 (Not Employed, Not Employed)                4                    11                      13%
Note: The table reports the average childcare hours per week by spouse for each family occupation group for
all married couples. Groups are reported in column one as (husband, wife) pairs. The final column ("High
Husband Childcare") reports the share of husbands in this family group which provide childcare hours in
excess of the average married woman in the economy. TC classifications by 50% cutoff, see Table 2. Source:
American Time Use Survey 2017-2018; American Community Survey 2017-2018.




                                                   19
technology and the learning-by-doing that is involved in the transition has taken
place, going back all the way to the status quo is not attractive. As a result, many
workers will benefit from added flexibility in combining career and child care
needs. This change will be a benefit to both mothers and fathers, but given that
currently mothers carry the majority of the burden of child care, in relative terms
they are likely to gain more, both because of added flexibility in their own work
and because of more contributions from their husbands.

4.2    Existing Evidence on Persistent Changes to Gender Norms

One central force behind the uneven division of the burden of childcare between
women and men is persistent social norms. Is there a possibility that the COVID-
19 shock will push these norms towards more gender equality? To assess this
possibility, we can draw a parallel between the COVID-19 crisis and the last
major shock to women in the labor market, namely World War II. During the
war, millions of women entered the labor force to replace men in factories and
other workplaces. The impact of the war shock was particularly large for mar-
ried women with children, who in the pre-war economy had very low labor force
participation rates. A large literature documents that the shock of World War II
had a large and persistent effect on female employment.13

While some of this impact was at the individual level (i.e., women who entered
the labor force during the war increased their employment also after the war),
another component works through shifting cultural norms. Fernández, Fogli,
and Olivetti (2004) show that boys who grow up in a family where the mother is
working are later on more likely to be married to women who also work (they
use the World-War-II shock to identify the size of this effect). This observation is
suggestive of an impact on social norms: these boys observed a more equal shar-
ing of duties at home and in the labor market between their parents compared to
single-earner families, which had repercussions for which they desired in their
own families.14 There is also evidence that shifting social norms and beliefs were
  13
     See for example Acemoglu, Autor, and Lyle (2004) and Goldin and Olivetti (2013). Doepke,
Hazan, and Maoz (2015) argue that the persistent impact of World War II on the female labor
market was also one of the root causes of the post-war baby boom.
  14
     See Grosjean and Khattar (2018) for evidence of persistence in gender norms over even longer
periods.

                                               20
one cause of the secular rise in the labor force participation of married women
from the 1960s to the 1990s. Fernández (2013) and Fogli and Veldkamp (2011) ar-
gue that women gradually learned, by observing other working women in their
family and neighborhoods, about the true costs and benefits of being in the work-
ing force (including potential effects of working on children). As more women
worked, there were observations to learn from, which accelerated the transition
to higher levels of female labor force participation.

4.3   Fathers’ Childcare Responsibilities During the COVID-19 Crisis and the
      Evolution of Gender Norms

The example of World War II suggests that temporary changes to the division
of labor between the sexes have long-run effects. How is this likely to play out
during the COVID-19 crisis? Here an important question is how much fathers’
child care responsibilities will increase. Many fathers will be working from home
during the crisis while also taking on child care responsibilities. The mere fact of
being at home rather than at a workplace is likely to increase men’s child care
responsibilities. This effect is likely to be large during the crisis, because given
that schools and daycare centers are closed, the overall need for child care is
much higher. Hence, even if (as is likely) on average women will shoulder the
majority of the increase, many fathers will still experience a large increase in their
child care hours. It is likely that this higher exposure will have at least some
persistent effect on future contributions to child care, be it through learning by
doing, more information about what kids are actually doing all day, or through
increased attachment to children.
We would expect even bigger effects within families where the COVID-19 crisis
also results in a shift in the relative distribution of childcare hours towards men.
One group for which this is likely to be the case is families where the mother is
already staying at home, but the father previously worked out of the house and
is now either working at home or not employed. We expect the biggest impact
on the division of labor among couples where, because of the COVID-19 crisis,
fathers temporarily turn into the main provider of child care. We expect this to be
the case for couples where both parents are currently in the labor force, and where
the father is able/forced to work from home during the crisis, while the mother is

                                         21
not. For example, this would be the case if the mother is in a “critical” occupation
(such as a medical doctor or other healthcare professional who can’t work from
home), whereas the father is in an occupation that switches to telecommuting
during the crisis (such as education and a lot of non-critical office work).

Table 9 provides an impression of the magnitudes involved. The table describes
the distribution of couples among employment vs. non-employment for each
spouse, where employment is further broken down in critical occupations and,
among the non-critical ones, occupations with a low and high ability to telecom-
mute. Consider the bottom panel, which displays this data for married couples
with children. During a stay-at-home order with only critical occupations ex-
empt, we expect all non-critical workers to be at home. In nine percent of house-
holds, the wife is in a critical occupation (such as medical doctor) while the hus-
band is not. In these households, we expect the husbands to temporarily turn
into the main providers of childcare. While this group is obviously a minority, it
still consists of millions of households, suggesting that during the height of the
crisis seeing men as the main providers of child care will be much more common
than previously.

We can also consider what happens if workplaces resume but schools remain
closed. In this case, we would expect most workers with the ability to telecom-
mute to continue working from home. We see that in 12 percent of married cou-
ples with children the husband is in an occupation with a high ability to telecom-
mute, while the wife is not (“Non-Tele” or “Critical”). Hence, in this scenario the
number of men turning into main providers of child care is even higher.

We therefore see that the crisis is likely to generate a large, if temporary, upward
shift in men’s participation in child care, with a sizeable fraction of married men
taking the main responsibility, in most cases for the first time. Based on the per-
sistent effects of other shocks to the household distribution of labor in the past,
we expect this shift to lead to a substantial increase in men’s future participation
in child care.

In assessing these effects, it bears emphasizing that the changes imposed on
households by the current crisis are very large. The existing literature on the
effects of paternity leave (i.e., parental leave reserved exclusively for fathers)

                                        22
                   Table 9: Distribution of Couples by Family Group
 All Couples            Wife Non-Tele       Wife Tele      Wife Crit     Wife Non-Emp          Total

 Husb Non-Tele                16%               5%            4%                10%            36%
 Husb Tele                     9%               7%            3%                7%             27%
 Husb Critical                 8%               2%            3%                6%             19%
 Husb Non-Emp                  5%               2%            2%                11%            19%

 Total                        38%               17%           12%               34%            100%

 No Children            Wife Non-Tele       Wife Tele      Wife Crit     Wife Non-Emp          Total

 Husb Non-Tele                15%               5%            4%                7%             32%
 Husb Tele                     9%               7%            3%                6%             25%
 Husb Critical                 7%               2%            3%                4%             17%
 Husb Non-Emp                  6%               2%            2%                17%            26%

 Total                        37%               18%           11%               34%            100%

 With Children          Wife Non-Tele       Wife Tele      Wife Crit     Wife Non-Emp          Total

 Husb Non-Tele                17%               5%            5%                11%            38%
 Husb Tele                     9%               7%            3%                8%             28%
 Husb Critical                 8%               2%            4%                6%             21%
 Husb Non-Emp                  4%               1%            1%                7%             13%

 Total                        38%               16%           13%               33%            100%
Note: The table reports the share of couples by husband-wife occupation types. Telecommuting classi-
fications are made according to the TC 50% cut-off. Source: American Time Use Survey 2017-2018;
American Community Survey 2017-2018.




                                                23
finds effect for relatively small changes; for example, Farré and González (2019)
provide evidence that the introduction of just two weeks of paternity leave for
fathers in Spain had persistent effects on the division of labor within couples.
During the current crisis, many millions of men are on a form of forced paternity
leave for a much longer period, and a sizeable fraction will be the main providers
of childcare during this time. Hence, even while women carry a higher burden
during the crisis, it is still highly likely that we will observe a sizeable impact of
this forced experiment on social norms, and ultimately on gender equality, in the
near future.


5    Outlook and Policy Options
We conclude with thoughts on policy options. Although in the last section we
pointed out channels that may ultimately lead to a reduction in gender inequal-
ity, we should keep in mind that the challenges for families during the current
crisis are unprecedented, severe, and falling disproportionately on those least
able to respond, such as low-income single mothers. There are a number of pol-
icy options available that governments could use to address specific challenges
families are likely to face during the coming crisis. Examples of policies that
might be considered to address these challenges include:

    1. Government subsidies to replace pay for workers who need to provide
       child care during the crisis due to school and daycare closures and are there-
       fore unable to work, conditional on a continued employment relationship
       (i.e., workers can return to work immediately after the crisis).

    2. Suspending work requirements for government assistance programs such
       as Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) and Medicaid until
       school and daycare centers re-open.

    3. Removing the requirement to be actively seeking work to be eligible for
       unemployment insurance over the same period.

    4. Extending unemployment benefits to workers voluntarily separating from
       employment to provide child care.

                                         24
This is not a comprehensive list, and each policy involves tradeoffs with factors
such as budgetary impact and work incentives. However, the policies provide
examples of how some of the specific challenges posed by the COVID-19 cri-
sis could be addressed. Indeed, some countries such as Germany and Denmark
have already adopted measures that allow workers to remain on their employers’
payroll during the crisis despite working zero or reduced hours. In the United
States, an additional factor relevant for the evaluation of measures that protect
employment is that health insurance is often employment based. Hence, protect-
ing employment would have an additional effect of preserving health insurance.

The COVID-19 also raises policy questions for employers. Many universities are
already extending tenure clocks for all junior faculty as a response to the COVID-
19 epidemic. But recent evidence from Antecol, Bedard, and Stearns (2018) sug-
gests that gender blind tenure clock extensions for parents actually reduce female
tenure rates and increase male tenure rates, likely because of differences in time
spent on childcare. Given the unavailability of other forms of childcare, during
the crisis the gap between the ability of junior faculty with and without children
to get research done will be extremely large. While faculty without children may
still suffer from stress during this period, their time available to work is likely
to actually increase, given that time use for other activities, such as socializing
with others, declines during social isolation.15 Extending the tenure clock indis-
criminately for all current junior faculty, as a number of universities have already
implemented, would not address this disparity, which hits women stronger than
men. Similar mechanisms are at work in corporate settings where bonuses are
tied to hours worked: mothers will likely find it harder to meet these targets
because of childcare provision during the crisis while most men will not, exacer-
bating the gender wage gap.

Finally, there will be other consequences of the current crisis that will fall dis-
proportionately on women that are outside the scope of this paper that we leave
to future research. In normal recessions, incidents of domestic violence increase
(Siflinger, Tertilt, and van den Berg 2012). With families cooped up inside, these
risks will further increase and women are much more likely than men to be the
  15
       Aguiar et al. (2018) report that young men spend about eight hours per week socializing.


                                                 25
victims of domestic violence. Further, some states are restricting access to abor-
tions during the crisis, and the impact of the pandemic on fertility more broadly
remains to be seen. We plan to expand our analysis to some of these dimensions
in future research.


References
 Acemoglu, Daron, David H. Autor, and David Lyle. 2004. “Women, War, and
    Wages: The Effect of Female Labor Supply on the Wage Structure at Midcen-
    tury.” Journal of Political Economy 112 (3): 497–551.
 Aguiar, Mark, Mark Bils, Kerwin Kofi Charles, and Erik Hurst. 2018. “Leisure
   Luxuries and the Labor Supply of Young Men.” Unpublished Manuscript,
   University of Chicago.
 Albanesi, Stefania. 2020. “Changing Business Cycles: The Role of Women’s
    Employment.” NBER Working Paper 25655.
 Altonji, Joseph G., Lisa B. Kahn, and Jamin D. Speer. 2016. “Cashier or Consul-
    tant? Entry Labor Market Conditions, Field of Study, and Career Success.”
    Journal of Labor Economics 34 (S1): S361–S401.
 Antecol, Heather, Kelly Bedard, and Jenna Stearns. 2018. “Equal but inequitable:
   Who benefits from gender-neutral tenure clock stopping policies?” American
   Economic Review 108 (9): 2420–2441.
 China Center for Disease Control. 2020. “Vital Surveillances: The Epidemio-
    logical Characteristics of an Outbreak of 2019 Novel Coronavirus Diseases
    (COVID-19).” China CDC Weekly 2:113–122.
 Coskun, Sena, and Husnu Dalgic. 2020. “The Emergence of Procyclical Fer-
    tility: The Role of Gender Differences in Employment Risk.” CRC TR 224
    Discussion Paper Series No. 142.
 Davis, Steven J., and Till von Wachter. 2011. “Recessions and the costs of job
   loss.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2:1–72.
 Doepke, Matthias, Moshe Hazan, and Yishay D. Maoz. 2015. “The Baby Boom
   and World War II: A Macroeconomic Analysis.” Review of Economic Studies
   82 (3): 1031–1073.

                                       26
Doepke, Matthias, and Fabian Kindermann. 2019. “Bargaining over Babies:
  Theory, Evidence, and Policy Implications.” American Economic Review 109
  (9): 3264–3306.
Doepke, Matthias, and Michèle Tertilt. 2016. “Families in Macroeconomics.”
  Chapter 23 of Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 2. North Holland.
Ekberg, John, Rickard Eriksson, and Guido Friebel. 2013. “Parental leave: A
   policy evaluation of the Swedish “Daddy-Month” reform.” Journal of Public
   Economics 97:131 – 143.
Ellieroth, Kathrin. 2019. “Spousal Insurance, Precautionary Labor Supply, and
    the Business Cycle.” Unpublished Manuscript, Indiana University.
Farré, Lídia, and Libertad González. 2019. “Does Paternity Leave Reduce Fer-
   tility?” Journal of Public Economics 172:52–66.
Fernández, Raquel. 2013. “Cultural Change as Learning: The Evolution of
   Female Labor Force Participation over a Century.” American Economic Review
   103 (1): 472–500.
Fernández, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti. 2004. “Mothers and
   Sons: Preference Formation and Female Labor Force Dynamics.” Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 119 (4): 1249–99.
Fogli, Alessandra, and Laura Veldkamp. 2011. “Nature or Nurture? Learning
   and the Geography of Female Labor Force Participation.” Econometrica 79
   (4): 1103–38.
Fukui, Masao, Emi Nakamura, and Jón Steinsson. 2019. “Women, Wealth Ef-
   fects, and Slow Recoveries.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Berke-
   ley.
Gallen, Yana. 2018. “Motherhood and the Gender Productivity Gap.” Unpub-
   lished Manuscript, University of Chicago.
Goldin, Claudia. 2010. “How to achieve gender equality.” The Milken Institute
   Review, pp. 24–33.
Goldin, Claudia, and Claudia Olivetti. 2013. “Shocking Labor Supply: A Re-
   assessment of the Role of World War II on Women’s Labor Supply.” American
   Economic Review 103 (3): 257–62.

                                    27
Grosjean, Pauline, and Rose Khattar. 2018. “It’s Raining Men! Hallelujah?
   The Long-Run Consequences of Male-Biased Sex Ratios.” Review of Economic
   Studies 86 (2): 723–754.
Jarosch, Gregor. 2015. “Searching for Job Security and the Consequences of Job
   Loss.” Unpublished Manuscript, Princeton University.
Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, Johanna Posch, Andreas Steinhauer, and Josef
   Zweimüller. 2019. “Child Penalties across Countries: Evidence and Expla-
   nations.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 109:122–26.
Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Jakob Egholt Søgaard. 2019. “Children
   and Gender Inequality: Evidence from Denmark.” American Economic Jour-
   nal: Applied Economics 11 (4): 181–209.
Oreopoulos, Philip, Till von Wachter, and Andrew Heisz. 2012. “The Short- and
   Long-Term Career Effects of Graduating in a Recession.” American Economic
   Journal: Applied Economics 4 (1): 1–29.
Schoonbroodt, Alice. 2018. “Parental Child Care During and Outside of Typical
   Work Hours.” Review of the Economics of the Household 16:453–476.
Schwandt, Hannes, and Till von Wachter. 2019. “Unlucky Cohorts: Estimating
   the Long-Term Effects of Entering the Labor Market in a Recession in Large
   Cross-Sectional Data Sets.” Journal of Labor Economics 37 (S1): S161–S198.
Siflinger, Bettina, Michele Tertilt, and Gerard van den Berg. 2012. “Domestic
    Violence over the Business Cycle.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of
    Mannheim.
Stevens, Ann Huff. 1997. “Persistent effects of job displacement: The impor-
   tance of multiple job losses.” Journal of Labor Economics 15 (1): 165–188.
Tamm, Marcus. 2019. “Fathers’ parental leave-taking, childcare involvement
   and labor market participation.” Labour Economics 59:184–197.




                                     28
                             Table 10: Occupational Telecommuting and Distribution of Employed Workers by Type
                                                                                                               Single Women   Single Women    Married Women   Married Women
     Occupation                                       Able to TC   Effective Annual TC   All Men   All Women                                                                  Critical Occupation
                                                                                                               No Children    With Children    No Children    With Children

     Transportation and Material Moving                  3%                1              10%         2%           2%              3%              2%              2%                 X
     Food Preparation and Serving                        4%                2               4%         6%           9%              7%              3%              3%
     Building and Grounds Cleaning and Maintenance       4%                4               4%         3%           3%              5%              2%              3%
     Production                                          4%                4               8%         3%           3%              5%              3%              3%
     Healthcare Support                                  8%                13              1%         4%           4%              6%              3%              3%                 X
     Construction                                        10%               4               8%         0%           0%              0%              0%              0%
     Farming, Fishing, and Forestry                      11%               1               1%         0%           0%              0%              0%              0%                 X
     Installation, Maintenance, and Repair               11%               10              6%         0%           0%              0%              0%              0%                 X
     Extraction                                          13%               1               0%         0%           0%              0%              0%              0%
     Personal Care and Service                           13%               21              2%         6%           7%              7%              5%              5%
     Protective Service                                  14%               4               3%         1%           1%              1%              1%              1%                 X
     Healthcare Practitioners and Technicians            16%               17              3%        10%           8%              9%             11%             13%                 X
     Technicians                                         18%               3               0%         0%           0%              0%              0%              0%




29
     Office and Administrative Support                   26%               24              7%        19%           19%            20%             22%             18%
     Sales and Related                                   33%               35             10%        10%           13%            10%              9%              8%
     Education, Training, and Library                    37%               36              3%        10%           8%              7%             10%             13%
     Community and Social Services                       46%               46              1%         2%           2%              2%              3%              3%
     Life, physical, and social science                  54%               24              1%         1%           1%              0%              1%              1%
     Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports, and Media      57%               45              2%         2%           3%              1%              2%              2%
     Management,business, science, and arts              63%               44             13%         9%           8%              8%             11%             11%
     Legal                                               64%               35              1%         1%           1%              1%              1%              1%
     Business operations specialists                     66%               60              2%         3%           3%              3%              4%              3%
     Architecture and engineering                        67%               36              3%         1%           1%              0%              1%              1%
     Financial specialists                               68%               37              2%         3%           2%              2%              3%              3%
     Computer and Mathematical                           78%               66              4%         2%           2%              1%              2%              2%

     Note: Column (1) reports the share of all workers in the occupation who said they were able to telecommute to work if they wanted to. For those who
     reported being able to telecommute, Column (2) reports the annualized number days they actually did telecommute to work. Column (3)-(7) report
     the share of all employed women, also conditional on marital status and children, who are in each occupational category. The final column identifies
     critical occupations during the COVID-19 crisis. Soure: Ameriacan Time Use Survey 2017-2018; American Community Survey 2017-2018.
Table 11: Frequency Working from Home, by gender, marital status, and children

 All Couples                      single men      single women       married men       married women

 5+ per week                           7%               7%                 6%                 11%
 3-4 per week                          5%               5%                 4%                  7%
 1-2 per week                          7%               10%                7%                 10%
 At least 1 per week                   6%               6%                 6%                  6%
 Once every 2 weeks                    9%               6%                 7%                  6%
 Once a month                          6%               7%                10%                  5%
 Less than once a month                8%               8%                11%                  9%

 No Children                      single men      single women       married men       married women

 5+ per week                           7%               6%                 4%                 11%
 3-4 per week                          4%               5%                 7%                  8%
 1-2 per week                          8%               11%                6%                 10%
 At least 1 per week                   5%               6%                 7%                  3%
 Once every 2 weeks                    9%               6%                 6%                  7%
 Once a month                          7%               7%                 7%                  5%
 Less than once a month                9%               9%                 9%                  8%

 With Children                    single men      single women       married men       married women

 5+ per week                           7%               10%                7%                  9%
 3-4 per week                          5%               8%                 4%                  6%
 1-2 per week                          3%               8%                 8%                 10%
 At least 1 per week                  11%               5%                 5%                  7%
 Once every 2 weeks                    1%               5%                 7%                  6%
 Once a month                          1%               8%                10%                  6%
 Less than once a month                3%               5%                12%                 10%
Note: The table reports the frequency of working from home (for those able to work from home) by gender,
marital status, and children. Source: American Time Use Survey, 2017-2018.



                                                  30
                                         Table 12: Family Member Characteristics by Family Group
     Family Group                                           Husbands                                                                     Wives

         (Husband, Wife)     Share BA   Age    Income     Hours Worked   Own Children   Own Child < 5   Share BA   Age   Income     Hours Worked   Own Children   Own Child < 5

     (Non-Tele , Non-Tele)     7%       44    $ 40,740        42             1.3             0.2          9%       42    $ 24,022       35             1.3             0.2
     (Non-Tele , Tele)         13%      45    $ 51,906        43             1.1             0.2          39%      43    $ 43,458       38             1.1             0.2
     (Non-Tele , Crit)         11%      44    $ 48,893        42             1.2             0.2          34%      42    $ 42,492       37             1.2             0.2
     (Non-Tele , Non-Emp)      7%       45    $ 48,784        43             1.5             0.4          12%      43    $ 5,593         5             1.5             0.4
     (Tele , Non-Tele)         45%      45    $ 73,531        44             1.1             0.2          28%      43    $ 26,739       33             1.1             0.2
     (Tele , Tele)             68%      45    $ 97,625        45             1.0             0.2          71%      44    $ 61,786       39             1.0             0.2
     (Tele , Crit)             64%      44    $ 87,432        44             1.2             0.3          71%      42    $ 63,173       37             1.2             0.3




31
     (Tele , Non-Emp)          64%      47    $ 128,949       45             1.4             0.3          51%      45    $ 8,227         5             1.4             0.3
     (Crit , Non-Tele)         12%      45    $ 49,638        44             1.2             0.2          11%      43    $ 23,232       35             1.2             0.2
     (Crit , Tele)             26%      45    $ 68,685        45             1.1             0.2          47%      43    $ 45,970       38             1.1             0.2
     (Crit , Crit)             34%      44    $ 76,418        45             1.2             0.3          50%      42    $ 55,167       38             1.2             0.3
     (Crit , Non-Emp)          23%      46    $ 76,600        46             1.4             0.4          23%      44    $ 6,276         5             1.4             0.4
     (Non-Emp , Non-Tele)      10%      50    $ 18,353        10             1.0             0.1          9%       48    $ 25,296       35             1.0             0.1
     (Non-Emp , Tele)          30%      52    $ 27,530        11             0.8             0.1          47%      49    $ 59,588       39             0.8             0.1
     (Non-Emp , Crit)          25%      50    $ 23,468        10             0.9             0.2          44%      47    $ 57,757       39             0.9             0.2
     (Non-Emp , Non-Emp)       25%      55    $ 36,679         8             0.7             0.1          24%      53    $ 15,201        4             0.7             0.1
     Note: The table reports various characteristics of husbands and wives which are members of each of the major occupational groups we study. TC
     cutoff at 50%. Source: American Time Use Survey 2017-2018; American Community Survey, 2017-2018.
                                         Table 13: Family Member Characteristics by Family Group
     Family Group                                           Husbands                                                                     Wives

         (Husband, Wife)     Share BA   Age    Income     Hours Worked   Own Children   Own Child < 5   Share BA   Age   Income     Hours Worked   Own Children   Own Child < 5

     (Non-Tele , Non-Tele)     28%      45    $ 56,406        43             1.1             0.2          36%      43    $ 35,955       37             1.1             0.2
     (Non-Tele , Tele)         44%      45    $ 70,005        43             1.0             0.2          66%      43    $ 68,675       41             1.0             0.2
     (Non-Tele , Crit)         29%      44    $ 56,542        43             1.2             0.3          47%      42    $ 49,502       37             1.2             0.3
     (Non-Tele , Non-Emp)      23%      46    $ 65,224        43             1.5             0.4          22%      44    $ 6,485         5             1.5             0.4
     (Tele , Non-Tele)         66%      46    $ 101,251       45             1.1             0.2          61%      44    $ 43,862       36             1.1             0.2
     (Tele , Tele)             79%      45    $ 118,996       45             1.0             0.2          83%      43    $ 85,849       41             1.0             0.2
     (Tele , Crit)             72%      44    $ 101,111       45             1.2             0.3          76%      42    $ 66,159       37             1.2             0.3




32
     (Tele , Non-Emp)          72%      47    $ 147,243       46             1.4             0.3          57%      45    $ 8,362         5             1.4             0.3
     (Crit , Non-Tele)         20%      45    $ 60,479        44             1.2             0.2          31%      43    $ 33,622       37             1.2             0.2
     (Crit , Tele)             34%      45    $ 77,602        45             1.1             0.2          63%      43    $ 64,584       40             1.1             0.2
     (Crit , Crit)             34%      44    $ 76,418        45             1.2             0.3          50%      42    $ 55,167       38             1.2             0.3
     (Crit , Non-Emp)          23%      46    $ 76,600        46             1.4             0.4          23%      44    $ 6,276         5             1.4             0.4
     (Non-Emp , Non-Tele)      20%      51    $ 24,082        10             0.9             0.1          28%      49    $ 37,426       37             0.9             0.1
     (Non-Emp , Tele)          41%      51    $ 28,942        11             0.8             0.1          65%      49    $ 89,019       42             0.8             0.1
     (Non-Emp , Crit)          25%      50    $ 23,468        10             0.9             0.2          44%      47    $ 57,757       39             0.9             0.2
     (Non-Emp , Non-Emp)       25%      55    $ 36,679         8             0.7             0.1          24%      53    $ 15,201        4             0.7             0.1
     Note: The table reports various characteristics of husbands and wives which are members of each of the major occupational groups we study. TC
     cutoff at 25%. Source: American Time Use Survey 2017-2018; American Community Survey, 2017-2018.
                    Table 14: Childcare by Family Occupational Group
          Family Group             Husbands Childcare     Wives Childcare    Husbands High Childcare
         (husband , wife)              (weekly hours)       (weekly hours)        (percent of group)

      (Non-Tele , Non-Tele)                  4                    7                     14%
         (Non-Tele , Tele)                   4                    6                     13%
       (Non-Tele , Critical)                 5                    5                     23%
   (Non-Tele , Not Employed)                 5                   11                     20%
         (Tele , Non-Tele)                   7                   10                     17%
           (Tele , Tele)                     5                    7                     22%
          (Tele , Critical)                  5                    7                     22%
      (Tele , Not Employed)                  7                   13                     27%
       (Critical , Non-Tele)                 1                    3                      4%
          (Critical , Tele)                  4                    6                     17%
        (Critical , Critical)                5                    8                     18%
    (Critical , Not Employed)                4                   17                     14%
   (Not Employed , Non-Tele)                 9                    6                     26%
      (Not Employed , Tele)                  8                    6                     26%
    (Not Employed , Critical)                9                    4                     21%
 (Not Employed , Not Employed)               4                   11                     13%
Note: The table reports the average childcare hours per week by spouse for each family occupation group.
Groups are reported in column one as (husband, wife) pairs. The final column ("High Husband Childcare")
reports the share of husbands in this family group which provide childcare hours in excess of the average
married woman in the economy. TC classifications by 25% cutoff. Source: American Time Use Survey
2017-2018; American Community Survey 2017-2018.




                                                   33
                  Table 15: Distribution of Couples by Family Group

 All Couples            Wife Non-Tele       Wife Tele      Wife Crit     Wife Non-Emp          Total

 Husb Non-Tele                 4%               8%            2%                6%             20%
 Husb Tele                     3%               24%           5%                11%            42%
 Husb Crit                     2%               8%            3%                6%             19%
 Husb Non-Emp                  1%               5%            2%                11%            19%

 Total                        10%               44%           12%               34%            100%

 No Children            Wife Non-Tele       Wife Tele      Wife Crit     Wife Non-Emp          Total

 Husb Non-Tele                 3%               8%            2%                4%             17%
 Husb Tele                     3%               24%           4%                9%             40%
 Husb Crit                     2%               7%            3%                4%             17%
 Husb Non-Emp                  2%               6%            2%                17%            26%

 Total                         9%               45%           11%               34%            100%

 With Children          Wife Non-Tele       Wife Tele      Wife Crit     Wife Non-Emp          Total

 Husb Non-Tele                 4%               8%            3%                7%             22%
 Husb Tele                     3%               23%           5%                13%            44%
 Husb Crit                     2%               8%            4%                6%             21%
 Husb Non-Emp                  1%               4%            1%                7%             13%

 Total                        10%               44%           13%               33%            100%
Note: The table reports the share of couples by husband-wife occupation types. Telecommuting classi-
fications are made according to the TC 25% cut-off. Source: American Time Use Survey, 2017-2018;
American Community Survey, 2017-2018.




                                                34
                Table 16: Distribution of Couples by employment status

       All Couples                                                    Wives

                                                  Not Employed         Part-Time      Full-Time
                              Not Employed               6%                2%             6%
          Husbands            Part-Time                  2%                1%             3%
                              Full-Time                 22%               13%            45%

       No Children                                                    Wives

                                                  Not Employed         Part-Time      Full-Time
                              Not Employed               9%                2%             8%
          Husbands            Part-Time                  2%                2%             4%
                              Full-Time                 17%               10%            46%

       With Children                                                  Wives

                                                  Not Employed         Part-Time      Full-Time
                              Not Employed               4%                1%             5%
          Husbands            Part-Time                  1%                1%             2%
                              Full-Time                 25%               15%            44%

Note: The table reports the share of couples by employment and full-time, part-time status of each spouse.
Source: American Community Survey, 2017-2018.




                                                   35
         Table 17: Telecommuting by Gender, Marital Status, and Children

 All Individuals         Can Telecommute           Did Telecommute           Days Telecommute

 single men                       24%                       19%                         17
 single women                     27%                       23%                         21
 married men                      42%                       37%                         29
 married women                    39%                       34%                         38

 No Children

 single men                       26%                       21%                         17
 single women                     30%                       26%                         23
 married men                      37%                       32%                         25
 married women                    33%                       28%                         33

 With Children

 single men                       17%                       14%                         15
 single women                     21%                       18%                         19
 married men                      45%                       39%                         30
 married women                    42%                       38%                         41
Note: Table reports those who said they are able to telecommute (column 1); those that were able and did
telecommute (column 2); and the approximate days per year telecommuting, for those which were able.
Source: American Time Use Survey, 2017-2018.




                                                  36
 Table 18: Reasons Working for Home, by Gender, Marital Status, and Children

 All Individuals           single men     single women       married men       married women

 catch-up work                16%               20%               20%                23%
 required                     14%               12%               13%                14%
 coordinate personal          14%               20%               22%                25%
 reduce commute                9%               6%                 9%                 8%
 preference                   22%               21%               19%                16%
 weather                       3%               5%                 2%                 2%
 other                         2%               1%                 2%                 1%

 No Children               single men     single women       married men       married women

 catch-up work                17%               19%               21%                24%
 required                     14%               12%               14%                14%
 coordinate personal          13%               17%               14%                13%
 reduce commute                8%               8%                11%                 8%
 preference                   23%               24%               21%                22%
 weather                       2%               5%                 4%                 5%
 other                         2%               1%                 2%                 0%

 With Children             single men     single women       married men       married women

 catch-up work                14%               23%               20%                23%
 required                     11%               12%               13%                14%
 coordinate personal          21%               26%               25%                30%
 reduce commute               14%               4%                 8%                 9%
 preference                   19%               15%               19%                13%
 weather                       4%               4%                 2%                 1%
 other                         1%               1%                 2%                 1%
Note: The table reports the reasons given for working from home (for those who ever did work from home)
broken down by gender, marital status, and children. Source: American Time Use Survey, 2017-2018.



                                                  37
