                         NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        PROPRIETARY PUBLIC FINANCE,
                          POLITICAL COMPETITION,
                              ANO REPUTATION




                            Herschel I. Grossman

                                Suk Jae Noh




                          Working Paper No. 2696




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 August 1988




We hsve received helpful suggestions from Alberto Aleaina, Patrick Kehoe,
Philippe Weil, and other participants in the NBER/FMME workshop on Positive
Hodels of Monetary and Fiscal Policy.  The above research is part of an NBER
research program. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NP,ER Working Paper #2696
                                        August 1988


                          PROPRIETARY PUBLIC FINANCE,
                             POLITICAL COMPETITION,
                                 AND REPUTATION


                                   ABS TRAI




     Although tax policy in most historical cases has been barely
distinguishable from legalized theft, why have tax and spending
policies in a few unusually fortunate communities, such as some
of the modern democracies, apparently been, if not welfare
maximizing, at least relatively benevolent?   We address this
question within a general positive analysis of tax and spending
policy that focuses on the effects of political competition and
its interaction with other constraints on policy choices,
especially the constraint that equilibrium policies must be time
consistent.   The framework for this analysis is a theory of a
proprietary fiscal authority whose objective is to extract rents
for the political establishment, the proprietor of sovereign
power.   The analysis shows that, if the political system is
sufficiently stable, then a positive amount of political
competition can induce the proprietary fiscal authority to behave
more like a hypothetically benevolent fiscal authority.    But,
political competition can lower the equilibrium tax rate only
until the time—consistency constraint becomes binding.   Moreover,
in a reputational equilibrium, the minimum time—consistent tax
rate is lower the more concern that the policymaker has for
future political rents. Accordingly, because this concern for
the future increases with more political stability, the
beneficial effect of political competition also increases with
the stability of the political system.




Herschel Crossman                        Suk Jae Noh
Department of Economics                  Department of Economics
Browr University                         Dartmouth College
Providence, RI 02912                     Hanover, NH    03755
           Until two or three hundred years ago, it was
      characteristic almost everywhere——and to this day, it
      is characteristic in the majority of countries and in
      countries containing the majority of the world's
      population——that the primary government activity was
      and is extraction of surpluses from the predominantly
                                         such surpluses to
      agricultural population and use of
                                       and near the
      benefit   tiny groups of people in
      government——Mills [1986], page 134.
     Theories of public finance commonly presume that the
                                                              or a
objective of the fiscal authority is to maximize the welfare
                                                  that actual tax
representative citizen. It is arguable, however,
and spending policies usually do not conform to the normative

prescriptions of this benevolent view of the fiscal authority
and, moreover, that such divergences are not entirely
attributable to the idiosyncratic ignorance or foolishness of
particular policymakers.  This observation suggests that a useful
                                                            self—
positive theory would view the fiscal authority either as
                                                       that  has
interested or as the agent of a self—interested group
political power, rather than as benevolent, but also as subject
to economic and political constraints that differ across time and
place.  Such a model might help us to understand the wide range
of actually observed experience of tax and spending policies.
Although, as Mills points out, tax policy in most historical
cases has been barely distinguishable from legalized thett, why
have tax and spending policies in a few unusually fortunate
communities, such as some of the modern democracies, apparently
been, if not welfare maximizing, at least relatively benevolent?

     An appealingly intuitive, but too simplistic, answer is that
political competition in democracies provides a useful constraint
on tax and spending policies.   One complication is that democracy
is neither necessary nor sufficient for political competition.
More importantly, a high level of political competition in fact
does not seem always to produce relatively benevolent tax and
spending policies.
                              —2—


      The presentpaper attempts to develop a general positive
analysis of tax and spending policy that can clarify the effects
of political competition and its complex interaction with other
constraints on policy choices, especially the constraint that
equilibrium policies must be time consistent.  The framework for
this analysis is a theory of a proprietary fiscal authority whose
objective is to extract rents for the political establishment,
the proprietor of sovereign power.   [North (1981) refers to the
objective of maximizing political rents as "predatory", but it is
not clear why this pejorative term is more warranted in
describing the proprietor of sovereign power than in referring to
the activities of self—interested proprietors of private
property.)

      Examples of groups that could constitute the political
establishment include the professional politicians, the
bureaucrats, the royal court, the members and/or supporters of
the ruling party, the military, or the clients of any of these
groups.   This theory assumes that, although the identity ot the
political establishment is subject to change, it is at any point
in time well defined. The theory also assumes that the fiscal
authority is an efficient maximizer of the self interest of the
political establishment.1 Accordingly, tax and spending policies
in this theory differ a little or a lot from the policies that
would maximize the welfare of the representative citizen, not
because the fiscal authority is benevolent or selfish, wise or
foolish, knowledgeable or ignorant, but rather, as with any self—
interested proprietary activity, because of the nature of the
constraints, which in this case are both economic and political,
that the fiscal authority faces.

     In attempting to maximize political rents —— or, more
precisely, the sum of current and expected future political rents
—— the proprietary fistal
                          authority is subject to the basic
economic constraint that political rents are limited by the
                              —3—

output of the producers who are subject to taxation by the fiscal
authority.  Accordingly, the fiscal authority faces an endemic
trade—off between increases in the share of output that goes to
political rents and the disincentive effect of increases in the
rental share on the tax base. The tiscal authority must take
account of the disincentive effects both of high expected tax
rates and of niggardly provision of productive public services.

     If the maximization of political rents were subject only to
this economic incentive constraint, the fiscal authority would
set the tax rate at the peak of the Latter curve and would devote
only a fraction of its revenues to providing productive public
services.  However, the additional constraints associated with
political competition and with the requirement of time
consistency, both of which derive from the nature of the

political and legal system, can cause the equilibrium tax rate
and expenditure pattern to diverge from this simple revenue and
political rent maximizing policy.
     The competitive threat posed by actual or potential rivals
to the existing political establishment can operate through
established legal processes that are peaceful and democratic or
it can involve the extralegal use of force.  In either case, to

pose an effective competitive threat, rivals must be genuine
outsiders, rather than merely parties or cliques, that as in
Alesina (1988), alternate in power according to a stationary
stochastic process and that cooperate, at least implicitly, in
extracting and sharing political rents. It it exists, political
competition faces the fiscal authority with a choice between, on
the one hand, tax and spending policies that increase political
rents but decrease both the expected welfare ot the
representative citizen and the survival probability of the
existing political establishment and, on the Other hand, tax and
spending policies thatsacrifice political rents in order to
increase the survival probability of the existing political
                              —4—

establishment and its likelihood of being able to receive
political rents in the future.2 A central result ot the analysis
is that, if the political system is sufficiently stable (in a way
defined more precisely below), then a positive amount of
political competition induces an equilibrium in which the
proprietary fiscal authority sets a lower tax rate than at the
peak of the Laffer curve and, despite reduced revenues, spends
more on productive public services.
     The requirement of time consistency, if it is a binding
constraint, influences the equilibrium policy in the opposite
direction. The time—consistency constraint reflects the
inability of the fiscal authority to use irrevocable commitments
to control its own future actions, including its future choice ot
the tax rate. This inability to make commitments is a corollary
of the sovereign's ability to act without being answerable to a
higher legal authority, the power from which the fiscal
authority's power to tax and to set the tax rate derives.

     Without irrevocable commitments, an expectation about future
policy can be rational, and an announcement about future policy
can be credible, only if this expectation or announcement is time
consistent —— that is, only if the fiscal authority will not be
able to do better in the future than to validate this expectation
or announcement.  In general, a time—consistency constraint is
potentially binding anytime that a sovereign policymaker might be
tempted to take actions that other agents do not expect.  In the
present context, the time—consistency requirement restricts the
equilibrium tax rate to be sufficiently high that the fiscal
authority will resist the temptation to set the actual tax rate
higher than this expected rate. The time—consistency requirement
thus limits the potential effect of political competition on the
equilibrium tax rate. Political competition can lower the
equilibrium tax rate or'.ly until the time—consistency constraint
becomes binding.
                               —5—

     Recent theories —— see, for example, Grossman & Van Huyck
(1986, 1988) and Grossman (1988) —— have emphasized the role of
reputational considerations in supporting time—consistent
equilibria.    In a reputational model, the implication of the
time—consistency restriction for equilibrium policy depends in
large part on the rate at which the policymaker discounts the
future.   For example, in the present context, if the fiscal
authority is sufficiently concerned about future political rents,
then reputation substitutes fully for the inability to make
irrevocable commitments and the time—consistency constraint does
not bind.   Alternatively, the less concern that the fiscal
authority has for future political rents the more that a binding
time—consistency constraint raises the equilibrium tax rate and
reduces spending on productive public services.

     An essential aspect of the analysis of reputation and time
consistency that follows is that it associates the fiscal
authority's discount rate with the survival probability of the
existing political establishment.  If, for example, the existing

political establishment has a high survival probability, then the
fiscal authority is greatly concerned about the effects ot its
current policies on its potential for extracting political rents
in the future.  In equilibrium, the survival probability depends
in turn on the stability of the political system.  Accordingly,
another central result of the analysis is that the beneficial
effect of political competition increases with more high
political stability.

1.    A   Pure Kleptocrat

      Consider a simple production economy in which between any
dates   t  and  t+1 producers divide their time between a non-
negative fraction       devoted to the production of a marketable
good and a non—negativ fraction    lL    devoted to production of
a nonmarketable good.   For simplicity,   assume for now that the
                                         —6—

time of producers is the only productive input.  [Section 5 below
extends the analysis to consider a productive public service.]
Output of the marketable good is a concave tunction
          and arrives
                    in quantity        at date                t+1.  Output of
the nonmarketable good is a linear function of                l—L and arrives
in quantity       z1     at date       t+l.   Specifically,   the assumed
technologies,      summarized by a single parameter           a,     are


(1)                  =
                         t,   0 < a < 1,      and

                     =


The analysis also assumes that neither form of output is
storable.

      The fiscal authority imposes at date t+l a tax on the
marketable output at rate x1, U       x÷i    1.  The utility that
the representative producer receives at date t+l, denoted by

ut+11   is a linear function of its nonmarketable output and of
its marketable output net of taxes —— specifically,


                 u1 z1
                     =        ÷
                                  (l_x1)y÷1.
At date     t,    the representative producer forms an expectation,
denoted by              of the tax rate that the tiscal authority will
impose at date t+l. Using this expectation, the representative
producer calculates that its expected utility for date t+l,
denoted by u1, is


(2)
                 u1 = z1      +   (l—x+1)yt+1.

     Because the analysis abstracts from storage, the
representative producer. problem is simply to choose        to
maximize u+1. Given               x÷
                              and the production possibilities
specified by equations (1), the solution to this problem is
                                              —7—


             0             =
                               (l—x1)° <         1.


According to equation (3), a high expected tax rate on marketable
output causes producers to devote more time to nonmarketable, and
hence nontaxable, production.  Specifically,       is inversely
                                              t.
related to       x1
                  and is positive if and only if        is less        x1
than unity.3 Substituting equations (1) and (3) into equation
(2) reveals that given        the maximized value of expected
                                     x÷1
utility is

                                                                       1
                 e                                            e       1—a
                           a                   a +
             u1        =       +    (l—a)Z            (l_a)(l_xt÷i)

     A benevolent fiscal authority would set the tax rate, taking
account of the representative producer's behavior, to maximize
the representative producer's utility.  In the present example,
which abstracts from productive public services, a benevolent
fiscal authority would set the tax rate equal to zero.
     The proprietary fiscal authority's objective is to maximize
the sum of the current and expected future rents that it
transfers to the political establishment. 4oreover, in this
simple economy, in any period  t+l political rents, denoted by
       are equivalent to current tax revenues, given by
           Thus, the proprietary fiscal authority acts like a
pure kleptocrat.  It uses the sovereign power to tax only to
exploit the producers.

      Because                  is   a fixed function of           and       is a
fixed function of                       the fiscal authority knows exactly
how                  depends on               and         The relevant future,
      x1y÷1                             x+l
                                                —8—


however, extends          to an horizon,by date t+h,denoted
                                                       h   0,
that is a random variable corresponding to the prospective
longevity of the survival in power of the existing political
establishment.  Thus, at any date   t,  the sum of current and
expected future political rents,  denoted by Rt,   is given by




(5)             Rt
                     =
                         r       +
                                     Et
                                          t+h
                                                r    S
                                                         r   +
                                                                 EtRt+l,
where   r   =
                 xy
                  and where Et is an operator that denotes an
expectation taken over possible realizations of h conditional
on information available at date t.    [Equation (5) assumes
without loss of generality that the fiscal authority does not
discount revenues received either before or at date t+hj

     To evaluate the expectation in equation (5), assume that the
probability that the existing political establishment, being in
power at date t, will not survive to date t+l is
where 0 <       t+l
                  1.  Given this stochastic process, and given
that h is the only stochastic element in the model, the
expectation in equation (5) equals a discounted sum of revenues
over an infinite horizon —— namely,


(6)
                EtRt+1
                             =
                                     P+ir+i + P+1P+r+2 +
According to equation (6), the contribution ot revenues at any
future date to Rt is larger the larger is the probability that
the sovereignty          will survive to that date.

     To model the competitive political threat discussed above,
assume that         the survival probability of the existing
political establishment from date t to date t+l, depends at
least in part on its popularity relative to potential rivals.
The citizens know, of zourse, that under any political
establishment the fiscal authority would attempt to maximize
                                     —9—

political rents. Accordingly, the popularity of the existing
political establishment at date t reflects the difference
between         expected utility at date t+l associated with
the existing political establishment, and the equilibrium value
of expected utility implied by proprietary public finance, which
we denote by u. Specifically, the analysis assumes that



                      =                       0             < 1,     q > 0.
              t+l         e[l_q(u*_u1)]   ,
                                                       0




From equation (4),         u1
                           depends negatively on x+11 the
expectation  that the representative producer forms at date t of
the tax rate that the fiscal authority will impose at date t+l,
and  u    depends in the same way on the equilibrium tax rate,
which we denote by         x.   (We derive        x*       below.)

     In equation (7), the parameter 0 indexes the stability of
the political system and the parameter q indexes the
competitiveness of the political system. Specifically, if 0 is
large and     qis small, the political system is stable and not
highly competitive.   In this case, the survival probability of
the existing political establishment is high and depends little
on the currently expected tax rate. In contrast, if 0     and q
are both large, the political system is both stable and highly
competitive.  In this case, the survival probability is high if
and only if the currently expected tax rate is low relative to
the equilibrium expected tax rate.

     At the other extreme, if 0 is low, the political system is
unstable.  In this case, the survival probability is low whatever
the value of q or the currently expected tax rate. Such a
situation could reflect either a highly chaotic internal
political process or a high level of external threat that is
independent       of the popuiarity of the political establishment.
                                       —
                                             10 —



The present analysis treats           both     q    and   B    as exogenous
structural parameters.4

2.       An Irrevocable    Tax—Rate Commitment

        Suppose,    hypothetically,     that at any date t the fiscal
authority could irrevocably           commit itself to set a specific
preannounced  tax rate at date t+l. Moreover, assume, for
simplicity, that this preannounced tax rate is operative whether
or not the existing political establishment survives to date
t+1.   (If the existing political establishment does not survive
to date  t+l,   then its replacement receives the tax revenue
associated with the preannounced tax rate.    Denoting the)


              tax
preannounced      rate as
                           x+1i this tax—rate commitment would
imply


(9)                   =
               x+1

and also would imply that the representative producer's
expectation     of the tax rate would be

                e    =
(9)
               x+1

      With    an irrevocable
                          tax—rate commitment, current political
rents,         are predetermined.   Hence, to maximize Rt, the
fiscal authority at date t would choose             as        x+1
                                                            of a
                            to maximize expected future political
program     (Tx+l}f,
rents,  EtRt+1 as given by equation (6), subject to the
constraints given by the production possibilities, equations (1),
the behavior of the representative producer, equations (3) and
(9), the political process, equation (7), and the tax—rate
commitment, equation (8). Moreover, if the existing political
establishment survives,\the fiscal authority would face the same
                                                          —   11    —




problem    in choosing                 etc. Thus, the fiscal
                                        ÷ix÷'             ÷2't+3
authority's problem    equivalent to the
                                    is   problem of choosing a
constant announced and actual tax rate, denoted x', to maximize


(10)     ER =    ---—        r,
         where r =           xy,        y =       =       (l—x),
                 p =         e[l_q(u*_ue)]            ,
                                                                and
                         =        a + (l—a)L=             a +       (la)(lx)1.
In solving      this problem,                  the fiscal authority                    takes        u        as
given.

       The first—order condition for a maximum value of                                                 ER        is
that    x'  is a value of  x such that


 11)
                r        p                    r           —0
                                                          —

                                          (1—p)2


where                =       y (1   —   —s-—
                                         1—a 1—x
                                                              and
                                                                    x   =   —
                                                                                l—x

The second—order condition     for a unique maximum is unambiguously
satisfied.      Moreover, at both x equals zero and x equals
unity, ER       equals zero. Thus, x'     is in the range U K x K 1.
For 0 < x K x'                ER        is an increasing function of                           x,    and for
x' K x < 1      ER           is    a decreasing function of                           x.

     The first—order condition given by equation (11) says that
the optimal kleptocratic tax rate equates the expected marginal
revenue from taxation to the marginal Cost of the tax rate in
                                           —
                                               12 —



reducing  the probability of surviving to collect future political
rents.   In the simplest case, it q equals zero, and,
accordingly,   ap/x equals zero —— that is, if there is no
political competition and, accordingly, the survival probability
does not depend on the expected tax rate —— then x    equals
1—c, which is the tax rate that maximizes tax revenue,   in the
absence of political competition, a proprietary fiscal authority,
if it could commit itself to a preannounced tax rate, would set
the tax rate at the peak of the Latter curve.

       Alternatively, if        q     is positive,    then   p/x   is
negative.      Consequently,     equation (11) implies that 3r/3x  is
positive    arid,   accordingly,   that  x'  is less than  1—c. In other
words, if the political system is competitive, then the optimal
kleptocratic tax rate is less than the revenue maximizing tax
rate.

       In equilibrium,ue equals    u* and, consequently,  p
equals    0.Imposing this equilibrium condition on equation (11)
reveals that, if the equilibrium tax rate               x
                                               were equal to
x', then x' and           x
                        would satisfy



(12)           iL   =
                          1—c       l—x'


Because the rhs of equation (12) is an increasing tunction of x',
equation (12) implies that, if q is positive, then the larger
are q and    0,  the lower is x'. In other words, the
equilibrium kleptocratic tax rate would be lower and, hence,
closer to the optimal policy of a hypothetical benevolent fiscal
authority, the more competitive and the more stable is the
political system —— that is, the more that a high survival
probability depends on a low expected tax rate, as opposed to
being high or low independently of the tax rate. In fact, as q
became arbitrarily large, if x' were the equilibrium tax rate,
then x' and         x
                   would approach zero.
                                  —   13   —



3.    Reputation and Time Consistency
      Because it has sovereign power, the fiscal authority in tact
cannot irrevocably commit itself to a preannounced tax rate.
                                                           is
Moreover, at date t+]., because marketable output
predetermined, being the result of the producers' crioice at date
t  of        the fiscal authority would maximize its current
revenue    x1y1     by setting the tax rate    x1  equal to

unity.  If, however, producers at date t    had expected that the
tax rate at date t4-l would be unity——that is, that the fiscal
authority would confiscate all marketable output——then they would
have set the fraction of their time devoted to the production of
marketable output equal to zero.   Accordingly, for marketable
output    to be positive
                      and,  hence, for potential political rents to
be positive, producers at  date  t  must expect that the fiscal
authority will resist the temptation to set xt+i
opportunistically equal to unity.5
     This restriction implies that the preannounced tax rate,
         must be less than unity and credible.  With credibility,
                                                             even
x+1. the tax rate that producers expect, equals txt+1,
though this preannounced tax rate is not an irrevocable
                                                             —— that
commitment.   Credibility in turn requires time consistency
is, the sum of current and expected future political rents must be
at least as large if the fiscal authority honors this pre—
announcement as it would be if the fiscal authority were to set
the tax rate equal    to unity.

     To analyze the determination of the set of credible
preannounced tax rates, we use a simplified version of models of
expectations developed in previous analyses of reputational
equilibria for monetary and fiscal policy —— see, for example,
Grossman (1988) and Grossman & Van Huyck (1986, 1988).
Specifically, assume that fiscal aufhoritles always preannounce
credible tax rates ardfollow a rational policy of honoring their
                                            —    14   —




preannouncements, except  for an infinitesimal fraction,      of                     ,
instances  in which they inexplicably lose the rational ability to
resist the temptation to set the tax rate equal to unity.   A loss
of rational restraint could result either from idiosyncratic
irrationality or from a breakdown in the process by which the
individuals who compose the fiscal authority reach their
decisions. Either infirmity, however uncommonly it occurs, is
intrinsic and irreversible.

     Knowing this pattern of fiscal authority behavior, producers,
when dealing with a specific fiscal authority, attach
probability l—, which equals approximately unity, to rational
behavior as long as this fiscal authority has always honored its
preannounced tax rate in the past.  If, alternatively, this fiscal
authority has ever set the tax rate equal to unity, producers
would expect such confiscatory behavior in the future. In this
case, which occurs with frequency  E,  or approximately zero,
future marketable output, and hence potential political rents,
would be zero. [We can easily extend this analysis to allow
producers to ignore an isolated instance of confiscatory taxation
or to forget distant past behavior.   In Grossman & Van Huyck
(1988), memory is a stochastic process.]

     Given that the fiscal authority at date t has a reputation
for honoring its preannounced tax rate, these assumptions about
producers' expectations imply that

(13)        for   . =   t,   +l        =
                                            txt+l         and

            for   t > r,     either                       =
                                                 x+1
                  if         x
                                 t—J
                                                  x
                                             t—J—1 t—J
                                                                for all   j >   U,

                  or         x1            = 1        otherwise.
                                      —   15 —



With expectations evolving according  to condition (13), the time—

consistency property given the  stationary structure of the model,
implies that, if         is less than unity and is credible, then
       satisfies the time—invariant condition

(14)                     )   y.
                    xy


      The lhs of condition (14) gives the present value at any date
t+1   of current and expected future political rents if at all
dates   r > t  the fiscal authority announces tax rate x for date
r+1     and then honors       this announcement   at date   r+1.   This

strategy would yield political rent equal to xy at all dates
t+1 and survival probability p    from all dates T+l to
T+2, where t+h+l     T+1   t1-l.  The rhs of condition (14) gives
the present value at any date t+l of political rents if the
fiscal authority has announced tax rate x at date t and were
to set the tax rate equal to unity at date t+l. This strategy
would yield political rents equal to y at date t+1, but would
mean that at all future dates marketable output and political
rents would be zero.  Condition (14) simply says that for a tax
rate less than unity to be time consistent the value of the
strategy of honoring this preannounced tax rate must be at least
as large as the value of the confiscatory            strategy.

       To determine how condition (14) restricts the equilibrium tax
rate    x*,  recall that in equilibrium, because 0e equals    u,
p     equals  Consequently, after imposing the equilibrium
               0.

condition that x equals x, condition (14) implies that                    x
must satisfy


(15)           x* ) j..


     Condition (15) says that the time—consistency requirement
implies a minimum value for the equilibrium tax rate and that this
minimum tax rate is lower the more stable is the political system.
                                —   16   —



More stability, i.e., larger 0, implies a lower value tar the
minimum equilibrium tax rate because larger 0 implies a higher
survival probability p for the political establishment and thus
a higher value tar expected future political rents relative to
current political rents.

4.    Reputational Equilibrium
     Given that producers base their expectation about the fiscal
authority's tax policy on the fiscal authority's current and past
record of honoring preannounced tax rates, a rational fiscal
authority considers how its current tax rate affects its
reputation for honoring its preannouncements and how its
reputation affects its ability to extract political rents in the
future.  Specifically, taking account of its reputation for
rational behavior, the proprietary fiscal authority's problem at
date t is to choose the constant announced and actual tax rate
x   to solve the problem of maximizing current and expected tuture
political rents —— the problem given by equation (lu) above ——
subject to the additional time—consistency constraint given by
condition (15). This setup implies that x* is the tax rate that
would provide the largest value of ER subject to the condition
that the expectation that the fiscal authority will honor its
preannounced tax rate is time consistent.  The assumption that the
equilibrium corresponds to the best time—consistent expectation is
consistent with the fiscal authority's ability to make an active
decision to announce the tax rate x.
     The analysis in Section 2 derived the tax rate x' that
would produce the highest value of ER given that the fiscal
authority honors this preannounced tax rate. If x' is equal to
or larger than 1—9, then the preceding analysis implies that
condition (15) is note binding constraint on the choice of x*.
In that case, reputatic' is a perfect substitute for irrevocable
commitments and, accordingly,       x    equals   x'.
                                                  —   17 —



            Alternatively,  is smaller than
                                 if     x'    1—0, then condition
(15) is a binding constraint on the choice of   x. In that case,
because, for x such that x' < x      1,  ER   is a decreasing
function of x, condition (15) is satisfied as an equality ——
that        is,     x   equals        1—0.as long as 0 is
                                                 Nevertheless,
positive, reputation is an imperfect substitute for irrevocable
commitments, and time consistency does not imply contiscatory
taxation.            In sum, the time—consistent reputational                 equilibrium
sat:   is f i e s


(16)                 x*=max(xI,l_0).

     Equation (16), together with equation (12), has the following
implications.    First, if and only if both 0 > a and q > 0,
then        x
          < 1—a.   Second, if and only if either 0 = a or   q = 0,
then      = x
            1—a.   Third, if and only if  0 < a, then     >                     x    l.
      Figure 1 illustrates these implications of equations (12) and
(16).   In this figure, the boundary labelled x     1—0 divides
(q,0)        into the region above
             space                                        x
                                           1—0 in which the time—
consistency constraint  given by  condition (15) is not binding and
in which     = x' > x
                    1—0   and the  region below  x' = 1—0  in which
the time—consistency constraint is binding and in which
x  = 1—8 > x'. From equation (12), the x = 1—0 boundary
satisfies           the equality




(17)                q = (1 —     ---- .j!)
Equation  (17) implies that this boundary is positively sloped,
intersects the q = 0 axis at     0 = a,  and approaches q = 1
as      8    approaches unity.
     In the region above                     x   = 1—0,      iso—tax—rate   loci depict
combinations of 9 and q                          derived from equation (12) that imply
Political
Stability
 U




            4-,




                     =   1—U   = 1—u




                                               q
  0
                                             political
                                             comp at it 10m




                           Figure 1
                  Raputational Equilibrium
                                            —   18 —



the   same value of            x,  where     =  x x'.
                                                    The iso—tax—rate locus
for     x*        x   = 1—a,    the revenue maximizing tax rate, coincides
with the segment a               0 < 1  of the q = U boundary. All of trie
other iso—tax—rate loci above                   x' = 1—0  lie inside the q = U
boundary, are negatively sloped,                 and have      x
                                                               = x' < 1—a. In this
subregion, political competition, i.e., q > 0, makes the optimal'
kieptocratic tax rate lower than the revenue—maximizing tax rate.
      In the region below the   x'     1—0                 boundary, iso—tax—rate
loci depict combinations of   0    and   q                 that imply the same value
of    x,  where         x
                      1—0. All of these                    iso—tax—rate loci are
horizontal.   Starting at the x' = 1—0   boundary and moving
through the region below     = 1—0      x
                                    towards  smaller values or 0
we are initially in the subregion between the boundary x' = 1—0
and the iso—tax—rate locus for     = 1—0    1—a.x In this

subregion,                                = 1—0 K 1—a
                  the iso—tax—rate loci have               x
                                                       —— that is,

although the time—consistency constraint is binding, the
equilibrium tax rate is less than the revenue—maximizing tax
rate.        Eventually,    as we continue moving towards smaller values
of    8,     we   cross the iso—tax—rate locus for              x
                                                         = 1—0 = 1—a. Now
we   are     in the subregion in which the iso—tax—rate loci have
x       1—8 > 1—a     —— that is, the time—consistency constraint forces
the equilibrium tax rate above the revenue—maximizing tax rate.
Here we continue to cross higher iso—tax—rate loci until finally
we reach the iso—tax—rate locus for                    x
                                        = 1—8 = 1, which
coincides with the             0 = 0     boundary.
     The subregion of               x   = 1—0 > 1—a
                                       accords with the idea of
Buchanan & Lee (1982) that "a short political time horizon" could
result in an equilibrium tax rate that is on the wrong side of the
Laffer curve.  The present analysis formalizes the concept of a
short political time horizon in terms of a model in which an
unstable political structure implies a low equilibrium survival
probability for the political establishment. In the subregion of
   = 1—0 > 1—a, political rent would be larger if the fiscal
                                   —   19 —



authority were able to create the expectation of a lower tax rate
and were to validate this expectation. The announcement of a
lower tax rate, however, would not be credible because a lower tax
rate would not be time consistent.   In this model, the fiscal

authority can be on the wrong  side of the Laffer curve not because
it is stupid, but because it is in a time—consistency trap.   In
the most extreme possibility, in which the index of political
stability 0 is zero, producers would expect confiscatory
taxation and the proprietary fiscal authority would extract zero
political rents.
     Most importantly, Figure 1 illustrates that the equilibrium
kleptocratic tax rate        x
                           is lowest, and, hence, closest to the
zero tax rate of a benevolent fiscal authority, if both the index
of political stability, 0, and the index of political
competition,  q, are large.   But, Figure 1 also illustrates that
a larger q   implies a lower equilibrium tax rate if and only
if    0                and q is small enough that the time—
           is large enough
consistency constraint is not binding. Thus, the effect of  q
on x* is limited.    Moreover, the smaller is 0, the smaller is
the range of values of q over which a larger q implies a
lower x*. If 9 is small enough or if q is large enough that
the time consistency constraint is binding, then  x  depends on
9    but not on    q.


5.        Functional Kleptocracy

     To generalize the preceding analysis, assume now that the
production of the marketable good requires combining the time of
producers with a productive public service.   At date t, the fiscal
authority provides this public service in amount g,         U.

Specifically, in place of equations (1), the  assumed technologies,
now summarized by the parameters a and 8,    are
                                         20 —




(18)          =         a > 0,     > U, a +        K 1 and


              =
         z1
According to equations (18), producers time and public services
have positive and diminishing marginal products and are
complementary inputs both of which are essential tor production of
the marketable good.         Also, returns      to scale are diminishing.

     Allowing for a productive public service provides a useful
social function for the proprietor of sovereign power and an
associated rationale for why the producers willingly subject
themselves to the sovereign power to tax. With the amount of
marketable output, which provides the tax base, depending on the
provision of an essential productive public service, the
proprietary fiscal authority's objective of maximizing political
rents requires it to use some of its tax revenues to provide this
productive public service.  Accordingly, the use ot the sovereign
power to tax is not purely exploitive.  In this extended model, we

can characterize the proprietary fiscal authority as a tunctional
kleptocrat.   [For simplicity, the analysis treats productive
expenditures and political rents as distinct, although in practice
particular budgeted expenditures can have both productive
components and rent components,          which outsiders probably are
unable to distinguish.]

       The representative producer's problem still is to choose
       to maximize       as given by equation (2). Given x+1,
     and the production possibilities specified by equations (18),
the solution to this problem, in place of equation (3), now is


                                    1
          0       =      e         1—a     1.
(19)                  [(l—x+1)g]
                                —   21 —



According                        is positive if and only if the
          to equation (19),     Z
expected tax rate is less than unityand the amount of public
services is positive. Moreover,        is larger the lower is
      and the larger is    t•{We ignore the possibility that

      would be sufficiently small and gt sufficiently large to
x1                                                     < 1.    In
make equation (19) inconsistent with the condition
that event,      would equal unity.) Substituting equations (18)
and (19) into equation (2) reveals that the maximizeu value of
expected utility is still given by equation (4).
     To finance the provision of gt' the fiscal authority issues

tax—anticipation notes that mature at date t+l, when it redeems
these notes with the tax revenue from the marketable output that
   has enhanced. For simplicity, assume that these notes are
fully collateralized and that the interest rate is zero.  Thus,
the fiscal authority must choose Xt+l to satisfy the budget
constraint
            x1             g.  See Grossman & Van Huyck (1988) for
a complementary reputational model of sovereign debt that
emphasizes the possibility of debt repudiation.]
     A benevolent tiscal authority in this extended model would
face the standard problem in normative public finance of choosing
a socially optimal amount of public expenditure that has to be
financed by distortionary taxation. Given the preferences and
behavior of the representative producer, this problem reduces to
the problem of choosing, subject to the fiscal authority's budget
constraint and to  x÷1
                        =
                            x÷1i   and     x1to maximize    '
                                                  as given by
                                                               as
given by equation (19), thereby maximizing
equation (4).  The time—invariant solution for this problem,
denoted by g and x, equates the marginal product of public
services to unity, thereby maximizing the net contribution or
public services to marketable output, and satisfies the fiscal
authority's budget constraint as an equality.   Specitically,
p and x satisfy
                                                                  —   22   —



(20)          ag1            =   1     or, equivalently, g =                       8y,       and


(21)     xy =          g.

Equations (20) and (21) together imply that                                                  x     equals   8.

       Equations (19) and (20) together also imply that the optimal
values   of g and x are inversely related.  Specifically,
                                                      1

(22)         g =


This   inverse              relation obtains because              value of x implies a
                                                                               a lower

larger value of                    L    and, hence, a higher marginal product of
public services.

     Returning to the proprietary fiscal authority, consider first
the policy of the functional kleptocrat in the case in which the
time—consistency constraint is not binding. In this case, the
equilibrium amount of public services, denoted by g', and the
equilibrium announced and actual tax rate, again denoted by x',
solve the problem of maximizing


(23)     ER =                 r,
                                                                                         8
where r = xy —               g,        y =       2.   g       =   [(l—x)g8     I    g

             =                          e
         p         8   [l—q(u *—u           )I   ,        and
                                                                                     1
              =             + (l—a)L =                    +   (l—a)[(1—x)g8]1

The differences between the problem given by equation (23) for the
functional kleptocrat and the problem given by equation (10) above
for the pure kleptocrat are that in equation (23) both the current
amount of political rens and the expected utility of the
                                              —   23 —



representative producer, and, hence, the survival probability of
the political establishment, depend on the amount of public
services that the fiscal authority provides as well as on the tax
rate.

     The first—order conditions for a maximum value of ER are that
the derivatives of ER with respect to x and with respect to g
equal zero. Thus, x' and g' satisfy

                               r
(24)    X   1     +    !a
                        X   (l_p)2
                                        =


where       =   y (1   -
                           ---- -i--—       and     =   -

and

                  + 3p         r        =
(25)
        g              g
        r
            1—p
                            (1—p)2
where       =    Sxy        — 1 and               eqSz/g.
                (l—a)g

Equation (24) like equation (11) above, says that the optimal
proprietary policy equates the expected marginal revenue from
taxation to the marginal cost of the tax rate in reducing the
probability of surviving to collect future political rents, except
that the marginal revenue from taxation and the marginal cost of
taxation now depend on the amount of public services as well as on
the tax rate itself.  Equation (25) says that the optimal
proprietary policy also equates the expected marginal cost of
public services in reducing current poltical rents to the marginal
benefit of public services in increasing the survival
probability.

     Equations (24) and (25) together imply that g' and x also
satisfy equations (20) and (22). This result says that, given the
tax rate, the functiona].\kieptocrat, like the hypothetically
                               —   24 —



benevolent fiscal authority,  would spend a sufficient amount on
productive public services to  maximize the net contribution of
public services to marketable output.   For a given tax rate, this
spending policy maximizes both the tax base and expected political
rents.

     The functional kleptocrat, however, does not choose the same
tax rate as would a benevolent fiscal authority. For example, if
q equals  zero, then equation (24), like equation (11) above,
implies that x' equals   1—ct.  In other words, if the time—
consistency constraint is not binding, then the functional
kleptocrat, like a pure kleptocrat, in the absence ot political
competition would set the tax rate to maximize tax revenue.
     The assumption of diminishing returns to scale means that
1—ct is larger than  3.    Thus, if q equals zero, then x is
larger than x and, consequently, equation (22) implies ttiat g'
is smaller than g     . In other words, if the time—consistency
constraint is not binding, the proprietary fiscal authority in the
absence of political competition would set a higher tax rate and
would provide a smaller amount of public services than would a
benevolent fiscal authority. Accordingly, the proprietary policy
would result in a smaller production of marketable output and a
lower level of utility for the representative producer than would
a benevolent policy.

      These differences, however, would be smaller the larger are
a and      .
               Specifically,as the sum of a and    approaches unity
—— that is, as the technology approaches constant returns to scale
—— g' approaches    ,   x' approaches     ,
                                          and the maximum amount at
rent that the political establishment can collect approaches zero.

     Analysis of equation (24) and (25) also reveals that, it the
time—consistency constraint is not binding, the effects at
political competition .q and political stability 8 on the
functional kieptocrat are a straightforward extension of the
                                        —   25 —



effects     on a pure kleptocrat.Specifically, if q is positive,
then    is
       x'   smaller, g' is larger,  and the amount of political rent

is smaller than with q equal  to  zero.  Political competition
causes the proprietary fiscal authority both to set a lower tax
rate and to provide  a larger amount of public services in order to
enhance the survival probability of the political establisnment.
                                                         then x'
Moreover, as with the pure kleptocrat, if q is positive,
is lower and g' is larger the larger are q and  0.   Thus, the
                                                      to the
optimal policy of the functional kleptocrat is closer
optimal policy of the hypothetically benevolent fiscal authority
the more competitive and the more stable is the political
system.
     Now consider the policy of the functional kieptocrat in the
case in which the time—consistency constraint is binding. In
place of condition (14), this constraint for the functional
                                                     is less than
kieptocrat is that, if the equilibrium tax rate x*
unity, then      x
                 and the equilibrium amount of public services,
denoted by g* satisfy the condition


(26)           (xy —   g)   > y —   g

The    theof condition (26) gives the present value at date t+l ot
current and expected future political rents it at all dates
    t the fiscal authority provides public services in amount
                                          and then honors this
g and announces tax rate x for date r+l
announcement at date t+1.  The rhs of condition (26) gives the

present value at date t÷1 of political rents if the fiscal
                                                     and has
authority has provided public services in amount g
announced tax rate  x  at date  t  and were to set the tax rate

equal to unity at date t+1.
     To determine how condition (26) restricts     xand    g*
define x and g to        the  e
                             tax rate and amount of public
services that maximize ER, as given by equations (23), subject
                                                         —
                                                                 26 —



to the constraint given by equation (26) being satisfied as an
equality. Thus, x and 7 satisfy the first—order conditions

             _E_ +                       r                        —L-   +   p     r       —
(27)    cX   i—              3X
                                                   +
                                                             X    1P        3X
                                                                                 (1—p)2
                                                                                              X      0   and



                             3p          r                        _L_ +     3p    r               + 1]
(28)    g    1—p
                         +
                             g     (1—p)2
                                                   + A   [p—
                                                             g    i—p       g    (1—p)2
                                                                                          —
                                                                                              g          =




                     -
where        =           —s--
                         1—a      1_,
                                  l—x         g = __
                                                  1—a             g

        3r       p        3r      p          are             -
                                                       as in equations (24)           an      (2b)   above,
        r— --—                    ----
and where        A       is a positive Lagrange multiplier.

     These first—order conditions imply that the ettects of the
time—consistency constraint on the functional kieptocrat are also
a straightforward extension of the effects on a pure kleptocrat.
Specifically, equations (27) and (28) together imply that
g and x also satisfy equations (20) and (22). Even if the time
consistency constraint is binding, the functional kleptocrat
provides productive public services in the quantity that, given
the tax rate, maximizes the net contribution of public services to
marketable output.

     Given that in equilibrium p equals 8, after imposing the
equilibrium condition that     equals      and g equals g*                  x
condition (26) together with equation (20) imply that


(29)             x = (1—B)(l—8)                    +    8.

Moreover, the time—consistent reputatiorial equilibrium for the
functional kleptocrat in general satisfies


(30)    x        max (x', x) and


(31)    g*       mm          (g', g),
                             —   27 —



where g' and x1 and g and x are related according to equation
(22). Equation (30) has the same form as equation (16) that
applied to the pure kieptocrat, although x' and x for a
functional kleptocrat are generally not equal to x' and 1—0
for a pure kieptocrat.  Nevertheless, Figure 1 with x replacing
1—8  also summarizes the qualitative properties of the
reputational equilibrium for the functional kleptocrat.   The
x' = x boundary intersects the q = 0 boundary at   6 =



6.    Summary
     The analysis, as summarized by Figure 1, shows that, if the
political system is sufficiently stable, a more competitive
political system is better up to a point. As long as the time—
consistency constraint is not binding, more political competition,
like more political stability, implies a lower tax rate and more
spending on productive public services. In this case,  he
proprietary fiscal authority, in order to enhance the survival
probability of the political establishment, behaves more like a
hypothetically benevolent fiscal authority.
     Political competition, however, can lower the equilibrium tax
rate and increase the equilibrium spending on productive public
services only until the time—consistency constraint becomes
binding. Consequently, the beneficial effect of political
competition increases with the stability of the political
system. Regardless of the amount of political competition, a
political system that is insufficiently stable can cause the
fiscal authority to be trapped on the wrong side of the Latfer
curve and to provide little in the way of productive public
services.

     Why then, as we asked in the introduction, have tax and
spending policies in some of the modern democracies apparently
been, if not welfare maximizing, at least more benevolent than in
                              —   28 —



the typical kieptocracy?   The theory of proprietary public finance
developed here suggests that the fiscal authorities in these
modern democracies are riot necessarily relatively uninterested in
maximizing political rents or relatively wise or knowledgable.
Instead, the theory suggests not that they do not share the
objectives of other kieptocrats, but rather that they face
economic and political constraints that induce them to follow
policies that are closer to the policies of a hypothetically
benevolent fiscal authority. The theory suggests, specifically,
that the essential characteristic of these modern democracies is
that their political systems combine a high degree of political
stability with a positive amount of effective political
competition.
                             —   29 —



                            FOOTNOTES



1.   The analysis abstracts from the process of forming the
     political establishment and from the related agency problem
     that North stresses in his discussion of the extraction of
     political rents. We implicitly assume that the process by
     which the political establishment appoints and removes
     individual policymakers insures that the fiscal authority
     faithfully translates the political establishment's
     preferences into policy.
2.   This analysis would extend in a more general framework to
     the more basic policy choice emphasized by North between a
     structure of property rights that facilitates the extraction
     of political rents and a structure that enhances the welfare
     of the representative citizen.   The specific models
     developed below implicitly take as given the structure of
     property rights and exchange and other determinants of the
     economy's production possibilities, except for provision of
     productive public services. Moreover, the analysis does not
     consider the possible use of police powers to increase the
     survival probability of the existing political establishment
     by suppressing dissent.   The analysis also takes the fiscal
     jurisdiction as given——see Friedman (1977) tor a relevant
     analysis——and abstracts from the threat of secession, a
     possibility analyzed by Buchanan & Faith (1987).
3.   In an extended model, this inverse relation between       and
                                              of taxable
      x+l also could involve the relocation               activity
     outside the jurisdiction of this fiscal authority, a
     possibility analyzed in the literature stemming trom the
     work of Tiebout (1956) and also emphasized by Friedman
     (1977) and by North.
                              —   30   —




4.   In this setup,        does not depend on         the actual
     tax rate imposed at date t+l. In other words, the
     political establishments survival to date t+l is
     determined before
                         x1   is imposed.  An alternative
                    which would complicate the analysis of the
     formulation,
     reputational   equilibrium, would have        depend on
                                             t+l
     x1,    rather than on       with survival in power to
     date t+l——that is, the ability to collect political rents
     at date t+l——determined after the fiscal authority attempts
     to impose
                xt+i.
5.   If, as suggested in the preceding footnote,          depended
     on  x1    rather than on         the fiscal   authority would
     be tempted to set x÷j    to maximize                  rather
     than to maximize             The implied tax rate, although
     higher than  x,   would be less than unity if q is
     positive. Moreover, although the present model focuses on a
     simple proportionate income tax, a similar time—consistency
     constraint would apply to any tax that the fiscal authority
     would be tempted to impose at a higher rate than expected.
     See Grossman & Van Huyck (1986) for an analysis at a time—
     consistent reputational equilibrium for seigniorage, in
     which case inflation is the tax.
                               —   31 —



                              REFERENCES


A.   Alesina, "Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two—Party
        System with Rational Voters," American Economic Review, 38,
      1988, forthcoming.
J.M. Buchanan and R.L. Faith, "Secession and the Limits of
      Taxation: Toward a Theory of Internal Exit, American
      Economic Review, 77, December 1987, 1023—1031.
J.M. Buchanan and D.R. Lee, "Politics, Time, and the Latter
        Curve," Journal of Political Economy, 90, August 1982, 816—
        819.
0.  Friedman, "A Theory of the Size and Shape of Nations, Journal
       of Political Economy, 85, February 1977, 59—77.
H.I. Grossman, "Inflation and Reputation with Generic Policy
       Preferences,' NBER Working Paper No. 2239, revised March
        1988.
H.I. Grossman and J.B. Van Huyck, "Seigniorage, Inflation, and
      Reputation," Journal of Monetary Economics, 18, July 1986,
        21—31.
H.I. Grossman and J.B. Van Eluyck, "Sovereign Debt as a Contingent
      Claim: Excusable Detault, Repudiation, and Reputation,"
      American Economic Review, 78, December 1988.
E.S. Mills, "Positive Theories of Government," Chapter 9 in The
      Burden of Government (Stanford:   Hoover, 1986).
D.C. North,    'A Neoclassical Theory of the State," Chapter 3 in

        Structure and Change in Economic History (New York: Norton,
        1981).
C. Tiebout,   'A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures," Journal ot

        Political Economy, 64, October 1956, 416—424.
