                          NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                UNEMPLOYMENT:  GETTING THE QUESTIONS RIGHT -
                           AND SOME OF THE ANSWERS




                           Olivier   Jean Blanchard




                           Working Paper No. 2698




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Masaachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge. MA 02138
                               September 1988




Thia paper was prepared for the Cheiwood Gate Conference on Unemployment, May
1988.  I thank Robert Solow for comments. This research is part of NBERs
research programs in Economic Fluctuations and International Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #2698
                                           September 1988


                  UNEMPLOYMENT:   GETTING THE QUESTIONS RIGHT -
                            AND SOME OF THE ANSWERS


                                     ABSTRACT




     This   paper analyzes the issue of persistent high unemployment. It

focuses on two channels of persistence. The first is capital accumulation.

The paper analyzes investment decisions under imperfect competition,

focusing in particular on the effects of demand and cost shocks on

investment, capital composition and bankruptcies, and their effect on

employment and unemployment. The second is labor supply. The paper

analyzes the various channels through which the unemployed may become

disenfranchised, leading to higher equilibrium unemployment. In both

cases, it briefly reviews and assesses the available empirical evidence.

It ends by drawing several implications.




                                           Olivier Jean Blanchard
                                           Department of Economics
                                           MIT
                                           Cambridge, HA 02139
         The first Chelwood Gate conference on unemployment in 1985

(Economica 1986) could claim major accomplishments. For the first time1

the European experience of high unemployment was analyzed within a largely

common framework, and similarities and differences across èountries

systematically examined. But, at the end of the conference, the sense of

elation at the progress achieved was mixed with uneasy feelings. There

were at least two reasons. First, it was not clear within that frsnework

how one could explain what appeared to have become, by 1985, persistent

high equilibrium unemployment. Second, the diversity of explanations

across countries, which laid the blame alternatively on increases in tax

wedges, shifts in Beveridge curves and assorted time trends, was, given

the commonality of unemployment experiences, very much unsettling.

         Thus,   Chelwood Gate 2 was born. The research program which is
reflected in the papers presented at this conference has focused naturslly
on two   tasks. The first has been to further unify   and refine the common

framework. The second has been to extend that framework so as to expLain

persistent high unemployment. Fortunately for researchers, unfortunately

for Europe, equilibrium high unemployment is still with us, giving us

three more years of data and making the question just as topical as it was

three years ago.

         Has the goal been achieved or should we already be preparing

Chelwood Gate 3 7 It would be presumptuous for me to give a general

assessment. But, just as at the end of Chelwood Gate I, I have mixed
                                     2




feelings. This time, they have a different origin. I am afraid that the

research program may have been overambitious. The model estimated in the

country papers is a rich one, allowing in particular for a putty-clay

technology, allowing for differences across firms and dealing explicitly

with aggregation, estimating the complete structure of demand. While much

is learned, the very richness of the model makei it harder to see how the

model can - -in its analytical version- - and does --in its empirical

incarnations--, explain what I see as the crucial issue, the persistence

of high unemployment. Thus, in this paper, I present a barebone version

of the model, one which, I hope, preaerves its logic, allows to focus on

the main issue at hand and to discuss, in that light, the results obtained

in the country papers.

       In section 1, I go back one step and present the Chelwood Gate 1

model as embodied in the Solow and Bean papers presented at that

conference. This provides a convenient way of introducing the central

issues. Sections 2 and 3 extend that model by focusing on channels for

peraistence. Both rely on the simple idea that prolonged unemployment

leads to decreases in factors of production, leading to higher equilibrium

unemployment. Section 2 examines the role of capital accumulation.

Section 3 examines the role of effective labor supply, the possibility

that prolonged unemployment effectively disenfranchises part of the labor

force. Section 4 discusses a few odds and ends and briefly speculates on

policy implications.
                                       3



Lection 1. Chelwood Gate Mark I




          Like any model aimed at explaining employment, Chelwood Gate Mark 1

was fundamentally a model of labor demand and labor supply. The model was

however eclectic, recognizing the imperfectly competitive nature of goods

markets and the complex nature of wage bargaining in the labor markeJ.

What follows is a simple version of that model. Its purpose is to

introduce the central issues and it does not do full justice to the

original. In particular it ignores the open economy nature of European

economies. It also ignores most relevant dynamics but thia is only to

introduce them and focus on their implications in the next two sections.



L_lrice setting. wate settinz and aggregete demand,

          The model builds on three equations. The first is price setting by

firms under imperfect competition. The second is wage setting, which

results from bargaining between firms and workers. The third is aggregate

demand.                                               -
                                                          -




Price   setting

          Imperfect competition in the goods market and the recognition that

firms actually set prices and thus real product wages, is an important

element of any story about unemployment. The Dixit-Stiglitz version of

Chamberlinian monopolistic competition has proven to be a most useful

workhorse and I follow tradition

          At any point of time there is a given number of firms. Each faces

a demand function given by
                                                 4



        Yj —   y           c(p-p),      c>l
                       -



where all variables (here and later) are in logarithms, all constants

(here and later) are ignored. Yj is demand for good i, y is aggregate

demand. p and p are the nominal price of good i and the price level

respectively. Ignoring fixed costs of production production is

characterized by:

                   =
                           a(yj-k-qi),          s>l

where n1, k1, q are employment, the capital stock, and total factor

productivity of firm i respectively2. At any point in time, the capital

stock is given from the past. There may be fixed costs ; this is not

relevant until we endogenize capital and the number of firms.

        Profit maximization delivers a price setting equation for each

firm:

        pi-Ep —            b(-q   +   (a-L)(Ey-k-q)   t (Ew-Ep)) ; b —   (l+c(a-l)),
Ocb<l

        Together            with this price equation come an employment and an output

 equation for each firm. Ignoring for an instant the E.'s on the right

hand side, the relative price chosen by each firm depends on three terms,

which the firm takes as exogenous. The first is total factor

 productivity. The second is aggregate demand, scaled by the firm's

 capital stock and productivity : an increase in y leads the firm to

 increase its price, as well as its output supply and employment. The

 third is the aggregate real wage, the nominal wage divided by the price

 level. An increase in the aggregate real wage leads the firm to increase

 its relative price, and to decrease supply and employment. This is an
                                       S



important point     from the point of view of each firm, both aggregate

demand and the aggregate real wage are independent forces, and both beyond

its control.

        The E.'s stand for expectations and allow for price decisions to be

made not on the basis of current values of y, w or p. but on the basis of

past expectations of those variables. The motivation is to allow for

potential effects of aggregate demand ; the exact specification of what E.

exactly stands for may be quite complex, as work on staggering has shown.

For analytical purposes, assuming either that E stands for expectations

held as of one period earlier, or even more crudely that Ex —   x(-l)   for

any x is enough to make most points.

        By symmetry, all firms act identically, so that the price setting

equation implies

(1)     p-Ep —   b((a-l)(Ey-k-q)-q+(Ew-Ep))


Wage settina

        Chelwood Gate 1 was, I think rightly, agnostic as to the specifics

of wage setting. Having rejected the Phillips curve black box, we are

just starting to explore relative empirical merits of efficiency wages,

insider-outsider and other theories of wage setting    it is far too early

to impose heavy structure on an aggregate wage equation. Following

Chelwood Gate 1, I assume the wage setting equation takes the form

(2)     w — Ep +   c(n-)   +   z

where   is the labor force, and z is a vector of variables influencing

wage bargains. One standard interpretation of this equation is as the
                                      6




outcome of the choice of the expected real wage and employment by a

monopoly union facing a labor demand schedule, but other interpretations

are possible. Again, E. stands for expectation, generously interpreted.

may include among other things total factor productivity q, or perhaps

actual labor productivity, y-n ; it may include taxes, measures of

mismatch. All of those were included in one or the other of the wage

equations estimated for Ghelwood Gate 1. As will be abundantly clear, 1±

exact   form of the wage setting equation and what z includes turn out to b

crucially important, and we shall need to dig deeper into where equation

(2) exactly comes from. I defer digging to later.



Agireate demand

         Here, I stay well short of the treatment of aggregate demand in

Chelwood Gate 1 and 2. Given the issues at hand, all I need is the

possibility of shocks to aggregate denand and a negative effect of the

price level on the level of demand. Thus, I assume

(3)      y—x-p
where y is again aggregate demand, and x is the vector of variables whici

affect aggregate demand.



2. Equilibrium and actuaj unemolovment rates

         Equations (1) to (3) characterize the economy. Given a

specification of the E.'s, one can easily characterize the actual level

unemployment. Or, assuming that the E.'s stand for actual values, one

obtains equilibrium unemployment. I look at them in reverse order. Havii
                                        7



done so, I use the results to describe the main conclusions of --and the

issues raised by-- Chelwood Gate 1.




Equilibrium unemployment

                  Equilibrium unemployment is defined as the level of

unemployment which would prevail, were all expectations equal to actual

values. While when we introduce dynamics, the definition would have to be

explicit as to what past values of unemployment are taken to be

(equilibrium, actual 7), this issue does not arise here yet.

       When expectations are equal to actual values, the price equation

   becomes:

       p-w —   - q + (a-l)(y-k-q), or   using the production function

       p-w —   - q ÷ ((a-l)/a)(n-k)
Thus, while aggregate demand and real wages are taken as independent.

influences by firms, equilibrium (so defined) implies a relation between

the real wage and aggregate demand. Equivalently, the second line

implies, just as under perfect competition, a relation between employment

and the real wage, a pseudo labor demand relation.

       The wage equation is simply

(2')   w-p —   c(n-)   + z


       It is clear that those two equations alone determine the

equilibrium real wage and level of unemployment. The real wage set by

bargaining must he consistent with the real wage that firms are ready to

pay. In the useful Lsyard-Hickell (1987) terminology, the target real
                                              8




wage, from wage bargaining, must be consistent with the warranted real

wage, the wage implied by price setting. Or, put yet another way,

unemployment must reconcile the income claims of firms and workers. The

aggregate demand relation, as usual, plays no other role in equilibrium

than to determine the price level or the rate of inflation.




          Solving for equilibrium unemployment, and denoting it by a star,

gives

(4)      fln* —       ((a-l)+ac)((a-l)(-k)-aq+az)
         The equilibrium level of unemoloyment depends on three sets of

factors, the ratio of capital to the labor force, total factor

productivity and whatever factors belong to z.

          By contrast, actual unemployment depends on aggregate demand. Its

properties depend on the exact characterization of what the E. 's stand

for. One example makes the basic point



Actual unemp)&yment

          Assume that, for both workers and firms, Ep —      p(-l)-t-(p(-l)-p(-2)),
and    that for all other variables, expectations are equal to actual values.

Then, equations (1), (2) and (3) become

(la)      p — bw +     (l-b)(p(-1)-t-(p(-l)-p(-2)) + b(a-l)(y-k-q)   -
                                                                         bq

(2")      w —   p(-l)-f(p(-l)-p(-2))   +   c(n-)   + z

(3")      y —   x-p


Note,    from the first equation that there is no longer a simple relation

between the real wage and the level of aggregate demand, or between the
                                             9




real wage and employment. Solving the first two equations for prices

gives

(5)     p-p(-l) —   (p(-l)-p(-2)         (b/a)(ac+aL)(n.n*)

        This equation has a definite air of deja vu, giving the rate of

change of inflation as a function of the deviation of the unemployment

rate from its equilibrium value. Inflation accelerates or decelerates

depending on whether the rate of unemployment is below or above

equilibrium, a Phillips curve like relation. Unemployment is in turn

determined by aggregate demand and the production function

(6) a—n —   -(l-a)k   -
                          a(x-p)   +aq

Together, equations (5) and (6) imply that, given x, actual unemployment

converges to equilibrium unemployment.



3. Conclusions from Chelwood Cats I



        Within that broad framework, much of Chelwood Gate 1 was focused on

two main issues. The first was that of how much the increase in

unemployment was an increase in equilibrium unemployment, or instead an

increase in actual unemployment over its equilibrium value. The answer

was quite unanimous       while the increase in unemployment had been in part

due to demand, by 1985 actual and equilibrium rates roughly coincided

this was reflected in the relative constancy of inflation rates.

        The second and central issue was thst of what explained this

incresse in equilibrium unemployment, of the respective contributions of

(n-k), q and z. This is where the picture was more confused, both

conceptually and empirically
                                       10




  Specifications varied in essential ways. One important difference was

for example the treatment of productivity in the wage equation. Should one

assume that z did not include productivity, in which case the model had

the unappealing implication of predicting steadily declining unemployment

7 Or, should one assume that z included productivity, and if so in what

form 7 Should it be total factor productivity -     t.either   actual or trend--,

or should it be labor productivity - -either actual, n-k, or trend, n*-k 7

The approach of L.ayard and Nickell for example was to assume a priori that

neither p-k, nor q could affect equilibrium unemployment, to assume that z

had the forms — q   -
                        ((a-l)/a)(p-k) + z';   this implied that the increase

in unemployment could only be explained by factors in z', not by changes

in capital intensity or in productivity growth.

       Even when specifications were common, results differed in essential

ways. This was reflected most vividly in Bean et al's summary table

(table 4) of the decomposition of the increase in equilibrium

unemployment, constructed using a common model specification but reaching

drastically different results across countries.



The false dichotomy between equilibrium and actual unemployment



       Why didn't Chelwood Gate 1 give a convincing explanation of high

persistent unemployment 7 Fundamentally, this came from too sharp a

dichotomy between equilibrium and actual unemployment.

       Part of the appeal of the Chelwood Gate 1 model was indeed that

very dichotomy, which gave a way of organizing thoughts about movements in
                                        11




unemployment. The image of unemployment given by the model was one of

aggregate   demand driven fluctuations in actual unemployment around an
equilibrium   level which itself moved in response to movements in z q and

(a-k).    One could then think separately of factors affedting actual and

equilibrium unemployment. But it was precisely this dichotomy which did

not fit the experience of the 1980's, in which       sharp, aggregate demand

induced increase in unemployment had been followed by art increaSe in

equilibrium unemployment. Thus, it was this dichotomy. whichbád to be

abandoned for progress to be made.

         It was clear that the dichotomy was at beat a conceptual

convenience. After a period of high actual unemployment, if nominal

rigidities were suddenly lifted, the economy could not and would not

return instantaneously to its previous level of unemployment. Costs of

adjusting labor would for example lead firms to increase employment only

gradually. But, were this the only factor involved, the economy would

return fairly quickly to its previous level of equilibrium unemployment

and the dichotomy embodied in the model above would still provide a useful

conceptual shortcut for all but the short run. The question was therefore

whether there were factors which would be triggered by high actual

unemployment and would imply a   very   slow return, or perhaps no return at

all, to previous levels of unemployment, explaining the European

experience.

         Two such channels were already suggested at Chelwood Gate 1, and

both of them are explored st more length at this conference. The first,

which was emphasized in the papers by Dreze and Sneessens on Belgium, and
                                      12




by t4alinvaud on France, is that of capital accumulation. A long period of

high unemployment may lead to capital decumulation, increasing equilibrium

unemployment. This channel is present, but not emphasized, in the model

above. The second was emphasized by Gregory in his paper on Australia. A

long period of high unemployment may lead to changes in the structure of

labor markets, and to the disenfranchise of part of the labor force,

increasing equilibrium unemployment. I explore both of them in turn

examining   their logical structure as well as the empirical evidence
presented in   the country papers3.
                                        13




Section 2. Capital Accumulation and the Persistence of Unemployment



       That the dynamics of capital accumulation can amplify the effects

of factor prices on labor demand and unemployment is an old idea, dating

far beyond Chelwood Gate 1. The response of investment decisions to

changes in real wages or other factor prices under perfect competition is

well understood4. How must the story be modified when we allow for

imperfect competition ?,   After   all, the real product wage isnow a

decision variable of firms. Does it make sense to think of investment as

depending on the wage, on aggregate demand ? I first review the logic of

capital accumulation decisions under imperfect competition before turning

to the empirical evidence.



I; Capital accumulation        the firms decisions         -




       The monopolistic competition framework introduced earlier provides

a natural structure to think about investment decisions5. Ignore for the

moment the decision of firms as to whether to operate or to shut dowit (for

example, assume that there are no fixed costs, and that there is a given

number of firms, assumptions to be relaxed later). It is straightforward

to derive the (logarithm of the) optimal capital stock for firm i, kd

       kdi.ki —   (yj-k-q)      -(l/a)[r -   (w-p)],   where

              — (y+cq)     -
                               c(l-(l/a))r   -
                                                 c(l/a)(w-p)
where r is the (logarithm of the) real user cost of capital. E.s could

and should be introduced as they were earlier but this is not the point I

want to focus on here. The first line follows from cost minimization, and
                                            14



gives kdi given Yj          The second line gives optimal Yj when the firm can

choose both factors freely. Combining both to eliminate Yj gives

(7)       kd -   ki   —
                          (y-k-q)   + cq -(l/a)[(ac+1-c)r +   (c-l)(w-p))
          Just as for price, employment and output decisions before, each

firm perceives two independent economy-wide forces as relevant to its

investment decisions. The first is aggregate dàiand ; other things equal,

aggregate demand affects optimal capital one for one (in elasticity

terms). The second is factor prices, the aggregate real wage and user

cost of capital. Factor prices have the usual two effects on investment,

coat and substitution effects. An increase in the user cost decreases

optimal output and optimal capital intensity. An increase in real wages

decreases optimal output but leads firms to shift to more capital

intensive methods of production.

          Going from optimal capital to investment requires a specification

of costs of adjustment. This part is well travelled ground, which there

is no need to retrace. When the firm has adjusted to its desired capital

stock, its relative price is given by

(8) Pj-P — -q +(l-(l/a))r +         (l/a)(w-p)
which is nothing else than the factor price frontier (adjusted for the

mark up from monopoly power which should appear in the -neglected-

constant term).       Long run marginal    cost is independent of the level of

output.



2. Capital accumulation and unemployment
                                       15



          Just as before, while each firm takes aggregate demand and

aggregate real wages as given, theae are determined at the aggregate level

by the interaction of firms decisions, wage setting and the aggregate

demand relation. Here, the steps are the same as in section 1; the

outcome, given k, is characterized by equations (1) to (3)      but now k

changes:over time. If.for firms, expectations (the "Es") are equal to

actual values1 then there is a relation between real wages and aggregate

demand, namely equation (1') ; otherwise, there may not he any simple

relation between real wages and aggregate demand. Thus, even at the

aggregate level, we can still think of investment as depending on both

aggregate demand and real wages.

          There is no point in tracing through the dynamics of different

shocks.     I first work out the long run effects (once capital has adjusted)

on equilibrium unemployment of changes in z. Then, I consider one example

of dynamic adjustment, which reintroduces fixed costa and bankruptcies and

allows to make a number of relevant points.




          In the long run, from equation (8), the equilibrium relation

between prices wages and user cost is

(9)       p-w —   (a-1)r   -aq

          Thus, if the user cost is fixed (in real terms), the real wage is

fixed from price setting in the long run. Firms will choose prices so as

to reestablish that real wage. Combining this with the wage setting

equation, which for the moment, we still take to be

(2)       w-p —   c(n-)    + z
'S
'-'St
                                                 16




we get an expression for the long run level of equilibrium unemployment

(10)      n- —   (l/c)(-(a-l)r +   aq   -
                                            z)

The level of unemployment has to be such as to reconcile the target real

wage with the warranted real wage, which is independent of z. The effect

of z on equilibrium unemployment is clearly larger in the long run thsn in

the short run. This is shown in figure 1              short run aggregate "labor

demand", equation (1'), is downward sloping            long run aggregate "labor

demand", equation (10), is horizontal. An incresse in z shifts labor

supply, equation (2) inwards, leading to A in the short run, B in the long

run. The increase in z leads to a short run increase in real wages,

triggering capital decumulation, further increasing equilibrium

unemployment over time.



          Shocks to aggregate demand still do not affect long run equilibrium

unemployment (they obviously could if they implied a permanent change in

interest rates and the user cost, as indeed they have done in the 1980's

).     But to the extent that they can temporarily affect unemployment -to
the extent that E.s are not equal to actual values-, they can have

substantial effects on capital accumulation, thus leading to increases in

equilibrium unemployment along the path of adjustment. The dynamics of

adjustment can be very rich. Consider the following example:

          Suppose that the economy is a Dixit-Stiglitz economy, where each

firm must, in order to produce, pay fixed -capital- costs. Assume also

that, once fixed costs have been paid, the firm only needs to use labor,

so that marginal cost is constant, With free entry, the number of firms
                                             17




is such that there is zero net profit, that the size of the demand facing

each firm is such as to generate operating profits which cover capitat

costs. Assume further that E.s for firms are equal to actual values.

       Using those assumptions in equation (1') gives a simple price

setting equation

       p-w-q
The wage setting and aggregate demand equations.are as before, with, in

the wage setting equation, Ep —          p(-l).   This allows for nominal rigidities

and an effect of aggregate demand on unemployment. Thus

       w —   p(-l)   +   c(n-)   +   z
       n   —y—

where the lest relation between output and employment comes from the

assumption of constant returns to labor.

       Consider the effect of an.increase in z, say an increase in

workers' militancy, which leads to an increase in nominal wages given

prices. Firms increase their nominal price to maintain their markup. The

increase in the price level reduces aggregate demand, reduces the demand

facing each firm. Thus, the market becomes too small to support all of

them1 and some firms go bankrupt. EmpLoyment decreases. This process

however goes on      given the increase in the price level, workers further

increase the nominal wage, leading to further increases in prices, further

reduction in demand, further benkruptcies. This process goes on until

unemployment leads workers to accept the warranted real wage. In

equiLibrium, real wages are unchanged, but the number of firms, capital

(fixed costs) and employment are all smaller6. While this has described
                                        18




the effects of z, the same analysis can be used to study the effects of a

demand contraction. While a demand contraction has no long run effect, it

leads for some period of time to bankruptcies and decreases in capital and

in employment. Even vhen the initial demand contraction disappears, firms

need to be reopened for the economy to return to its initial equilibrium.

       In addition to giving a simple handle on the interacti?n between

capital accumulation and unemployment, this example is useful in other

ways. Consider, in passing, those two points       (1) capital decreases here

without any movement in real wages or user costs      this would make life

difficult for investment functions baaed on factor prices.     (2) While the

problem is clearly a problem of unwarranted wage demands, firms will

perceive it partly as a problem of wages and partly as a problem of

demand, as the demand they face keeps shifting adversely over time      this

suggests the dangers of using firms' perceptions to characterize the

origin of unemployment, as is done in some European countries.



3. Capital accumulation and unemployment. Lessons from Chelwood Gate 2.



       The interaction between capit4l accumulation and unempl.oyment is

the first main theme of Chelwood Gate 2. The basic theme is simple and

very much consistent with the analysis above       the increase in real wages

in the 1970's and the demand contraction of the 1980's have led to a large

relative decline in capital accumulation, which has contributed to the

incresse in equilibrium unemployment.

       Conceptually, this effect is already fully captured in the price

setting equation, and in the model of section 1. Equation (4) makes clear
                                    19



how equilibrium unemployment is likely to be affected by the level of

capital accumulation. A decrease in capital shifts marginal cost upwards.

leading firms to increase their price given wages, or equivalently, to

decrease the wage that they offer at any level of employment. This will,

unless workers accept the required fall in the real wage lead to an
                                                                       -

increaee in equilibrium unemployment.

       The papers at this conference go however beyond relying on their

estimates obtained from price equations. There are indeed a few good

reasons to think that empirical price equations will not fully capture the

effects of capital decumulation on price setting and thus on unemployment:

       The first, which is investigated at length in the papers is the

putty-clay nature of technology. Suppose that the decrease in investment

rates in Europe hides a sharp decrease in the number of machines, partly

compensated by a shift towards higher capital intensity:machines. The

number of jobs consistent with full employment of machines has fallen more

sharply than the capital stock numbers might suggest. Or, and this is

again related to putty-clay, the underlying marginal cost curve (remember

that the price setting equation is, under the assumption of constant

elasticity of demand just a parallel translation of marginal cost) may he

much more non linear than suggested in the price equation above. Finns

may be able to satisfy demand at roughly constant marginal cost until they

hit a capacity constraint at which they cannot increase employment at any

positive real wage. Finally, firms may use delivery lags or rationing

(permanently 7) instead of increasing prices, so that again the estimated

price equation may not reflect the slope of the marginal cost curve.
                                         20



           For all those reasons, the papers use an alternative,

complementary, approach, and estimate the level of employment consistent

with full employment of capital under a strict short run Leontief

assumption. IThile those papers use a more sophisticated approach, they

confirm what a first pass examination of the data would suggest. Profit

rates decreased sharply in the 1910's and have only recently etarted to

recover the profitability index computed by the EEC, which is normalize

to equal 100 over the 1960's stood at 60 in 1975, 65 in 1980 and stands

now at approximately 757       How much of this profit slump is due to dernan

and how much to cost shocks is an important (and well defined, as I have

shown above) question, to which we do not have yet an answer. This

decrease in profitability has affected investment. The table below gives

investment rates in Europe and their relation to the growth rate of

output:


Table 1

(EECI2)           Investment/GNP ratio                  Crovth rate of GDP

  70/61                       23.1%                                  4.8%
  80/71 :                     22.5                                   3.0%
  87/81 :                     19.5                                   1.6%

Source       European Commission


           Investment rates have indeed gone down. 3ut if we take marginal

K/Y   to   be roughly equal to 2, they appeared to have gone down by less th

would have been predicted from the decrease in output growth, suggesting

that part of investment has taken the form of an increase in capital

intensity. Table 2, which gives average capacity utilisation rates in

manufacturing for EEC countries makes this last point simply.
                                      21




Table 2

Capacity utilization in manufacturing industry

                   Peak73    Trough75 Peak79/80 Trough82/83        January88

EEC9               86.4        15.0        83.9       76.4               84.2


          Capacityutilization is now close to historical peak values.

Whether or 'not we must interpret this as telling us that economy wide

employment cannot be increasad is open to question. I do not believe so

and return to the issue in section 4. However it surely tells us that

firms have decreased capacity in line with the slowdown in output, and

that capital accumulation is surely responsible for part of the increase

in equilibrium unemployment.



          Thissection has highlighted the potential role of capital in

generating persistence of unemployment. As a transition to the next

section, note however the importance of wage setting in the background.

How capital accumulation affects wages is all important for persistence

and amplification. In particular, a central issue is that of what

productivity term belongs to the wage equation. If for example, wages

depend on actual labor productivity rather than, say, on total factor

productivity, efforts by firms to reduce costs by shifting to more capital

intensive techniques will be self defeating. This is for example the line

of argument used by Heliwig and Neuman(1987) to explain the increase in

unemployment in Germany. More generally, there is an obvious loose end in

the argument that capital shortages are to blame for high unemployment.
                                    22



Granted the decrease in capital, we still have to explain why uneuiployed

workers do not accept lower real wages in the face of such high

unemployment.
                                    23




Section 3. Labor Supply and the Persistence of tJnesrnlgymtt



       The traditional representation of wage setting had long been in

terms of a Phillips curve relation, between unemployment and wage

inflation given price inflation. It is deer that the current experience

requires us to go beyond such a black box relation. The natural starting

point in Europe is with wage bargaining between unions and firms. While

this also is an age old subject, recent work has suggested new and

important twists. Again, I review the current state of thought and then

turn to the empirical evidence.



1. Persistence of unemployment and membershio effects



       If wages are set by bargaining between unions and firms, one would

not expect the unemployed and the employed to have the same weight in

bargaining. Quite simply, one would expect the employed workers to have

more weight in bargaining. This simple remark would seem rather obvious

and hardly controversial ; it has however important implications, and in

particular suggests a very natural channel for unemployment persistence.

The lower the number of workers employed today, the lower is bargained

employment likely to be tomorrow.

       The argument was stated by Gregory at Ghelwood Gate 1 and applied

by him to the case of Australia. It has been the subject of substantial

research since then. In Blanchard and Summers (1987), we pushed the

argument to its logical limit, by looking at the case where unions are
                                              24



monopoly unions, with membership equal to employment at the time of

bargaining. We showed, not surprisingly, that employment would follow a

random walk. Low employment would lead thoae who remained employed to try

to preserve their jobs, not to lower wages to create new ones. Movements

in actual unemployment would translate one for one in permanent changes in
                                                                                  -
equilibrium unemployment, an effect which has cdme to be known aa

hysteresis    (see papers in Cross (1988)).



          The following variation on the model of section 1 makes the point

simply. Assume that all firms operate under constant returns to labor

(a—I), and that all E. 's for firms are equal to actual values. This

implies

(11) p—w-q and n—y•q
Aggregate demand is still given by y —             x•p,   so that replacing p from (II)

gives a derived demand for labor

          n — x-w

Given this derived demand, assume that the union chooses the nominal wage

w before it knows x, thus based on Ex rather than x, and that it chooses

the wage so that, in expected value, its members are employed. Assume

finally that membership is given by n(-l) +               d(-n(-l)).   If d-l,

membership is equal to the labor force ; if d—O, membership is equal to

last period employment. Then, the wage equation takes the form

                    w — Ex   -
                                 n(-l)   -


and the behavior of employment (unemployment) is given by

(12) -n — (l-d)(n-n(-l))             (x-Ex)
                                     25



All the dynamics of unemployment come from membership effects. If 4—0,

when unions only care about the currently employed, and under rational

expectations for the union, employment follows a random walk.



       This limiting case is, like all limiting cases, both revealing and

too strong. It is probably safe to assume that, except perhaps in those

countries where bargaining takes place at the national Level, unions are

indeed mostly concerned about the interests of the employed and, perhaps,

the recently laid off. ut the argument neglects the bargaining power of

firms which presumably have the option, perhaps at some high cost, to

bypass unions and go to the unemployed8. It also neglects the fact that

for many low skill jobs, insider effects are likely to be weak. And thus,

if we are to explain persistent high unemployment along those lines, we

must explain why the unemployed exert little or no pressure on wage

bargaining.



2, Disaffection and the persistence of unemployment



       That the long term unemployed appeared to have little effect on

wage setting was also emphasized at Chelwood Gate 1 by Layard and Nickell

in their analysis of unemployment in the 13K.   It also has been the subject

of heavy research since then.

       The argument that long term unemployment may lead to the loss of

skills, reducing human capital and thus decreasing equilibrium employment

dates back at least to Phelps (1972). That high unemployment today cornea
                                      26



from the fact that the long term unemployed have become unemployable does

not however seem to capture the current European experience. What appears

to be at work is a more complex more diffuse, change in attitudes towards

unemployment.

         Despite a move since the early 80's toward a less generous

unemployment benefit system, unemployment in Eutope is, for the most part

and for the better, not a life threatening experience. In times of low

unemployment however, there is a stigma associated with being unemployed.

Being unemployed reflects on the individual, rather than on society. A

period of high unemployment which leads to very high rates of long term

unemployment among specific groups chsnges their attitudes. Being

unemployed becomes normal, rather than deviant behavior. The fact that

others are unemployed also makes being unemployed less unattractive. The

low probability of getting jobs leads the unemployed to decrease their

search effort. Beyond those changes in attitudes, deeper changes take

place which further alleviate the burden of unemployment. For example.

the family structure adapts, with a higher proportion of young workers

staying at home to survive more easily on their unemployment benefits.

Government programs develop to provide short term employment to target

groups    those programs have ssibiguoua effects on equilibrium

unemployment. Early on, they may prevent the development of an

unemployment culture ; the Swedish experience provides evidence in favor

of that effect. But by providing cheaper labor to firms and allowing the

unemployed to go back and forth between unemployment and short term

employment opportunities, they decrease the pressure of unemployment on
                                    27



wages. All these effects make unemployment more tolerable. They also

decressehowever the pressure that unemployment puts on wages, thus

potentially increasing equilibrium unemployment.



3. Membirship and disaffection effects   empir-ical evidence

       -In contrast to the approach used to study the implications of

capital -accumulation, the papers limit themselves for the most part to the

estimation of aggregate wage equations. While conceptually this is

precisely what is needed, I suspect that we have learned everything we-can

from aggregate wage equations, and that we need to go much further.

      --There are two reasons to be skeptical of what can be learned from

such equations. The first is the issue of simultaneity. Can we really

hope to identify, when we use yearly data, the wsge and the price setting

equations 7 - Under many specifications of wage bargaining, all the

variables af-fecting price decisions will also affect wage setting. More

importantly in the present context, the effects suggested above arc likely

to affect wage bargaining slowly over time. The pressure from a given

level of unemployment on wages may slowly decresseover time, as the long

term unemployed slowly change attitudes, as the laid off workers are

slowly ignored in wage negotiations. Testing whether unemployment comes

in levels or in first differences is a very coarse test in this context.

  -
       What should then research be focused on 7 Given the tentative

nature of many of the hypotheses sketched above, I believe that we should

still be at the shopping stage, gathering qualitative and quantitative

evidence which aheds light on those aspects of the labor market, looking
                                        28




at the disaggregated evidence from specific industries. And here, there

is plenty of evidence to gather. For example;

         On the difference between the employed and the unemployed, between

insiders and outsiders ;   At   the beginning of 1987, in the UK, 34% of

manufacturing workers worked overtime, a figure just equal to the cyclical

peaks in 1974 and 1977, significantly above the '26% overtime figure for

1981 and the 29% observed in the recessions of 1973 and 1976. In June of

1985, 45% of those who were employed thought that they could find a job

quickly if they became unemployed compared to 40% in 1977 when the

unemployment was only half as high9. The differential between minimum and

average wage appears to have narrowed in many countries ;    in   France for

example, the ratio of the minimum wage to the wage of a skilled worker (P3

in the French classification) has increased from 57% in 1973 to 67% in

j935l0    In the UK, relative wages of workers around the median earnings

level have decreased since 197911. The evidence on the incidence and the

concentration of long term unemployment is well documented (see for

example the papers in Cross (1988))

         On the change in attitude with respect to unemployment and changes

in family structure. British libraries in the Midlands make available

pamphlets with the title     "Leaving School    what you should know about

social security benefits." In France, among those under 50 who have been

unemployed for more than two years, 25% are effectively not looking for a

new job, compared to 15% for those unemployed for less than a year. Among

those above SO, the numbers are respectively equal to 44% versus 25%.

Among 25 years old male workers in France, 55% of those who are unemployed
                                     29



live at borne, coispared to 30% for those who work12. The unemployment rate

in Spain 1s of 45% for young workers, but reaches 60% for those living at
                                                      -
home                                       -




       We clearly have to go beyond such anecdotal evidence. We have to

understand how the unemployed affect wage bargaining. This surely depends

on labor market and goods market atructure and itistitutions, on how easy

it is to create new firma, on whether collective agreements automatically

extend to new firms   and ao on. I do not think we fully understand those
aspects-of-the labor market. But both the logic of wage bargaining, and

the anecdotal evidence strongly auggest that the dynamics of labor supply

are acentra-l channel of persistence of equilihriuin unemployment.-
                                        30




Section 4. Miasma Parts and Policy



        While many details are still fuzzy, a broad framework is emerging.

With   it also emerges a broad consensus about the causes of high persistent
unemployment. The increase in unemployment is attributed to a variety of

supply and demand factors, with supply factors dominating the scene in tha

1970's, and demand factors playing a major role in the further increase in

unemployment of the early 1980's. These original factors have in large

part disappeared. But unemployment has not       the reason is to be found in

capital and labor supply effects      high actual unemployment has led to an.

increase in equilibrium unemployment.

        In this last section, I want to touch on two   issues.   First, should

we plan further research within this broad framework, or are some

important angles still left out 7 Second, taking our tentative

conclusions about the causes of persistent unemployment at face value,

what policies should we be recommending 7



I. Could we be on the wrong track ?

        Many other explanations have been adduced to explain European

unemploymenJ3. Many focus on changes in industrial structure, a factor

which is not emphasized in the above framework. That factor was not

discarded a priori. It was considered at Chelwood Gate 1 : results on

movements in mismatch indices were reported by Layard and Hickell for the

UK, and by Franz and Konig for Germany. Those indices, computed by
                                    31




looking at the relation between unemployment and vacancy rates by

industry, region or occupation, did not reveal any obvious increase1

suggesting, contrary to common perceptions, that there had been no drastic

change in the pace of industrial reorganization'4. I suspect that however

that the dismissal may have been too fast:

       One of the characteristics of the currentf unemployment situation is

the disproportionate incidence of unemployment among unskilled workers.

The ratio of unemployment rates of semi-and unskilled manual workers to

the total unemployment rate is equal to 1.9 in the UK, compared to 1.2 in

the US. At the same time, there is at least anecdotal evidence of

shortages of skilled workers. This suggests that we may not have looked

in the right direction: •a mismatch index by skill may well reveal higher

mismatch.

       What could explain such a mismatch 7 One line of explanation,

which has not received the quantitative attention that it deserves, has

been developed by Piore and Sabel (1924). Put in more neoclassical terms

than their own, the argument is the following. Changes in the nature of

markets and in the nature of products have led over the last fifteen years

to a movement away from mass production to whet they call "flexible

specializationTM. Such a shift translates into a change in relative

demands for skilled and unskilled labor, If the wage for unskilled

workers is inflexible downwards, or if skilled-unskilled wage

differentials are rigid, this shift translates into unemployment of

unskilled workers, and an increase in real wages for skilled workers. It

is clear that this line of explanation does not explain the sharp increase
                                        32



in unemployment of the early 1980's; It also doca not easily explain why,

for example, the wage of skilled workers relative to the average wage has not

increased over the last five years, while the reverse held for the wage of

low skilled workers. But it may well be part of the overall story and

deserves more attention.




2. What imolitations should we draw ?

     Suppose that it is indeed the case that, hecause of capital and labor

supply effects, equilibrium and actual unemployment are roughly equal. Does

thia imply that there is no room for refletion 7 Put another way, if demand

policies were aimed at decreasing actual unemployment, would equilibrium

unemployment stay high or follow quickly in tow 7

     Consider the capital accumulation constraint. The domputation given in

the papers of employment at full capacity utilization suggests a stringent

short run barrier to employment expansion, a marginal cost curve which turns

vertical at levels of employment close to current levels. By contrast, price

equations suggest a much more gently sloping marginal cost curve, suggest

that increased employment may require increases in markups, but may

nevertheless be technically feasible. How can we tell 7 History gives us a

nearly clean experiment and a good hint of the answer.

     In 1939, the US economy which had gone for 9 years with high

unemployment was suddenly confronted with a very large increase in demand,

due to the war effort and intertemporal speculation by consumers in

anticipation of future shortages and price increases. With respect to
                                    33




capital accumulation, the situation wes not quite the same as for Europe

today   Capital accumulation had been very slow throughout the 1930's and

by 1939, the capital stock stood at 15% below its 1930 level. But

capacity utilizstion numbers were lower in most sectors than they are in

Europe today. Nevertheless the increase in production over the next two

yesrs was truly remarkable   Even in those sectots in which capacity is

easily defined and measured, capacity utilization increased to

unprecedented levels. Capacity utilization in steel ingots production.

which stood at 61% in August 1939 hsd increased to reach 99% in October

1941. For cotton spindling activity, capacity utilization increased over

the same period from 85% to 126%... The index of the ratio of private

output to capital which had stood at .68 in 1938 (roughly its mean value

during 1915-1940) stood at .85 in 1941 (and at 1.05 in 1945...). And, as

is well known, unemployment decreased by 8% from 1939 to the eve of Pearl

Harbor in 1941, moat of the decrease being due to an increase in civilian

rather than military employment

        This does not imply that the same feast could be achieved by

Europe, especially without pressure on inflation. Indeed inflation,

measured by a wholesale price index, which had remained low until early

1941, started increasing at 2% a month from February on, largely because

of supply bottlenecks. But it makes an important point     the capital

constraint is not as rigid as it sounds, and the "capital constrained

employment" figure derived in the country papers at this Conference is

probably not the upper bound on employment. Furthermore, if profitability

is there, higher investment can relax the contraint fairly quickly over
                                       34



time15. And profitability appears now to be sufficient for investment to

take place in response to an increase in demand.

       What about labor supply effects ? The strict model of hysteresis

presented in section 3 implies that any change in actual unemployment will

be followed by an equiproportionate decrease in equilibrium -unemployment.

This is too sanguine a view. The change in mentlities and institutions

from ten years of high unemployment cannot be suddenly undone by an

increase in aggregate demand. I do not think that we understand the labor

supply mechaniams at work to have strong views as to how fast unemployment

can be safely decreased. Most of the leads reviewed in the previous

section suggest that progress will be faster if an increase in aggregate

demand is combined a major effort aimed at reenfranchiaing those who do

not participate in the labor market.
                                        35




                                     FOOTNOTES



       When referring to "Chelwood Gate Mark 1", I have in mind mainly the

papers by Bean and Solow, and the country papers which use that framework.

As will be clear below, some of the papers of Chlwood Gate 1 were already

developing the themes which are emphasized in Chelwood Gate 2.

2     This is the first place where putty-clay may make a difference.

This excludes the possibility that, for n-k large enough, the marginal

product of labor is zero.

       The reader of the Conference volume will realize that the model I

develop looks on the surface quite different from the Dreze-Sneessens

disequilibrium model which underlies the estimated country models. While

a full discussion of the differences would lead to another paper, the

following remarks may be useful:

       I see the main difference between the two as the formalization of

how markets clear or do not clear in the short run. I assume that, at any

point in time, firms set a price and are then willing and able to satisfy

demand, although perhaps at a loss. In contrast, the Dreze-Sneessens

approach sees firms as facing a vertical marginal cost at full capacity,

or labor shortages, so that some firms end up rationing demand because of

insufficient capital or labor.

       The issue of short run rationing is an interesting one, and asS the

formalization of the market as a set of micromarkets in disequilibrium may

give useful empirical insights. The construction of "capital-constrained

employment", "demand constrained employment" and "full employment" series

is a simple -   -although,   as I shall argue below, potentially misleading if
                                      36



taken too literally- -   way of summarizing and organizing the evidence on

the movements of capital, capacity, the labor force and output. Whether

however there is short run rationing has, I believe, little bearing on the

medium run issues which are the focus of the conference and of this paper.

On those medium run issues, on the logic end the role of capital

accumulation or wage bargaining, I see no substantial difference between

the two formalizations. And I find mine snslytically more convenient...

       See for exsmple Bruno and Sachs (1985), for a clear presentation

and an application to the European experience of the 1970's.

      A more elaborate analysis of investment decisions under imperfect

competition, closer in spirit to the model used at this conference, is

developed by Sneessens (1987). See also 1'lslinvaud (1980).
6     Solow in his Ghelwood Gate 1 paper suggested an interesting twist to

that story. If the decrease in the number of firms leads to an increase

in monopoly power (this is not the case given the Dixit-Stiglitz

formalization, but would be under the Uotelling-Weitzman approach), the

new equilibrium is characterized by higher markups, lower warranted real

wages. This may require an additional decrease in unemployment.      The

same is true if low activity decreaees flexibility, or productivity,

decreasing the wage that firms can afford to pay.     (See Blanchard and

Summers 1988).

      These numbers are from the Annual Report of the EEC (1987). Lee

(1986) gives recent numbers for nine OECD countries

      The argument also neglects the role of capital accumulation. In

choosing wages and the level of employment, the union must also take into

account the effect on capital accumulation and the rate of profit.     This

tends also to decrease membership effects.
                                    37




     Blanchard and Summers (1988)

10    Glaude and Hernu (1986)

      Adams (1987)
12
      Cezard (1986)
13    Krugman (1987) provides a survey.
14    This is explored in Modigliani et al (1987).
                                      38




                                  REFERENCES

H. Adams, "The Distribution of Earnings 1973 to 1986", mimeo Employment
Market   Research Unit, Department of Employment, UK

C. Bean, R. L.ayard and S. Nickell, "The Rise in Unemployment A Multi-
Country Study", Economica. Supplement. 53-2105. 1986. 51-523

0. J. Blanchard and L. H. Summers, "Hysteresis and the European
Unemployment Problem", NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1986. 1, 15-78

0. 3. Blanchard and L. H. Summers, "Beyond the Natural Rate Hypothesis",
American Economic Review, May, 1988, 78-2, 182-187

H. Bruno and J. Sachs, "Economics of Worldwide Stagfletion", Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, 1985

M. Gerard, "Fsmille, Milieu Social et Risque de Chomage", Economic et
Statistipue, Novembre-Decembre 1986, 91-96

H. Cezard, "500 000 Personnes Sont su Chomage Depuis Plus de Deux Axis",
Economic et Statisticue, Novembre-Decembre 1986, 83-90

R. Cross, (ed), "Unemployment, Hysteresis and the Natural Rate
Hypothesis", Basil Blackwell, 1988

H. Claude and Patrice Hernu, "Lea Sslaires en 1985", Economic et
Ststistlgus,   Mai 1986

R.G. Gregory, "Wages Policy and Unemployment in Australia", Economica,
Supplement, 53-210, 1986, S53-S74

EEC. "Annual Economic Report 1981-1988", November 1987

P. Krugman, "Slow Growth in Europe  Conceptual Issues", in "Barriers to
European Growth A Transatlantic View", R. Lawrence and C. Schultze ads,
Brookings, 1987, 48-75

R. Layard and S. Nickell, "The Labour Market", in "The Performance of the
British Economy", R. Dornbusch and R. Layard eds, Clarendon Press, Oxford
1987, 131-179

3. Chan-Lee, "Pure Profit Rates and Tobin's q in Nine OECD Countries",
OECD working paper 34, April 1986

H. Malinvaud, "Profitability and Unemployment", Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge 1980
                                    39




F. Modigliani, M. Monti 3. Dreze, H. Gierach and R. Layard, "Reducing
Unemployment in Europe   The Role of Capital Formation", CEPS paper 28,
1987

H. Piore and C. Sabel, The Second Industrial Divide", Basic Books, New
York, 1984

H. Sneessens, "Investment and the Inflation-Unemployment Tradeoff in a
Macroeconomic Rationing Model with Monopolistic Competition", European
Economic Review, 31., 1987, 781-815

R. Solow, "Getting the Questions Right". Economica, Supplement, 53-2105
1986, 523-S35
