                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      COLLAPSING EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES:
                              SHOCKS AND BIASES




                              Linda   S. Goldberg




                           Working Paper No. 2702




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                               September 1988




This research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National
Bureau of Ecoomic Research.
                                           NBER   Working   Paper #2702
                                           September    1.988



                    COLLAPSING EXCHANGE RATE REGIMES:
                            SHOCKS AND BIASES


                                ABSTRACT



 Patterns in domestic credit creation stemming from inconsistent fiscal
policies have received widespread attention for aggrevating
speculative attacks on central b: k foreign exchange reserves and
contributing to the collapse of exchange rate regimes. This paper
acknowledges the importance of monetary and fiscal discipline, but
also emphasizes the importance of other random shocks to the domestic
money market, most notably shocks from external credit supplies and
relative prices.
      Policies of the domestic fiscal authorities are only partial
catalysts for speculative attacks on a currency. Expansion of
domestic credit stemming from the monetization of fiscal imbalances
may be dominated by involuntary domestic credit expansions
necessitated by surprise shortages in supplies of external capital.
Further, the unexpected availability of external capital translates
into a lower net critical reserve floor, making the depletion of
central bank reserves by a speculative attack more difficult to
accomplish. Also of considerable importance are relative price shocks
which directly influence the probability of collapse by
                                                         randomizing
the demand for nominal money balances.
      Empirical studies of exchange rate crises that neglect these
considerations will produce biased estimates of both expected
                                                               collapse
probabilities and anticipated post-collapse exchange rates.




                                           Linda S. Goldberg
                                           New York University
                                           Department of Economics
                                           269 Mercer Street
                                           New York, NY  10003
1.   INTRODUCTION'

      The importance of exchange rate crises has been emphasized in a

growing body of theory concerned with sustainable policies and

stabilization. Models of exchange rate crises typically depict deficits in

the balance of payments leading to a gradual erosion of central bank

reserves followed hy a sharp, generally self-fulfilling speculative attack

on the currency which succeeds at collapsing the exchange regime.    The

timing and magnitu4e of such an attack is a function of general expected

profitability of such actions.    Expectations of profitability are taken

over the trend chsnges in relevant economic variables and over the range of

shocks that can affect the expected money market equilibrium and, in turn,

the exchange rate that would exist if an attack were to collapse the

exchange regime.     Patterns in domestic credit creation stemming from

inconsistent fiscal policies have received widespread attention for

contributing to speculative attacks on a currency.2 In this paper I

acknowledge the importance of monetary and fiscal discipline,   but also

emphasize the importance of other random shocks to the domestic money

market, most notably shocks from external credit supplies and relative

prices.   Policies of the domestic fiscal authorities are only partial

catalysts for speculative attacks on a currency.    Voluntary or choice

expansion of domestic credit may be dominated by involuntary domestic

credit expansions necessitated by surprise shortages   in supplies of


'An earlier version of this paper, entitled "Collapsing Exchange Rate
Regimes: An Extended Framework", benefited from comments and suggestions
by Peter Kenen, Bill Branson, Bob Cumby, Sue Collins and an anonymous
referee.  Support from the C.V.Starr Center of New York University is
           acknowledged.
patefully
 See Krugman (1979) and Flood and Garber (1984).



                                        -2-
external capital.     Further,   the unexpected availability of external capital

translates into a lower net critical reserve floor, making the depletion of

central bank reserves by a speculative attack more difficult to accomplish.

Also of considerable importance are relative price shocks which directly

influence the probability of collapse by randomizing the demand for nominal

money balances.

        The paper emphasizes that empirical studies of exchange rate crises

that neglect these considerations will produce biased estimates of both

expected collapse probabilities and anticipated post-collapse exchange

rates.      Since these estimation biases are one of the central themes of

this paper,     the starting point of the theoretical exposition is the most


frequently applied collapse model:      the linear discrete-time model of Flood

and Garber (1984).     Applications of this basic model have generated
estimates of collapse probabilities and expected post-collapse exchange

rates that are overstated to the extent that they have ignored the

importance of: 1) nontraded goods in the domestic consumption basket; 2)

positive and significant risk premia; 3) systematic deviations from

purchasing power parity (leading to relatively costly domestic nontraded

goods and potentially cheap exports);     and 4) significant real income

effects and currency substitution motives in the demand for real money

balances. Collapse probability estimates will be understated to the extent

that random behavior characterizes: 1) the price of traded goods relative

to nontraded goods; and 2) the availability of external credit supplies.

        The paper is organized as follows.      Section 2 extends the Flood and

Garber (1984) linear discrete time model of a collapsing fixed exchange

rate,    introducing a range of stochastic variables. Section 3 uses



                                          -3-
comparative statics to calculate the extent of probability and post-

collapse exchange rate biases in estimation induced by faulty

specification. Section 4 concludes.

     2.   THE EXTENDED MODEL

     Models of exchange rate crises and collapsing exchange rate regimes

depict deficits in the balance of payments leading to a gradual erosion and

then sharp speculative attack on central bank foreign exchange reserves.

This depletes reserves to the lowest level acceptable to the central bank

and eliminates the means by which the government can intervene in the

foreign exchange market.    As in the Mexican and Argentine experiences,

when this occurs the overvalued exchange rate can no longer be sustained

and the exchange regime collapses. The collapse can take the form of

either a discrete devaluation of the controlled exchange rate or a switch

to a floating exchange rate generally accompanied by a sharp currency

depreciation.

     Following Salant and Henderson's (1978) application of a Hotelling

model of natural resource depletion to a speculative attack on government

gold stocks,    Krugman (1979) applied the speculative attack model to the

foreign exchange market.    Krugman showed that when future government policy

is known with certainty,    a balance of payments problem passes through

three stages:    a period of gradually declining reserves,   a sudden

speculative attack and a post-crisis period during which the currency is

allowed to depreciate. When monetary policy and the quantity of reserves

that the government is willing to commit to maintain the existing exchange

rate are not known,   the timing and magnitude of the speculative attack are

dependent upon the estimates of individuals who have incomplete knowledge.



                                        -4-
The contribution of random domestic credit creation to the speculative

attack was also the driving force in Flood and Garber's (F-G) linear

discrete time model of a collapse.     Consistent with Suiter's (1986)

arguments, I note in this paper that uncertain government policy leading

uncertain or excessive domestic credit expansion may not be the most

                                                                         For
important shock that can drive an economy to the brink of collapse.

this reason, I examine the relative importance of other shocks and restate

the intuition behind a speculative attack.

     The probability of an exchange regime collapse generally is modelled

as the probability that an attack on central bank reserves will prove

rewarding to speculating agents.     Define the shadow exchange rate,          as

the exchange rate that would prevail in a post-collapse equilibrium. The

probability of attack then is the probability that    J÷ will   exceed

the fixed rate.    When the attack depletes reserves to a critically low

level, the reserve floor R, speculating agents will profit by a mininum of
     -
            per    unit of foreign currency held.

     I retain the basic form   of   the F-C model, with its emphasis on the


money market equilibrium condition and some of its small country

assumptions, but    departing from F-G by introducing a nontraded good and

allowing for systematic3 and random deviations between the relative price

of traded and nontraded goods.      The stochastic behavior of relative prices

serves to randomize the demand for nominal money balances.      I also add


uncertain access to supplies of external credit to emphasize that overall


3Connolly and Taylor (1984) show how expectations of a devaluation, or
change in exchange rate regime, can be reflected in relative prices of
domestic and foreign goods. These dynamics are not modelled herein.




                                         -5-
 domestic credit expansions are not always directly related to the
                                                                   policies
 of government fiscal authorities.    Other problematic assumptions embedded in

 the F-C model snd relaxed in this
                                   paper sre:          purchasing-power-parity,
 interest rate parity, and demand for real balances insensitive to income

and currency substitution motives.          One purpose of the analysis is to

introduce greater realism into the modeling of balance of payments crises.

        The public sector is comprised of a central bank and a

government/fiscal authority. When the government decrees a fixed exchange

rate,     the central bank must match any excess supply of domestic credit

with an offsetting decline in its foreign exchange reserves in order to

maintain money market equilibrium. When reserves normally used for

equilibrating the money market are no longer available,          possibly because
the speculative attack depleted reserves,          the controlled exchange rate

gives way to a flexible rate or a steeply devalued fixed rate.4

        The basic equations of the collapse model are equations 1                 9.
                                                                  through
Equation 1 represents the demand for real balances, i.e. nominal money, M,

divided by the domestic price index,              Money demand is sensitive to:

exogenously given real income, y, through transaction demands;           the

nominal interest rate, i, through portfolio motives; and to the expected

rate of depreciation of the exchange rate through the currency aubstitution

motive.    The exchange rate, S, is defined as domestic currency per unit of

foreign exchange. All expectations are calculated using the available

information set

  1)   M/Q—   a0-   a1i+ a2y- a3E[0S+1-S:   EJ/S

4The model needs only minor modification to be applied to the case of
unsustainable crawling exchange rates.



                                            -6-
        Equation 2 represents the linkage between the domestic interest rate

and the foreign interest rate,       i.    F-C assumed interest rate parity.

Instead,    I    assume that the interest rate spread is comprised of the

expected change in the exchange rate plus a wedge that I broadly interpret

as a risk premium.        The broad interpretation is because of interest rate

distortions that arise when the government uses the interest rate as an

instrument in the pursuit of policy objectives.        The presence of this

'nonrisk'       component of the wedge depends on the choice of interest rate to

be used in estimation.        This would lead to an rt which may diverge from the

standard asset market interpretation of a risk premium.        Further,   since the

domestic economy is rationed in its access to external credit,         the perfect


capital market'a direct linkage between the interest rate and capital flows

is severed. A theoretical argument for this break is provided by the

Stiglitz and Weiss type linkage between the price of credit and its supply.

Empirical evidence of        credit rationing to developing countries was given

by Kharas (1984).        Goldberg (1988) provided evidence that countries were

limited in access to external credit in periods preceding exchange regime

collapses.

  2)   i— i*      +   E[S+1-S: e]/S + rt
       In Equation 3, the domestic price index is defined as a weighted sum

of the price of domestic nontraded goods, P, and the domestic price of

traded goods,              The weight of nontraded goods in domestic

expenditures, a, is assumed exogenously given.        If the marginal propensity

to consume were permitted to vary, the model would need to distinguish

between expenditure switching and expenditure reducing behavior resulting




                                            -7-
 from expected changes in the exchange rate.                  As applied, we can interpret

 1-a as the share of consumed goods that are priced according to the law of

one price, and a as the share of gooods whose price is determined partially

by domestic conditions.             This is a departure from the Flood-Garber

formulation which assumed the existence of traded goods only (a—O) and all

of which were priced according to the strict form of purchasing power

parity.        Subsequent empirical applications of the F-G model, including

studies of Argentina and Mexico, have accepted this assumption although

empirical evidence by Goldberg (1988) supports a contrary hypothesis.5

     3)   Q— aP + (la)P*St
  4)      /— p* +
  5) U'             +

           The validity     of various     forms   of PEP assumptions   has been debated   on
both      theoretical     and empirical     grounds.      Accordingly, the specific form of
the relation between domestic and foreign prices is left open-ended
                                                                    by

equations 4 and 5 to introduce enough modelling flexibility to accomodate a

range of interpretations.                 Equation 4 breaks the assumption of short run

purchasing-power-parity (PPP) by introducing systematic and random relative

price deviations summarized by U'.                 Equation 5 divides these deviations
into a predictable or systematic component,                 p, and a short run or random
component,       U.
            Equation 6 defines the money supply as the sum of domestic credit in

circulation,        D,    and the stock of central bank foreign exchange reserves,

R.        Foreign exchange reserves are valued in domestic currency.             Following


Cumby and van Wijnbergen            (1988) and Blanco and Garber (1986)
respectively.



                                                    -8-
the tendency of the literature,    I do not address the type of money stock


valuation concerns voiced by uiter (1986).

  6)   M5 R +
  7)   D+1— D +     +

  8)   E7-
           Domestic credit creation proceeds according to a trend   rate,   t'
                                                                     and is
reflecting expected monetary financing of basic government deficits,

affected directly by two sources of variability. The first source,                is
the product of unanticipated domestic government expenditures and uncertain

                         Flood and Garber (1984) and Krugman (1979) stress
government revenues.

that this type of shock contributes greatly to the uncertain timing of a
                                                                            For
speculative attack and of the subsequent exchange regime collapse.
                                                  be attributed to surprise
example, domestic credit creation above trend may
                                                               for which no
shortages in government revenues or unanticipated expenditures

revenues are available. For simplicity         is modelled as an independent


random variable.     In more complex analyses, explicit sources of shocks

could be addressed for even more specific results.

           The second source of variability,     stems from the uncertain

                                           the troubled economy.        Such
availability of external credit flows into

external credit shocks have been documented by Harberger and Edwards
                                                                     the
 (1982).     Unanticipated domestic credit creation would occur when
                                        deficits by borrowing on world
government had planned to meet internal
                                                If external credit is
capital markets rather than by printing money.
                                         basic budget will be monetized.
 suddenly scarce, a greater share of the

    > 0 are interpreted as unanticipated availability of external capital,

                                          creation needed for meeting
 decreasing the amount of domestic credit



                                         -9-
  internal deficits.            < 0 are negative shocks
                                                        indicating unanticipated
  restricted access to external capital
                                        leading to further increases in
 domestic credit creation above trend rate      These shocks to external
 credit availability may be country
                                    specific or global as in the world
 contraction of credit to LDCs following the 1982 Mexican
                                                          debt crisis.  For
 convenience, the shocks to fiscal balance, external credit
                                                            availability and
 the relative price of traded and nontraded
                                            goods are modelled as

 independently though not identically distributed.

   9)   M'—   M
          The money market equilibrium
                                       condition,      Equation 9, will be used for
 tracking the movement of central bank reserve stocks under a fixed
                                                                     rate
 system or of the exchange rate under a flexible exchange rate system.   If
central bank reserves are not
                              permitted to decline in response to an excess
supply of domestic credit, the exchange rate would have to
                                                           adjust.
Following Flood-Garber the exchange rate that would clear the
                                                              money market
if the currency were
                     instantaneously allowed to (or forced to ) float is
called the shadow exchange rate,
                                        .    It provides a miniumum bound
                                                                   for the
rate that would prevail if
                           speculators attacked central bank reserves,
depleted reserves to a critically low level, and forced the
                                                            collapse of the
exchange regime.       It is interpreted as the lower bound for the
                                                                    post-
collapse exchange rate.

     The path of the shadow exchange rate is determined
                                                        by applying the
method of undetermined coefficients to combined
                                                equations I through 9.
Positing S—        +      and    solving for coefficients   -   and -y,   the solution
for the            rate in period   t is:
          - {l/
          shadow

    10)             a(P*t+   a()')}{ ((a+ a3)/a)s +         }


                                            -10-
 where a— a0 +     a2y    -
                              a1[        +   r
                                                    D   and R,     use equations 7 and 8 to
     I replace     M by       its components,

                                                                                    to observe
evaluate   D   and then value reserves at the critical floor,                 R,

the shadow rate path described by Equation 11.6

     11)    L-.   {1/acP*t+ a(Q+))}{              ((a1-f a3    +a)/a)ji+   Di + R   +   (-*)}
                                                       the ahadow rate.
     Note   the three random influences on the path on

Relative price shocks enter through the I2 term in the denominator.

                          relative price shocks weaken (heighten)               the pressure of
Positive (negative)
                                                                  Positive shocks caused by
domestic credit growth on the exchange rate.
                                                 on the exchange rate.
unanticipated basic deficits put upward pressure
                                                            to the
Some of this pressure could be mitigated by positive shocks

availability of external credit.                  Unexpected capital inflows to the crisis
                                                     More importantly,
country will alleviate some depreciation pressures.
                                                      on the exchange rate
notice that unexpected capital shortages put pressure
                                                         It also is
 even when domestic fiscal policies are not problematic.
                               relative price shocks can reverse the
 interesting that large enough
                                                   the shadow rate.
 direction of the effects that {y-f2 will have on
                                                 in this representative agent model and as
      Following the literature,

 assessed in period       t,    ir.,,   the probability that the exchange regime will
                                      the probability that the shadow rate
 collapse at the beginning of t+l, is

 will exceed the controlled rate in period t+l.

      12)   w—    Pr            -
                                    S     o }
                                                                commitment
      The rationale is straight-forward. Since the government's
                                        unrestricted access to central bank
 to a controlled rate gives speculators

                                                              reserves
 6For the float to be in place, central bank foreign exchange
                                              level.
 would be at the critical minimum permissible



                                                        -11-
foreign exchange reserves with free convertability,                speculators operating

in period Ct)          who expect the shadow rate to exceed the controlled rate in

period (t+l), will purchase foreign exchange reserves at the end of period

t.   With all agents assumed identical,             there will be a one shot attack on

central bank reserves that drives reserves down to the critical floor.                    The


collapse will occur instantly since there are no longer any resources to be

applied in defense of the weak currency.                Indeed, as emphasized by Obstfeld

(1986) though disputed by Buiter (1986) on consistency grounds,                  such a

speculative attack may be self-fulfilling.

     Using Equation 11 and replacing CY÷1 by the sum of its systematic and

random components,           manipulation of 12 yields:

        13)   —   Pr                          K÷1   }
                       {
where K+1      ((a+        a1+a3)/a)p +D +R÷1 Sta[P*t÷l+apt+j]
     This complex           probability expression needs to be evaluated based on the
joint   probability distribution of the summed right hand side random

influences.       This is a significant departure           from the basic F-G model since

we can have a non-zero probability of a run on reserves even when the basic

budget is under control and nonrandom. Each of the three sources of

randomness may be (but are not necessarily) characterized by distinct

statistical distributions. If the shocks were not independently

distributed, the cointegrated components would need to be identified and

the weights on the independent distributions specified. For example,

suppose government revenues were highly dependent on specific tariffs on

raw material exports.            The relative price shocks would also enter the

expression,       and we might rewrite Yt÷i'ttt         +       where -y'÷   is the




                                                -12-
independent fiscal shock.                 To keep the presentation clear, these extensions

are not included.

       The components of money demand that are known with 'reasonable'

certainty are collapsed into the                    term on the right hand side of the

inequality. The general and specific solutions for a closed form solution

for   w are       derived first by setting up the system and then by assuming

hypothetical distributions for the random components.                 I apply a

convolution integral to solve for the joint distribution of the random

variables.            Rewriting the problem as

14) w—       Pr   { Z1
                     K1 }
the   random variables have probability density functions (pdfs):

15)    1,+1       —           with pdf f1(Y1)
                  —           with pdf f2(Y2)
       X          —
                      SaaO+1 with        pdf f(X)
       Z          — SaaO-                    with pdf f(Z)
                      —
                          xt+1_Y1.t+1+Y2,t+1
The   derived formula for the probability density of Z1 is:
16) f(Z) —55              f(X)[l/SaaJ      f1(Y1) f2(Z+Y1-X) dY1dX
so    that
17) w3       _5K() f2(Z) dz

is the general form for the probability that the shadow rate will exceed

the fixed rate next period where Z is the previously defined weighted                 sure


of random variables from equation 15.

       To provide a direct parallel to Flood and Garber and provide a more

specific solution for             're,    I assume that the random variables follow

exponential distributions. The exponential distributions are both



                                                    -13-
analytically tractable and intuitively appealing, especially if we expect

large positive shocks to domestic credit creation (and other stochastic

terms)     to be more likely than large negative shocks.                    For example, the

argument that domestic nontraded goods prices are prone to larger shocks

than tradLed goods prices is reasonable for the case of nontraded

ag:ricultural goods and traded manufactures, though may be unreasonable when

there are traded raw materials. I represent                               +1and          as
exponentially and independently distributed with means adjusted to zero and

variances of (l/w)2, (l/i)2,              and (1/A2)2 respectively.

18)   k+—    -   l/w +   w÷1,    with           and

      f(X+1)—            exp [-w   w÷1]        if "t+i        0
                   [w
                   to                          ifw+1<0
19)          -1/A1 +               with f1—f, and
                           exp   [-A1   t+i'    if                0
      fyi.(Yit+i)—5A1
                     (9                          if-y+1<0
20)          -1/A2 +               with               and

                           exp   [-             if      ti            0

                     1o                          if     1+<0
Shift    variables, 11w,         l/5    and    l/&    are included so that the random

variables are distributed mean zero.                        Redefining K+1 as   K'1÷1   to include

the shift variables,             I integrate over equation 21 to derive the pdf of Z.

21)   f(Z)— fj(wA1A2/Saa)exp(wX)exp(-AiY1)expt-A2(Z+Yi-X)]dYidX
         so that

22)   f(Z)—      {wA1A2/   Staa(A1+A2)(w+Ai)}{          exp(A1Z) }

         Finally,       integrating over the range of Z, (-,K'+1], yields

23)   x—   {wA2/[Staa(Ai+A2)(+Aj)]}exp[A1 K'+1]



                                                        -14-
with    K'÷1—((a+a1+a3)/a)p     +D +R      -l/A1+l/A2- Sta[P*t+i4apt+ia/@]

The probability of collapse is a function of the variance of prices (11w),

the variance of domestic credit (1/A1), the variance of external credit

                                                                                   the critical
supplies (1/A2), the rate of domestic credit creation                      (Pt)'

reserve floor (Re), the share of nontraded goods in the domestic price

index (a), domestic real income          (ye),   the existing exchange rate,


systematic overvaluation of the nontraded good                            and some summary

variable which will simply be called X.

3.   Comparative Statics

       Using conparative statics I sign the sensitivity of 7r to the state

and control variables. As emphasized in the literature, the probability of

collapse increases as domestic credit creation rises.                       Further, there

exists sone    pp*   such that ir(p)—1 and for all p               < f, dic/dp
                                                                             >0       and

>    0, implying a concave mapping.        There is not, however, a finite s > 0

that satisfies    lrt(p)..O.   To completely eliminate the probability of

collapse, K'+1 would have to equal           -, a       condition unlikely to be achieved

by contracting domestic credit. Though            ir.   can not be eliminated,         it can

certainly be reduced significantly by lowering p, the trend rate of

expansion of domestic credit.        This would require fiscal control.

     The probability of collapse is positively correlated with the variability

of domestic government deficits,

                         >

            8ir/5 [1/A2] > 0    if 1/A2      1/A1 (sufficient          condition)


tTh     sufficient condition 1/A1    <    2[-(w-4-A2)
                                                         +   J(w-4-A2)2
                                                                          + 2 ]1




                                                 -15-
    and is positively correlated with the variability of supplies of

external credit, as long as external credit markets are characterized by

more uncertainty than internal fiscal balances.

        is positively correlated with the degree of randomness associated

with relative prices as long as 1/w is sufficiently large.                 As the share   o
nontraded goods or goods not satisfying the law of one price decreases                (a-,

0), 1/w must increase (l/w-*) to satisfy 26.

         /6(l/w)             > 0      if   l/w >   l/).   [(l-aaS)/aaSj,
                         < 0

        is negatively correlated with the share of the consumption basket

held in non PPP goods,

        5/6r <           0

     and is negatively correlated with the 'risk premium' on domestic

investments,   rt.       Cautious interpretatiion of this result is warranted

since the meaning of           r   remains vague and its dependence on       is possible.

The negatively signed relationship is attributed to the decrease in the

demand for real balances that occurs when the domestic interest rate rises.

An increasse in      r    leads to increased holdings of assets other than

domestic money and consequent increases in                . If    the risk premium were

modelled as a function of l/A1,l/A2, and 1/w, the overall responsiveness of

   to each of those variables would be reduced.

                     < 0

     The probability of collapse is negatively correlated with the level of

real income,    reflecting the increased transactions demand for real

balances that reduces the excess supply of domestic credit,                 Intuitively an

exception to this result would occur when increased                y spurs a more than

                                                   -16-
proportionate worsening of the current account due to increased import

demand.     This effect is not captured by the model.     Indeed if a fully

specified economy were modelled with real income dependent on domestic

spending expansions, the dynamics of the exchange rate would be

considerably more complex.

            £Rt/&pt    <   0

        As nontraded goods become systematically more expensive relative to

traded goods [Connolly and Taylor (1984)] the demand for real money

balances for transactions increases, alleviating pressure on the exchange

rate.    Implicit in this statement is the relatively inelastic demand for

such nontradeables as services.        As documented by Calvo (1983), such a

sharp increase in the relative price of nontraded goods in Argentina

occured in the two and one half years preceding the May 1981 sharp

devaluation of the peso.        However, if the anticipation of a devaluation

shifts demand away from nontraded goods as hoarding of traded durables

accelerates there would be some downward pressure on the relative price of

nontraded goods.

            6ic/6a3    <   0


        Finally,   x   is positively correlated with the leakage through currency

substitution, as expected.        It should be noted that a nonlinear rather than

a linear currency substitution term would probably better represent the

nature of currency substitution.

        The relative magnitudes of each of the influences on      can he

quantified through the empirical study of exchange rate crises.        The

potential for applied research on collapsing exchange rate regimes and for

application of the Flood-Carber discrete time model has been demonstrated



                                           -17-
by recent empirical work.8   Van Wijnbergen (1987) considered the

sustainability of the move from a flexible to a fixed exchange rate as part

of efforts to control high inflation in Brazil, Argentina and Israel.

Using the Flood-Carber collapse model, van Wijnbergen      illustrated the

linkage between inconsistent polity measures and their post-collapse

inflationary consequences. Blanco and Garber (1986) applied the basic

model to the Mexican experience from 1973 to 1982 and estimated one-period

ahead probabilities that the Mexican peso would collapse.      Cumby and van

Wijnbergen (1988) applied a similar model to the crawling peg experiente of

Argentina between 1979 and 1981.    Despite the previously discussed

troubling assumptiona embedded in the basic model, these applications

performed well qualitatively.

      For the most part,   the assumptions of the basic Flood and Garber

(1984) tollapse model were retained in these applications. Consequently,

any collapse probability (and shadow exchange rate) estimates generated

were understated to the extent that prites and external credit supplies

exhibit short term randomness.     Collapse probability estimates were

overstated to the extent that there are: nontraded goods in the domestic

consumption basket;    positive and significant risk premia;    systematic

deviations from purchasing-power-parity; and currency substitution motives

influencing the demand for real balances.      Goldberg (1988) found eath of

these extenaions statistically significant in applications to the

experiences of Mexico and Argentina.




see  Blanco and Garber (1986), van Wijnbergen (1987), Collins (1986),
Cumby and van Wijnbergen (1988), and Goldberg (l987b).



                                        -18-
4. Concluding Remarks

This paper has extended the Flood-Garber discrete time collapse model to

include a range of random influences on the money market.   Though exceaaive

and volatile domestic credit creation generally is perceived as the primary

force behind a speculative attack, the reasons for domestic redit creation

should be examined carefully and specifically addressed before policy

prescriptions are recommended for a crisis country.   It is possible that

unstable external credit supplies contribute more to the onset of a

speculative attatk than do   anticipated fiscal shortages or surpluses.

Highly variable relative prices may also have a more significant role than

variable domestic fiscal policies in triggering speculative attacks on

:entral bank reserves.

     Recent empirical applications of the basic model potentially will have

biased estimates of collapse probabilities and shadow exchange rates to the

sxtent that the extensions presented in this paper are statistically

significant.




                                      -19-
                             References

Blanco,H. and P. Carber, "Recurrent Devaluation and Speculative Attacks on
    the Mexican Peao',Journal of Political Economy, (February 1986).

Calvo, G.A. "Trying to Stabilize: Some Theoretical Reflections Based on
    the Case of Argentina, in Financial Policies and the World Capital
    Market:  The Problem of Latin American Countries, edited by Pedro Aspe,
    R. Dornbush and M. Obarfeld, University of Chicago Press (1983).

Connolly, M. and D. Taylor,  "The Exact Timing of the Collapse of an
    Exchange Rate Regime and Its Impact on the Relative Price of Traded
    Goods", Journal of Money. Credit and Banking, vol.16, no.2 (May 1985).

Cumby, R. and S. van Wijnbergen, "Fiscal Policy and Speculative Runs on the
    Central Bank Under a Crawling Exchange Rate Regime: Argentina 1979-
    1981", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 2376,
     (September 1987).

Flood, R. and P. Garber, "Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: Some Linear
    Examples", Journal of International Economics, vol. 16 (1984).

Flood, R. and R. Hodrick, "Real Aspects of Exchange Rate Regime Choice with
    Collapsing Fixed Rates," Journal of International Economics vol.21,
    no.3/4 (November 1986).

Goldberg, L.,   Collapsing Exchanae Rate Regimes: A Theoretical and
    Empirical   Investigation, Ph.D.Thesis, Princeton University, (January
     1988).

 ___________   "Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: An Application to Mexico and
    Argentina", C.V. Starr working paper #88-13 (1987)

____________ "Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes:     An Extended Framework", CV.
    Starr working paper #88-14 (1987).

Harberger, A. and S. Edwards, "Lessons of Experience Under Fixed Exchange
    Rates", in Theory and Experiences of Economic Development, edited by
    Mark Gersovitz (1982).

Krugman, P. , "A Model of Balance of Payments Crises", Journal of Money,
    Credit and Banking, vol.11, no.3 (August 1979), 311-325.

Obstfeld, M. , "Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance of Payments Crises",
    American Economic Review, vol.76, no.1 (March 1986).

Salant, S. and D. Henderson, "Market Anticipations of Government Policies
    and the Price of Gold", Journal of Political Economy vol.86,no.4
     (1978).

van Wijnbergen, S.,"Fiscal Deficits, Exchange Rate Crises and Inflation",
   National Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 2130 (1987).


                                          -20-
