                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        INTRADAY YEN/DOLLAR EXCHANGE
                      RATE MOVEMENTS: NEWS OR NOISE?




                               Takatoshi Ito
                              V. Vance Roley




                           Working Paper No. 2703




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                               September 1988




Talcatoshi Ito is Associate Professor of Economics, University of Minnesota,
and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. V. Vance Roley
is Rainier National Bank Professor of Banking and Finance, University of
Washington, and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research.
The authors are grateful to Sean Becketti and Richard Meese for helpful
comments and discussions. The authors also benefitted from comments received
from seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the
Summer Institute of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the University
of British Columbia, and the University of California at Berkeley. Financial
assistance from the National Science Foundation (SES-B808828) to the first
author and the Center for the Study of Banking and Financial Markets at the
University of Washington to the second author is gratefully acknowledged.
This research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper #2703
                                               September 1988


         INTRADAY YEN/DOLLAR EXCHANGE RATE MOVEMENTS: NEWS OR NOISE?


                                    ABSTRACT


     Intraday   movements in the yen/dollar rate are examined over the 1980-86

period using opening and closing quotes in the New York and Tokyo markets.

The results indicate that random-walk behavior is violated about half of the

time in various subsamples. However, the economic significance of departures

from the random-walk model diminshes over time. Large jumps in the exchange

rate also are examined, and some evidence on subsequent mean reversion is

presented. Finally, the response of Japanese and U.S. stock prices suggests

that intraday yen/dollar rate movements do contain at least some relevant

information.


Takatoshi Ito                                  V. Vance Roley
Institute of Economic Research                 Department of Finance DJ-1O
Hitotsubashi University                        University of Washington
Kunitachi, Tokyo 186                           Seattle, WA 98195
JAPAN
                                                      1

 I.     INTRODUCTION



        The behavior of asset returns in terms of both their predictability and their relation to economic

 fundamentals has received considerable attention. For exchange rates, a common efficient markets -
 rational expectations view is that most rate movements are unpredictable, and these unpredictable

 movements result from news about economic fundamentals (e.g., Mussa 1979, Dornbusch 1980, and

 Frenkel 1981). Different aspects of this view, however, have been questioned either empirically or

 theoretically.      -


        First, while some portion of- longer-run movements in exchange rates may potentially be

 predictable using forward premiums or interest-rate differentials, for example, very short-run
movements should approximately follow a random walk. The results of filter rule studies, however,

suggest that short-run movements are partially predictable and can be exploited to generate excess

returns (e.g., Bilson 1981, Dootey and Shafer 1983, and Sweeney 1986). Based on studies of this type,

Meese (1986) hypothesizes that the profitability of filter rules rises as the sampling frequency of the

data increases. Alternative hypotheses leading to such predictable movements can be taken from recent

studies in U.S. stock returns. Following Fama and French (1988) and Poterba and Summers (1987),

one hypothesis is that exchange rates exhibit mean reversion, implying predictable offsetting
movements.        Another hypothesis is that exchange rate movements have inertia (i.e., positive
correlation), which corresponds to the results of Lo and MacKinlay (1987) for weekly stock returns.

       Second, a number of studies do not reject the hypothesis that exchange rates sometimes reflect

speculative bubbles (e.g., Meese 1986, Evans 1986, and Woo 1987). In these instances, exchange rates

supposedly diverge from their fundamental values for significant periods of time before the bubble

bursts. The leptokurtic distributions of daily exchange rate changes (e.g., McFarland, Pettit, and Sung

1982, and Friedman and Vandersteel 1982) also are taken as evidence that large jumps occur too

frequently, perhaps reflecting sudden shifts back to fundamental values.         Large jumps also can
potentially be characterized as resulting from over-reaction, a hypothesis analogous to that proposed by

Shiller (1981) for U.S. stock returns.                                              -
                                                    2



       Third, short-run movements in asset prices and returns, including exchange rates, may simply

be characterized as noise (e.g., Black 1986, and DeLong, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldman 1987).

That is, while noise trading could cause persistent speculative bubbles in exchange rates, such trading

also may result in short-run random movements away from fundamental values. These movements,

then, would not be expected to have any information content of their own. Announcement studies do,

however, indicate that at least some short-run movements in exchange rates can be linked to
unanticipated changes in economic fundamentals.         Cornell (1982, 1983), Frankel and Hardouvelis

(1985), Engel and Frankel (1984), Hardouvelis (1984), and Roley (1987a), among others, find that U.S.

money announcements affect daily exchange rate movements. Hakkio and Pearce (1985) and Ito and

Roley (1987) consider additional economic announcements and find significant effects on more finely-

sampled intraday exchange rate movements.

      The purpose of this paper is to examine intraday movements in the yen/dollar exchange rate in

terms of their predictability, behavior around large jumps, and information content." The yen/dollar

rate is particularly useful to examine these properties For at least two reasons. One is that New York

and Tokyo currency markets are open during nonoverlapping hours. So, with the daily opening and
closing quotes collected from each market, the behavior of the New York and Tokyo markets can be

compared. A second reason is that during the 1980-1986 sample period considered here, different policy

regimes emanating from both the U.S. and Japan were announced. Among these policy changes, Japan

made significant moves to liberalize capital market restrictions further. As a result, the daily behavior

of the yen/dollar rate over policy regimes may be different, and these potential differences can be
analyzed as well.

       Following this introductory section, the second section summarizes the data used to investigate

the behavior of intraday yen/dollar rate movements. The various subsamples used, corresponding to

different policy regimes in both the U.S. and Japan, also are discussed. In the third section, the
predictability of intraday yen/dollar rate movements is tested. The null hypothesis in these tests is

that intraday movements Follow a random walk. An analysis of large jumps in the yen/dollar rate is

presented in the fourth section. Hypotheses relating to both bubbles and over-reaction are considered.
                                                    3



In the fifth section, the information content of intraday movements is empirically examined. This is

accomplished by estimating the effects of changes in the yen/dollar rate on U.S. and Japanese stock
prices. The main conclusions are summarized in the final section.



II.    EXCHANGE RATE DATA AND POLICY REGIMES

       To examine intraday movements in the yen/dollar exchange rate, four major segments are

considered within each business day from January 1, 1980, through September 29, 1986. (The timing

of the different segments is explained further in the Appendix.) First, exchange rate movements in the

Tokyo market are represented by opening (TKO) and closing (TKC) quotes. These quotes are
collected at 9:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. each day, the formal opening and closing times in this market.

Both the London and New York markets are closed during business hours in Tokyo. As such, this

segment is denoted as the "Tokyo" segment of the day. Second, from the close in the Tokyo market to

the opening in the New York market, European markets can influence the yen/dollar exchange rate

through cross arbitrage with European currencies. This segment is referred to as "Europe." Third,

yen/dollar rate quotes at 9:00 a.m. (NYO) to 4:30 p.m. (NYC) in New York are taken as the opening

and closing quotes in this market. This is the "New York" segment, although the London market is

still open concurrently at the very beginning hours of New York trading. The fourth segment of the

day differs from the others. In particular, there is no major market between New York and Tokyo.

For 2-1/2 hours (3-1/2 during daylight savings time), most of the Japanese, American, and European
market participants are not trading.    For convenience, this period is referred to as the "Pacific"
market, and it is represented by movements from the closing New York quote (NYC) to the opening

Tokyo quote in the next day (TKO+i).

      To take into account the effects of changes in policy and deregulation on intraday yen/dollar

exchange rate movements, several possible break points are considered within the 1980-86 sample.

First, in December 1980, sweeping deregulation occurred with respect to Japanese capital controls both

into and out of Japan." Second, in October 1982, the Federal Resrve announced the abandonment of

its previous monetary-controt procedure and also indicated that targets for the narrowty-defined money
                                                     4


stock (Ml) would be dc-emphasized. Third, in February 1984. the Federal Reserve adopted a different

reserve requirement system, and as a consequence the behavior of money and interest rates in the U.S.

may have changed.' Also in 1984, further efforts were made to liberalize Japanese capital markets

(Frankel 1984). Because of the closeness of these separate events in 1984, any relative effects cannot be

distinguished. Finally, in September 1985, the Group of Five (G5) meeting was held which may have

led to a concerted effort to depreciate the dollar (see Ito 1987). However, Feldstein (1986), among.

others, notes that the dollar had gradually been depreciating for seven months prior to the G5 meeting,

and that market forces may have been at least as important in causing the dollar's subsequent slide.

       Any of the above policy changes may have not only affected onshore credit markets, but also the

stochastic behavior of exchange rates. Indeed, Roley (1987a) and Ito and Roley (1987) find significant

differences across regimes for the response of the yen/dollar rate to economic news. As a consequence,

the behavior of the yen/dollar rate will be considered for both the entire 1980-86 sample and the

subsamples implied by potential changes in policy regimes.

       Summary statistics of yen/dollar exchange rate movements for each market and subsample are

presented in Table 1. Exchange rate movements are in percent, calculated as changes in natural
logarithms multiplied by 100. For the 1980-86 sample as a whole, the dollar tended to appreciate in

Tokyo and New York markets, and depreciate in the European and Pacific segments. The volatility of

the yen/dollar rate, measured by either the standard deviation or mean absolute change, was highest in

the New York market. The Tokyo market exhibited lower volatility than both the European and New

York segments. As expected, the volatility in the Pacific segment was the lowest, reflecting the relative

lack of trading and news during this part of the day.'

      Summary statistics for the five subsainples suggest different behavior over time both within and

across markets. Outing the January 1980-November 1980 period, the Tokyo market exhibited the most

voltaility. In the remaining four subsamples, however, the New York market was the most volatile.

Moreover, with the exception of the September 1985-September 1986 period, the dollar on average

appreciated in New York. In contrast, the dollar depreciated in Tokyo in three of the five subsamples.

      Some of the properties of intraday yen/dollar movements acorss subsamples and markets are
                                                        5


 tested in Table 2. The first row in the table, for example, tests whether the variances in the first two

subsamples are significantly different in each market. The results indicate that the null hypothesis of
equal variances across periods can be rejected in the New York and Pacific markets. Similarly, the null

hypothesis of equal variances in the second and third periods can be rejected in two of the four
markets.    In the remaining tests across periods, the null hypothesis can be rejected for all markets at

low significance levels. The last test in the table examines whether the variances in the Tokyo and

New York markets are significantly different. In all subsamptes except the first, the hypothesis ofequal

variances can be rejected. As a whole, these results support the notion that changes in policy regimes

altered the stochastic behavior or the yen/dollar rate. Moreover, the stochastic behavior appears to

differ across markets. These data are examined in much more detail in the sections that follow.



III.    PREDICTABILITY OF INTRADAY YEN/DOLLAR RATE MOVEMENTS

        In this section, the predictability of intraday yen/dollar rate movements is examined.
Predictability is considered with respect to the three previous intraday movements, day-of-week effects,

and previous large jumps of one percentage point or more. The magnitude of the predicted changes
also is considered.

        A plausible null hypothesis for intraday exchange rate movements is that they follow a random

walk. Consider, for example, the expected change in the exchange rate implied by uncovered interest

parity:
(3.1)                     100 [Et(st+i) — t1 = 9(it - it),



where          5t     =   natural logarithm of the yen/dollar rate in period t,



               it,i = annualized one-period interest rates, in percent, in Japan
                          and the U.S., respectively,
                      =   expectations operator using all public information at time t,

               C      =   parameter to adjust the differences in units between percent-
                          age changes in exchange rates and changes in annualized
                          interest rates.
                                                     6




 For nonzero values of the interest-rate differential, equation (3.1) implies that some portion of future

exchange rate movements is predictable. The predictability decreases, however, as the length of time

between t and t+1 shortens. In particular if the frequency of measured exchange rate movements is

one year, 9 takes a value of unity. If quarterly observations are used, B falls to 1/4. For daily data, 9

equals 1/365. Finally, with the four intraday segments considered here, B is approximately 1/4 of the

daily value, or 1/1460. As a consequence, for any plausible value of the Japanese - U.S. interest-rate

differential, the intraday predictive ability of the interest differential is approximately zero. Over the

1980-86 period, for example, 3-month dollar-denominated and yen-denominated interest rates were

most disparate in mid-1981, at about 12 percentage points. Assuming that the daily interest-rate
differential also peaked at about 12 percentage points, the implied daily dollar depreciation was 0.03

percent. At a level of 230 yen/dollar, which was the case then, the interest differential predicted dollar

depreciation of about 0.07 yen each day. With four intraday segments, the implied dollar depreciation

was only about 0.008 percent per segment, or 0.018 yen. The magnitude of this movement is well
below the bid-ask spread, which had a minimum value of 0.05 yen in the New York market over the

1980-86 sample.

       Other representations of exchange rates also should imply random-walk behavior over very short

time periods, although not necessarily over longer periods (e.g., Hakkio 1986). In particular, even ii

uncovered interest parity does not hold because of a time-varying risk premium, movements in this risk

premium are likely to be unpredictable, or at least small, over an intraday period. Moreover, standard

models of spot exchange rates involving a vector of fundamentals plus expected exchange rate
movements (e.g., Frenkel and Mussa 1980) also can approximately lead to random walks over very

short horizons. In this case, because expected exchange rate movements can be assumed to be small,

movements in the spot rate primarily reflect innovations in the variables reflecting economic
fundamentals.

       To test the random walk hypothesis, several alternative hypotheses are considered. The most

general specification estimated is
                                                         7




    (3.2)           As.
                              c+biAs1i+b2As.2+b3As.3+c1Tu+c2Wed+c3m
                              + c4 Fri + d1 Asti + d2 'i-2 + d3 issç3 + e,
    where                           = change in the natural logarithm of the yen/dollar
                    As1
                                      rate, multiplied by 100, in intraday segment i,

                    Tu,Wed,Th,Fri = day-of-week dummies,

                    Ast             = As if As 1.0 percent, zero otherwise,
                                    = random error term,

                                    = estimated coefficients (j=1,2,3,4).



    A constant term is included in the specification to capture a variety of possible effects from either

    systematic measurement errors in the variables across markets, small average predictable movements,

or small average predictable changes in the risk premium. The next three terms, -i' 'i-2' and

    As.3, are included to test the predktability of intraday yen/dollar rate movements based on the three
    most recent intraday movements.      The movement in European markets, for example, may have an

inertia effect on the within-the-market change in New York. Alternatively, the yen/dollar rate may

over-react to news in the Tokyo market, and such movements may be partially offset in the subsequent

European segment of the day. Positive values for the b3 imply inertia effects, while negative values

reflect mean reversion.

•
            The remaining variables in equation (3.2) allow fixed day-of-week effects and separate effects

from large jumps in the yen/dollar rate of 1 percent or more in previous segments. Several studies

have estimated significant day-of-week effects for exchange rates as well as other assets (e.g., Levi 1978,

French 1980, Gibbons and Hess 1981, and McFarland, Pettit, and Sung 1982). Equation (3.2) allows

effects different from Monday effects, which are embedded in the constant term. Previous large jumps

are included to allow any special inertia or mean reversion effects associated with such unusual events.

Large jumps are examined more closely in the next section.

            As a preliminary test of the random walk hypothesis, the intraday yen/dollar rate data also are

tested for the presence of a single unit root (e.g., Meese and Singleton 1982). The specification used for
                                                        8


this test is



(3.3)           s = c + bt + b1s1 i + b1 X_i + b2 'i2 + b3 Ssa +
where t is a time trend and the other variables are as defined previously. The null hypothesis
examined is H0 b=0, b'=l, and the marginal significance levels are taken from Dickey and Fuller

(1981), Table VLW

        A. Estimation and Test Results

        The estimation results for a restricted version of equation (3.2) along with various test results

are summarized in Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6 For the Tokyo, European, New York, and Pacific markets,

respectively. The results are reported for the entire sample and selected subsamples corresponding to

possible policy regimes." The middle of each of these tables gives the results for the unit root test.

The reported statistics indicate that the hypothesis that a single unit root is present can be rejected at

the 5 percent level in only two of 20 cases for the four markets across the five subsarnples. The
rejections occur in the last subsample in the European market and in the first subsample in the Pacific

market. This hypothesis also can be rejected for the overall sample in the Pacific market. As a whole,

however, the first-differenced specification (3.2) appears to be justified."

        The top halves of each of the tables report estimation results for equation (3.2) with the
restriction c =        = 0 (j=1,2,3,4). That is, the effects of only the three previous intraday segments are
                  d3

considered.1 For the Tokyo market, significant mean reversion relative to the Pacific segment is
estimated in three of five subsamples. In the first period, for example, the estimated coefficient

indicates that about 41 percent of the movement during the Pacific segment is offset in the Tokyo

market. Again, the Pacific segment is represented by the difference in the opening Tokyo quote in day

  and the 4:30 p.m. quote in New York in day t-1. Because there are not formal opening and closing

times in the New York market, most of the observed movements during the Pacific segment most likely

reflect movements in New York after the 4:30 p.m. quote.' Consistent with this view, significant
mean reversion in the Tokyo market relative to the New York market also is estimated in two of the

five subsamples. In constrast, a significant inertia effect is estimated with respect to the previous
                                                      9



 European   segment in the fourth period. Tests of the significance of the three previous segments as a

 group in predicting subsequent movements in the Tokyo market are reported in the second row of tests
 in Table 3.     These tests are performed using the heteroscedasticity-consisteut covariance matrix
 proposed   by White (198O)." The test results indicate that the three previous segments are significant
 at the 5 percent level in three of the live periods and for the overall sample. Thus, the hypothesis that

 the yen/dollar rate follows a random walk in the Tokyo market can generally be rejected.

       Jn contrast to the results for the Tokyo market, the results for the European segment of the day

 in Table 4 do not indicate mean-reverting behavior. Instead, significant inertia effects from the New

York market are estimated in three subsamples. Moreover, inertia with respect to the Tokyo market is

statistically significant in period I. The hypothesis that the effects of the three previous segments as a

group equal zero can be rejected in the first two periods as well as in the overall sample.

       The results for the New York market in Table 5 are similar to those of the European market in

that the random walk model can be rejected in the first two periods and in the overall sample. They

differ, however, in that the results once again suggest statistically significant meau-reverting behavior,

this time with respect to the previous movement in the European market in periods I and II. During
period I, a large and significant inertia effect with respect to the Tokyo market also is estimated.

       Finally, the results for the Pacific segment of the day suggest a mixture of mean reversion and

inertia with respect to movements during previous segments. For this segment, the random walk

hypothesis can be rejected in three periods and in the overall sample. In contrast to the other three
markets, the random walk model is rejected in the last subsample, which begins in September 1985.

       As indicated in Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6, day-of-week dummies are statistically significant in only

two instances other than in the Pacific segrnent}" This also is the only segment that spans
weekends, which may account for the significance of day-of-week effects in two subsamples as well as

the overall sample in the Pacific market. The results in the tables additionally indicate that large

jumps in the yen/dollar rate only ha''e effects significantly different from the other movements of less

than 1 percent in three of the 20 possible cases for the five subsamples. Because of the relatively small

number of such large jumps however, it may not be possible to isolate their effects in this particular
                                                         10


 specification.

        Several other issues relating to the results in Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6 also deserve mention. First,

 the inclusion of both day-of-week dummies and possible separate effects of large jumps do not eliminate

 the excess kurtosis found in previous studies (e.g., McFarland, Pettit, and Sung 1982, and Friedman

 and Vandersteel 1982). This departure from the normal distribution, however, should not significantly

 bias the reported test statistics (e.g., Miller 1986). Second, the presence of large jumps of 1 percent or

 more in both the current and lagged segments have little effect on the estimation and test results.

That is, outliers are not responsible for the significant departures from the random walk model
reported in the tables.UJ

        Third, the rejection of the random walk hypothesis does not necessarily imply an unexploited

profit opportunity. In fact, most of the implied predicted changes are smaller than the typical bid-ask

spread of 0.10 yen, especially during later subsamples. The last rows of the tables give an indication of

the absolute sizes of the fitted values from the estimated equations. The fitted values used to calculate

the numbers reported in the tables are taken from the following:



(3.4)             AS = Iai1I .
where                  =   the fitted value for segment i of the version of equation (3.2)
                           reported in Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6, excluding the constant term,

                  sSi = Si -
                   Si
                      = spot yen/dollar rate at the end of segment i.

The cutoff point in the tables is taken as 0.10 yen, the typical bid-ask spread. The results for the New

York market in Table 5, for example, show that 148 of the 208 observations in period I have absolute

predicted changes greater than 0.10 yen. By the fifth period, however, no fitted values are greater than

0.10 yen. This same pattern is generally repeated in the Tokyo and European markets, but not in the
Pacific segment, For the other three markets, however, the results may be interpreted as support for

the assertion that as the market becomes large and more traders (speculators) participate in it, the
predictable portion of future price movements diminishes.U'
                                                   11



IV.     LARGE JUMPS IN THE EXCHANGE RATE

        The behavior of the yen/dollar rate around large intraday jumps of at least 1 percent is

examined more closely in this section. Large jumps in asset prices often capture the attention of the

news media, and several common stories are encountered about movements following a jump. One is

that the price (exchange rate) declined, for example, because of "profit-taking" after a sharp rise.

Another is that the large jump itself represents over-reaction to relevant news, and the subsequent

decline merely moves the price back toward its equilibrium level. In any. event, there seems to be a

view, at least in the news media, that any large change in an asset's price is followed by a movement in

the opposite direction. There also is a view, which is not mutually exclusive, that sharp changes in the

price reflect the last stage of a bubble (or a bandwagon effect) in which the bubble bursts. A large

change by itself, however, is not evidence of a bubble. It may simply be reflecting some major news in

the world, such as the sudden death of a political leader, initiation of war in the Middle East, or a

major change in economic policy. Nevertheless, the profit-taking, over-reaction1 and bubble views

suggest that days around and including large price changes should be treated separately from other

days.

        The top part of Table 7 lists the number of times in which the yen/dollar rate jumped by more

than 1 percent in each market. From Table 1, a change of 1 percent is more than two standard

deviations. By selecting the infrequent days with jumps of more than 1 percent, special characteristics

can be examined.

        To examine large jumps initially, suppose that the exchange rate could deviate from an

otherwise stationary stochastic process for some period of time in the manner considered by Blanchard

and Watson (1982). A rational bubble could then emerge and burst occasionally. That is, this bubble

hypothesis for a large change within a day is that the jump is caused by the final stage of a bubble or a

bandwagon effect. A large jump can then be interpreted as a sudden correction to the natural

(equilibrium) level from an exploding bubble process. This interpretation predicts that the large jump

is preceded by a significant change in the opposite direction. Formally,
                                                      12


 (4.1)           Jump   = a + b(previous change) + e, b < 0.
The previous change is alternatively represented by either the change in the previous segment or the

cumulative change in the previous two segments, three segments, or week. Because this specification

only includes values of large jumps for the dependent variable, a sample selection bias exists that most

likely biases the results in favor of the bubble hypothesis.

         The other specification considered involves the hypothesis that large jumps are partially offset in

the subsequent segment because of either profit-taking or mean-reversion following over-reaction.

Under this hypothesis, the subsequent movement is not necessarily large, but it is in the opposite
direction regardless of the reason for the jump. This behavior can be represented as

(1.2)            (Change in subsequent segment) = a + b(Jump) + e, b C       0.

Different magnitudes of jumps over 1 percent also are considered separately in estimating this equation.

         The empirical results for intraday segments with large jumps are summarized in the bottom
part of Table 7. The results for equation (4.1) indicate that there is very little evidence that large
jumps are preceded by cumulative changes in the opposite direction. While the estimated coefficients

are negative, they are not statistically significant at high marginal significance levels. Large jumps,

therefore, cannot be identified as the popping of a bubble. In contrast, there is some evidence that a

portion of a large jump is offset in the subsequent segment. The first row of results for this
specification indicates that a positive jump of 1 percent, for example, is partially offset by a 0.13
percent decline in the yen/dollar rate during the next segment of the day. For jumps greater than 1.25

and 1.5 percent, however, the next two rows in the table do not report statistically significant effects.

Thus, the segments following the 27 largest jumps in the sample do not exhibit significant mean-
reverting behavior.



V.       INFORMATION CONTENT OF EXCHANGE RATE MOVEMENTS

         The information content of the intraday movements in the yen/dollar rate is examined in this

section. In this respect, the information content of short-run movements is interpreted as the degree to

which such movements reflect changes in fundamental factors. In turn, changes in fundamental factors
                                                   13


might be expected to affect not only exchange rates, but other asset prices as well. Given the results in

previous sections. where intraday yen/dollar rate movements both sometimes failed to follow the

predicted random walk model and indicated offsetting movements following large jumps, the

information content of yen/dollar rate movements may be questioned.

       To estimate the information content of yen/dollar rate movements, the responses of both U.S.

and Japanese stock prices are considered.Th' One advantage in using stock prices for thispurpose is

that equity markets are often characterized as being efficient in terms of processing new information

quickly. So, if intraday movements in the yen/dollar rate reflect relevant information, stock prices

would be expected to respond within a day.

       The effects of exchange rate movements in three of the four intraday segments on stock prices

are considered for both the U.S. and Japanese stock markets. All lour segments cannot be examined

for each stock market because of contemporaneous trading in the foreign exchange and stock markets.

Nevertheless, the formal opening and closing times of the New York Stock Exchange are ideal in

capturing the effects of three of the segments since New York stock trading begins at 9:30 a.m. and

ends at 4:00 p.m.'1 In contrast, the yen/dollar rate quotes in New York are collected at 9:00 a.m.

and 4:30 p.m. Thus, it is possible to construct movements in stock prices that capture the information

content of the exchange rate. In particular, exchange rate movements are measured from 4:30 p.m. on

the previous business day to 9:00 a.m. on the current business day. This time interval includes the

Pacific, Tokyo, and European exchange rate segments. Stock prices are measured from the previous

day's close at 4:00 p.m. to the current day's close. Exchange rate movements are therefore measured

when the New York stock market is closed. This new information should be reflected in stock prices

when the market opens at 9:30 a.m., and continue to be reflected at the 4:00 p.m. close. This

procedure nevertheless omits a relevant segment from 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. in New York. However, a

variety of major U.S. economic announcements, including those for the consumer price index, producer

price index, industrial production, and the unemployment rate, are made at 9:00 a.m. or earlier.

Moreover, the information content of this segment is considered for the Tokyo stock market.

      For the Tokyo stock market, the opening time is 9:00 a.m. and the market closes at 3:00 p.m.
                                                       14


Analogous to the measured change in the New York stock market, daily changes from the 3:00 p.m.

close are used to examine the information content of three exchange rate segments. In this case,

however, the three segments represent the Pacific, New York, and European currency markets. As

before, currency trading in the three segments occurs when the Tokyo stock market is closed.

        The specifications used to estimate the response of stock prices to intraday movements in the

yen/dollar rate can be represented as

(5.1)         NYSPt - NYSPI = a + bj(NYOt.TKCt) + b2(TKCt.TKOt) + b3(TKOt.NYCt j) +



(5.2)         TKSPt - TKSPL1 = a + bj(TKOt-NYCt j) + b2(NYCt1NYOt1)

                                   + b3(NYOt i.TKCt i + et,
where         NYSPL = natural logarithm of the Standard Sc Poors 500 Index at 4:00 p.m. (New York)

                        on day t, multiplied by 100,

             TKSPt = natural logarithm of the Nikkei-Dow 225 Index at 3:00 p.m. (Tokyo) on day t,

                        multiplied by 100,

and the other variables, which were defined previously, also are in natural logarithms multiplied by

100. In addition to these basic specifications, the separate effects of large intraday jumps in the

yen/dollar rate are considered, as well as possible day-of-week effects iii the two stock markets, in a

manner analogous to equation (3.2)•W Finally, the random error terms, et. reflect movements in

stock prices from the closing quotes on day t-1 to the closing quotes on day t not due to the measured

changes in the exchange rate along with the response to new information from the opening of the stock

markets to the closing on day t. Under the efficient markets hypothesis, this latter component is

orthogonal to the measured changes in the yen/dollar rate in equations (5.1) and (5.2).

        The estimation results for equation (5.1) are presented in Table 8. The results indicate that the

estimated response of U.S. stock prices is negative with respect to each segment in each subsample.th'

That is, dollar appreciation over these periods was associated with bad news for the U.S. stock market.

The hypothesis that the responses to movements in the three segments as a group equal zero (b1 = b2

= b3 = 0), however, can be rejected only for the complete sample and the second subsample. The
                                                     15

results also suggest that yen/dollar rate movements in the Tokyo market contain little or no

information. The estimated response of U.S. stock prices to these movements is insignificantly different

from zero in every subsample. In contrast, for the entire sample, movements in both Europe (NYO -

TKC) and Pacific (TRO - NYC1) segments provide information. In the case of the Pacific segment1

the information may simply be the result of trading in New York after the 4:30 p.m. quote used here.

The test results in the table also suggest that infrequent large jumps in the yen/dollar rate in recent

years had extraordinary effects on U.S. stock prices in three of the subsamples, but not in the overall

sample.

       Table 9 presents estimation and test results for the response of Japanese stock prices as

represented by equation (5.2). With only three exceptions, the response of Japanese stock prices to
intraday yen/dollar rate movements again is negative.          Moreover, the response to the European
segment is significantly negative for every subsample, and the response to the New York segment is

significantly negative in two subsamples. Reflecting the estimated responses to the New York segment,

the hypothesis that the response to the three segments as a group equals zero can be rejected in periods

III, IV, and the overall sample. Also, the responses to jumps in the exchange rate are significantly

different from the other estimated responses only in the first period.

       As a whole1 the results from both the U.S. and Japanese stock markets suggest that short-run

movements in the yen/dollar rate contain some relevant information. As a consequence, at least part

of these movements can be rationalized in terms of fundamental factors and not simply noise.
Moreover, during the 1980-86 sample period, changes in the implied underlying fundamental factors led

to a negative relationship between the yen/dollar rate and the stock market in each country. One
possible factor consistent with this result is world oil prices. An unanticipated rise in oil prices, for

example, adversely affects both economies, but such a rise has a larger negative effect on Japan since it

imports 99 percent of its oil. As a consequence, both stock markets could fall, and the dollar might

appreciate in value relative to the yen. The significant negative relationship between Tokyo stock

prices and yen/dollar rate movements in the European segment would appear to support this
hypothesis, as major world oil markets are trading during this part of the day. Another possible factor
                                                    16


is U.S. money announcements. In the case of a positive money announcement surprise, for example,

empirical evidence suggests that U.S. real interest rates rise, the dollar appreciates in foreign exchange

markets, and U.S. stock prices fall.1 In response, the Japanese central bank may raise interestrates

to moderate dollar appreciation, resulting in a similar decline in Japanese stock prices.

VI. SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS
       Intraday movements in the yen/dollar exchange rate were examined in this paper. The
availability of daily opening and closing quotes in both the New York and Tokyo markets allowed four

segments to be considered. These segments corresponded to currency trading in Tokyo, European, New

York, and Pacific markets.

       Several aspects of the daily movements in the four markets were examined. First, the random

walk behavior of intraday movements was tested. Random walk behavior was rejected in about half of

the five subsamples considered during the 1980-86 period. The economic significance of the departures

from the random walk model declined, however, during the latter part of the sample. Second, the
behavior of the yen/dollar rate in segments immediately before and after large jumps was investigated.

The empirical results suggested that large jumps themselves could not be characterized as final stages

of speculative bubbles. The results did indicate, however, mean reversion in the segment following a

large jump. Finally, the information content of the intraday movements was considered in terms of

their effect on U.S. and Japanese stock prices. The results suggested that yen/dollar rate movements of

less than one day contain relevant information. As a consequence, intraday movements cannot simply

be characterized as noise.
                                                         17


                                                    APPENDIX

                                          Data Definitions and Sources

A.    Exchange Rate Quotes

      TICO =   9   a.m. quote in the Tokyo foreign exchange market

      TKC = 3:30 p.m. quote in the Tokyo foreign exchange market

      NYO = 9 a.m. quote in the New York foreign exchange market

      NYC = 4:30 p.m. quote in the New York foreign exchange market

      All quotes are in yen/dollar. Tokyo quotes were collected from a daily newspaper, Nihon Keizai

Shinbun. New York quotes were obtained from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

B.    flSTiminE
             Tokyo                                                 New York

               Lrn
 T    9:00 A.M. (opening), IiiQ             T-1      7:00 P.M. (closed)         8:00 P.M. (closed)

 T    3:30 P.M. (closing), D11               T       1:30 A.M. (closed)         2:30 A.M. (closed)

 T 10:00 P.M. (closed)                       T 8:00 A.M. (closed)               9:00.A.M.(opening), jXQ

 T 11:00 P.M. (closed)                       T 9:00 A.M.(opening), JjQ 10:00 AM. (open)

T+1 5:30 A.M. (closed)                       T 3:30 P.M. (open)                 4:30 P.M.(ctosing),flhj

T+1 6:30 A.M. (closed)                       T 4:30 P.M.(closing), liQ 5:30 P.M. (closed)

T+1 9:00 A.M. (opening), ThQ                 T 7:00 P.M. (closed)               8:00 P.M. (closed)

      The New York foreign exchange market, unlike its Tokyo counterpart, does not have welt-
defined business hours. Therefore, 9 A.M. and 4:30 P.M. quotes are only approximations of the

opening and closing rates for the day.

       The number of hours between opening (0) and closing (C) quotes is the following:

               Tokyo (0) - Tokyo (C):            6.5 hours (with 1.5 hour lunch break)

               Tokyo (C) - N.Y. (0):             7.5 hours (EST)/6.5 hours (EDT)

                   N.Y. (0) - N.Y. (C):           7.5 hours

                   N.Y. (C) - Tokyo (0):          2.5 hours (EST)/3.5 hours (EDT)
                                                   18


                                             FOOTNOTES

1.    Based on the profitability of filter rules on daily data, Meese (1986, pg. 346) states that "it
      would appear that a major omission of empirical academic research has been to ignore analysis
      of intraday exchange rate movements... ." This paper attempts to fill part of this void.

2.    See Ito (1986) for an analysis of the effect of the December 1980 changes on covered interest
      parity.

3.    The effects of these changes in Federal Reserve policy are considered in detail by Roley (1986,
      1987b). The response of U.S. interest rates to money announcement surprises is found to change
      significantly over the different regimes.

4.    As reported in Ito and Roley (1987), correcting these data for differences in the number of hours
      in each segment does not alter these qualitative results or the test results reported in Table 2.
      In Ito and Roley (1987), however, changes in the yen/dollar rate are considered, as opposed to
      the percentage changes used in Table 1. Corrections for the number of hours are riot made here
      since the actual data used later correspond to those reported in Tables 1 and 2.

5.    See Ito (1988) for tests which support uncovered interest parity for the case of the yen/dollar
      rate.

6.    The test results are qualitatively unchanged for the null hypothesis involving only b' = 1. Also,
        and s1 in equation (3.3) are multiplied by 100.
7.    Observations involving national holidays in each country are deleted, but observations spanning
      weekends are included.

8.    While the other testsreported below use White's (1980) heteroscedasticity-consistent covariance
      matrix in cases where the estimated standard errors increase using this procedure, the reported
      results for the unit-root tests are not adjusted. In the other tests, the heteroscedasticity
      correction does not significantly alter the test results, so it seems likely that corrections to the
      unit-root tests also would not change the results appreciably. If heteroscedasticity was apparent,
      however, procedures proposed by Phillips (1987) should probably be used.
9.    A complete set of estimation and test results for various subcases of equation (3.2) is available
      as a supplement from the authors. In general, the results are not sensitive to the exclusion or
      inclusion of a particular set of variables. Specifications excluding the most recent lagged
      segment also were estimated to consider the effects of possible spurious correlation due to
      measurement errors, particularly in moving from quotes in the New York market to quotes in
      the Tokyo market, and vice versa. Tests of the significance of lagged segments changed only
      slightly in these specifications. In particular, the results in Tables 4 and 5 are the same, while in
      Table 6 lagged segments are significant in period III at the 5 percent level but not in period I.
      In Table 3, lagged segments in periods III and IV are no longer significant as a group at the 5
      percent level, but they are significant at the 7 percent level.
10.   This feature may be important for at least one day each week because of the effects of U.S.
      money announcements, which were made either at 4:10 p.m., 4:15 p.m., or 4:30 pm. over
      different subsamples.

11.   White's (1980) correction is used for the same tests in Tables 4, 5, and 6 as well. Moreover, the
      day-of-week dummies test uses this covariance matrix. However, the jumps test reported in
      Tables 3, 4, 5, and 6 does not. In general, the test statistics for the jumps test are higher using
                                                   19


      White's procedure, so the conservative approach of using the unadjusted covariance matrix was
      followed.

12.   The hypothesis that the effects of day-of-week dummies equal zero is tested in equation (3.2)
      under the restriction that d1 =    = = 0. Similarly, the effects of large jumps are tested in
                                      dz d1
      equation (3.2) under the restriction   that c1 = c2 = c3 = c4 = 0 These tests also were
      performed in equation (3.2) without any of these restrictions1 and the results were qualitatively
      the same.

13,   Both of these results again are reported in the supplement available from the authors.

14.   It also should be emphasized that the reported numbers do not necessarily imply anything about
      the profitability of filter rules. In particular, just fitted values are reported, not the accuracy of
      the fitted values. The low 17(215 reported in the tables suggest that the' fitted values do not
      capture much of the variation in actual values.

15.   Obstfeld (1985) also uses stock prices to infer the factors affecting exchange rates.

16.   During the earlier subsamples considered here, stock trading began at 10:00 a.m. in New York.

17.   The estimation and test results are not sensitive to the inclusion or exclusion of day-of-week
      dummies, so the reported results are for the specification without these dummies.

18.   in the last subsample, however, the estimated response to the cumulative change in the three
      segments was positive, but insignificantly different from zero, after the yen/dollar rate dropped
      to about 160.

19.   For evidence that U.S. money announcement surprises cause dollar appreciation, again see the
      relevant references in the introduction. For evidence on the negative relationship between U.S.
      money announcement surprises and U.S. stock prices, see Pearce and Roley (1985).
                                                   20


                                               REFERENCES


Bilson, John F.O., "The 'Speculative Efficiency' Hypothesis," Journal f Business, 54 (July 1981), 435-
      51.




                                                  j
Black, Fischer, "Noise," Journal of Finance, 41 (July 1986), 529-43.

Blanchard, Olivier 3., and Mark W. Watson, "Bubbles, Rational Expectations, and Financial
     Markets," in P. Wachtel (ed.), Crises In Economic th Financial Structure. Lexington,
      Mass.: Lexington Books, 1982.

Cornell, Bradford, "Money Supply Announcements, Interest Rates, and Foreign Exchange," Journal 21
      Internationat Money    Finance, 1 (August 1982), 201-8.

Cornell, Bradford, "The Money Supply Announcements Puzzle: Review and Interpretation," American
      Economic Review, 73 (September 1983), 644-57.

De Long, J Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence IL Summers, and Robert 3. Waldman, "The
      Economic Consequences of Noise Traders," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
      Paper No. 2395, 1987.

Dickey, David A., and Wayne A. Fuller, "Likelihoth Ratio Statistics for Autoregressive Time Series
     with a Unit Root," Econometrica, 49 (July 1981), 1057-72.

Dooley, Michael P., and Jeffrey R. Shafer, "Analysis of Short-Run Exchange Rate Behavior: March
     1973 to November 1981," in D. Bigman and T. Taya (eds.), Exchange E&
     Instability: Causes, Consequences,     Remedies. Cambridge, Mass.: Batlinger, 1983.
                                                                                          ia
                                                                                          Trade


Dornbusch, Rudiger, "Exchange Rate Economics: Where Do We Stand?" Brookins Paoers g
      Economic Activity, (No. 1, 1980), 143-85.

Engle, Charles, and Jeffrey Frankel, "Why Interest Rates React to Money Announcements: An
      Explanation from the Foreign Exchange Market," Journal 21 Monetary Economics, 13 (January
      1984), 31-9.

Evans, George W., "A Test for Speculative Bubbles in the Sterling-Dollar Exchange Rate: 1981-84,"
      American Economic Review, 76 (September 1986), 621-36.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, "Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock Prices,"
      Journal 21 Political Economy, 96 (April 1988), 246-73.

Feldstein, Martin, "New Evidence on the Effects of Exchange Rate Intervention," Nationat Bureau of
      Economic Research, Working Paper No. 2052, 1986.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., "The Yen/Dollar Agreement: Liberalizing Japanese Capital Markets," Institute for
      International Economics, mimeo, 1984.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Gikas A. Hardouvelis, "Commodity Prices, Money Surprises, and Fed
     Credibility," Journal f Money. Credit. th Banking, 17 (November 1985), 425-38.
French, Kenneth R., "Stock Returns and the Weekend Effect," Journal of Financial Economics, 8
      (March 1980), 55-69.
                                                  21


Frenkel, Jacob A., "Flexible Exchange Rates, Prices and the Rote of 'News': Lessons from the 1970s,"
      Journal 21 Political Economy, 89 (August 1981), 665-705.

Frenkel, Jacob A., and Michael L. Mussa, "The Efficiency of Foreign Exchange Markets and Measures
      of Turbulence," American Economic Review, 70 (May 1980), 374-81.

Friedman, Daniel, and Stoddard Vandersteel, "Short-Run Fluctuations in Foreign Exchange Rates:
      Evidence from the Data, 1973-79," Journal f International Economics, 13 (August 1982), 171-
      86.

Gibbons, Michael R.. and Patrick J. Hess, "Day of the Week Effects and Asset Returns," Journal 21
      Business, 54 (October 1981), 579-96.

Hakkio, Craig S., "Does the Exchange Rate Follow a Random Walk? A Monte Carlo Study of Four
     Tests for a Random Walk," Journal f International Money   Finance1 5 (June 1986), 221-9.

Hakkio, Craig S., and Douglas K. Pearce, "The Reaction of Exchange Rates to Economic News,"
      Economic Inquiry, 23 (October 1985), 621-36.

Hardouvelis, Gikas A., "Market Perceptions of Federal Reserve Policy and the Weekly Monetary
      Announcements," Journal 21 Monetary Economics, 14 (September 1984), 225-40.

Ito, Takatoshi, "Capital Controls and Covered Interest Parity Between the Yen and the Dollar,'
      Economic Studies Ouarterly, 37 (September 1986), 223-41.

Ito, Takatoshi, "The Intradaily Exchange Rate Dynamics and Monetary Policies after the Group of
       Five Agreement," Journal 21 the Jaoanese    International Economics, 1 (September 1987),
      275-98.

Ito, Takatoshi, "Use of (Time Domain) Vector Autoregressions to Test Uncovered Interest Parity,"
      Review f Economics        Statistics, 70 (May 1988), 296-305.

Ito, Takatoshi, and V. Vance Haley, "News from the U.S. and Japan: Which Moves the Yen/Dollar
       Exchange Rate?" Journal 21 Monetary Economics, 19 (March 1987), 255-77.

Levi, Maurice D., "The Weekend Game: Clearing House vs Federal Funds," Canadian Journal 21
      Economics, 11 (November 1978), 750-7.

Lo, Andrew W., and A. Craig MacKinlay, "Stock Market Prices Do Not Follow Random Walks:
      Evidence from a Simple Specification Test," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
      Paper No. 2168, 1987.

McFarland, James W., It. Richardson Pettit, and Sam K. Sung, "The Distribution of Foreign
      Exchange Price Changes: Trading Day Effects and Risk Measurement," Journal gf Finance, 37
      (June 1982), 693-715.
Meese, Richard A., "Testing for Buhbles in Exchange Markets: A Case of Sparkling Rates?" Journal 21
     Political Economy, 94 (April 1986), 345-73.

Meese, Richard A., and Kenneth J. Singleton, "On Unit Roots and the Empirical Modeling of
      Exchange Rates," Journal 21 Finance, 37 (September 1982), 1029-35.

Miller, Rupert G., Jr., Beyond ANOVA. Basics 21 Aonlied Statistics. New York: John Wiley & Sons,
      1986.
                                                   22


Mussa, Michael, "Empirical Regularities in the Behavior of Exchange Rates and Theories of the
     Foreign Exchange Market," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series Public Policy, 11 (Autumn
      1979), 9-57.

Obstfeld, Maurice, "Floating Exchange Rates:        Experience and Prospects," Brookings Papers g
      Economic Activity, (No. 2, 1985), 369-450.

Pearce, Douglas K., and V. Vance itoley, "Stock Prices and Economic News," Journal f Business, 58
      (January 1985), 49-67.

Phillips, P.C.B., "Time Series Regression with a Unit Root," Econometrica, 55 (March 1987), 277-301.

Poterba, James M., and Lawrence H. Summers, "Mean Reversion in Stock Prices: Evidence and
      Implications," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 2343, 1987.

Roley, V. Vance, "Market Perceptions of U.S. Monetary Policy Since 1982," Federal Reserve Bank of
      Kansas City, Economic Review, 71 (May 1986), 27-40.

Roley, V. Vance, "U.S. Money Announcements and Covered Interest Parity: The Case of Japan,"
      Journal of International Money th Finance, 6 (March 1987a), 57-70.

Roley, V. Vance, "The Effects of Money Announcements Under Alternative Monetary Control
      Procedures1" Journal of Money. Credit, and Banking, j9 (August 198Th), 292-307.

Shiller, Robert .1., "Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent Changes in
      Dividends?" American Economic Review, 71 (June 1981), 421-36.

Sweeney, Richard 3., "Beating the Foreign Exchange Market," Journal f Finance, 41 (March 1986),
      163-82.

White, Halbert, "A Heteroslcedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct Test for
      Heteroekedasticity," Econometrica, 48 (May 1980), 817-38.

Woo, Wing Thye, "Some Evidence on Speculative Bubbles in the Foreign Exchange Market," Journal
     21 Money, Credit, and Bankin, 19 (November 1987), 499-514.
                                   TABLE 1

        Summary of Yen/Dollar Exchange Rate Movements in Four Markets
            Entire Sample: January 1, 1980 — September 29, 1986


                        Tokyo       Europe        New York        Pacific

Mean                     .0014      —.0256         .0105           —.0098
Standard Deviation       .3448        .3579        .4265            .2014
Mean Absolute Change     .2406        .2538        .3086            .1251

               Period I: January 1. 1980 — November 30, 1980

Mean                   —.0057       —.0588         .0039            .0181
Standard Deviation       .4404        .4044        .3988            .1455
Mean Absolute Change     .3147        .2694        .2730            .1025
               Period II: December 1, 1980 — October 4, 1982

Mean                     .0180      —.0239         .0570          —.0035
Standard Deviation       .4069        .3974        .4634            .1840
Mean Absolute Change     .3083        .2962        .3646            .1112
               Period III: October 5, 1982 — January 31, 1984

Mean                   —.0025       —.0412         .0060          —.0006
Standard Deviation       .2888        .3273        .4461            .1732
Mean Absolute Change     .2054        .2439        .3341            .1106
              Period IV: February 1, 1984 — September 22, 1985

Mean                     .0006        .0082        .0052          —.0121
Standard Deviation       .2089        .2868        .3339            .1573
Mean Absolute Change     .1446        .1949        .2317            .1043
             Period V: September 23, 1985 — September 29, 1986

Mean                   —.0166       —.0336        —.0537          — .0548
Standard Deviation       .3693        .3776        .4774           .3276
Mean Absolute Change     .2530        .2711        .3289           .2229


NOTES: Exchange rate movements are measured as changes in natural log-
        arithms, multiplied by 100. If one market is closed because of
        a holiday, then not only that market, but also adjacent markets
        becooe missing observations. As a result, the number of obser-
        vations can differ across markets for the same period.
                                             TABLE 2

                     Tests of Variances Across Periods and Markets


                                Tokyo          Europe       New York      Pacific

H0: V(1)V(II)
     F—statistic                1.172           1.036
                                                                      *            *
                                                             1.350        1.599
     degrees of freedom        (225,460) (216,446) (463,228) (444,217)
     p—value                      .081           .377          .005         .000


Ho: V(II)=V(tII)
     F—statistic
                                         *              *
                                1.985           1.474        1.079        1.129
     degrees of freedom       (460,328) (446,317) (463,331) (444,316)
     p—value                     .000            .000         .230         .125


H0: V(1II)V(IV)
     F—statistic                1.912
                                         *              *            *            *
                                                1.303        1.785        1.212
     degrees of freedom       (328,411) (317,396) (331,408) (316,393)
     p—value                     .000            .006         .000         .036


H0: V(IV)=V(V)
     F—statistic                3.127
                                         *              *            *            *
                                                1.733        2.044        4.335
     degrees of freedom       (252,411) (243,396) (255,408) (243,393)
     p—value                     .000            .000         .000         .000


         Period:                  I              II           III          lY

U: V(TK)=V(NY)
     P—statistic                                        *            *            *            *
                                1.219           1.297        2.386        2.556        1.671
     degrees of freedom       (225,228) (463,460) (331,328) (408,411) (255,252)
     p—value                     .068            .003         .000         .000         .000



NOTES: The alternative hypothesis is that one of the variances is larger, e.g.,
        V(I) >   V(II).V(j), j=I, II, III, IV, V, represents the variance in an
        individual market in period j . V(TK) and VflW) are the variances in the
        Tokyo and New York markets, respectively.

*
 Significant   at the 5 percent level.
                                              TABLE 3

           Predictability   of Exchange Rate Movements; Tokyo (TICC — 11(0)


                                          Coefficient Estimates and Summary Statistics
                       Period;           I—V              I          It         III           IV                V

Constant                                 .003          .011         .029        .003        —.004  —.027
                                     (.009) (.029) (.019) (.016)                            (.010) (.025)
                                                *             *                        *            *
Pacific                              —.192            —.409       —.147        —.310        —.257            —.142
(TKO—NYC1)                           (.043) (.202) (.105) (.092) (.067) (.081)
                                                *             *            *
New York                             —.091           —.215        —.140        —.058        —.057            —.036
(NYC
     1—NY01)                         (.020)           (.074) (.042) (.035) (.032) (.054)
                                                *                                                   *
Europe                                   .079          .077        .037         .053         .090             .133
(NY01—TKC1)                          (.024) (.072) (.049) (.049) (.036) (.069)

                                         .03           .05         .03          .05          .05              .02

SE                                       .34           .41         .40          .27          .20              .38


                                                                  Test Results
      Tests                        i—v                i            ii           in             iv                    v

Dickey—Fuller   with
 time trend
                                 1.440              1.265         3.436         1.195        1.758              0.855
observations                       1547               206           429           303              382            233
p—value                           '.10              '.10          '.10          >.1O          '.10              '.10

Previous 3 segments0                      *                               *             *                *
F—statistic                       9.861             2.348         4.121        3.240         2.982              1.650
degrees of freedom               (3.1549) (3,202) (3,425) (3,299) (3,378)                                      (3,229)
p-value                            .000               .074         .007          .022          .031                 .179

Day—of—Week DuriesO                                                                     *
F—statistic                       1.716    1.562                  0.539         2.536        1.314              1.270
degrees of freedom               (4,1545) (4,198)                 (4,421) (4,295) (4.374) (4.225)
p—value                            .144      .186                  .707          .040          .264                 .283

Jumps0
F—statistic                      0.735              1.128         1.188        3.262         1.916              0.889
degrees of freedom               (3.1546)           (1,201)       (3,422) (1.298) (3.375)                      (3,226)
p—value                            .531               .190         .314          .072          .127              .448

Number of absolute fitted
 values greater than .10 Yen
number                              592               112           228           119              105                   79
total observations                 1553               206           429           303              382               233
                                    TABLE 3 ——   continued


NOTES: Numbers        in parentheses below the estimated coefficients are estimated
           standarderrors. Jumps are absolute 1 percentage point or more changes
          in a segment. The null hypothesis for the Dickey-Puller, day—of—week
          dummies, and jumps tests corresponds to the specification with three
          previous segments and a constant term in the top half of the table. The
          test of the significance of the three previous segments also is per-
          formed in this specification. Absolute fitted values are additionally
          taken from this specification, but the estimated constant term is
          excluded in the computations. Tests of the significance of the day—of—
          week dummies and the three previous segments use White's (1980) hetero—
           scedasticity—consistent covariance matrix.

*
    Significant   at the 5 percent level.
                                               TABLE 4

             Predictability of Exchange Rate Movements: Europe (NYU — TKC)

                                        Coefficient Estimates and Summary Statistics
                         Period:        I—V               I        lIT         III             iv            v
                                                *
                                                     — .060
                                                              *                       *
Constant                              —.028                       —.034       —.041            .006        —.038
                                       (.009) (.028) (.019) (.018) (.015) (.026)
                                                              *
tokyo                                    .056         .137         .031        .001            .083         .068
(TKC—TKO)                              (.032) (.066) (.047) (.064)                            (.073)       (.067)

Pacific                               —.077  —.037                —.139  —.156                —.077        —.025
(TED—NYC1)                            (.044) (.195)               (.102) (.106)               (.099)       (.076)

                                                *             *           *           *
New York                                 .121         .251         .150        .168            .075  —.010
(NYC 1—NY01)                           (.025) (.074) (.041) (.041)                            (.046) (.052)

                                         .02          .05          .03         .05             .01         —.01

SE                                       .36          .40          .39         .32             .29          .38


                                                                  Test Results

          Tests                     1V                I            II           III                 IV             V

Dickey—Fuller with
 time trend                                                                                                              *
                                   2.448            0.646         1.313        3.314            0.447         6.342

observations                        1562              208           432          306                 378           235
p—value                            '.10             '.10          >.10         '.10             '.10              .05

Previous 3 segmentsO                      *                               *               *
F—statistic                         8.984     2.575               4.872        3.878            0.937         0.379
degrees of freedom                 (3,1555) (3,204)               (3,428) (3,302) (3,374)                    (3,231)
p—value                              .000      .052                .002         .009                .422       .768


Day-of-Week       Dummies0
F—statistic                         2.324           1.761         2.011        0.876            0.682         1.383
degrees of freedom                 (4,1551)         (4.200) (4,424) (4,298) (4,370) (4,227)
p—value                              .073            .153          .110         .453                .563          .246


Jumps0                                                                                    *
F—statistic                         1.980           0.247         0.333        3.520            0.853         1.172
degrees of freedom                 (3,1552) (2,202) (3,425) (2,300) (3,371) (3,228)
                                     .115            .864          .801         .015                .465          .319
p—value

Number of absolute fitted
 values greater than .10 Yen
number                                542             26             220         170                  55            17
total observations                   1559             208            432         306                 378           235


NOTES: See the notes in Table 3.
                                               TABLE 5

             Predictability of Exchange Rate Movements: New York (NYC — NYo)


                                         Coefficient Estimates and Summary Statistics
                        Period:          I—V              I            II          III          IV            V

Constant                                 .003         .000             .043        .002         .002        —.049
                                     (.011) (.026) (.022)                         (.025) (.018) (.030)
                                                *                 *           *
Europe                               —.077           —.135            —.149       —.025        —.043         .008
(NYO—TKC)                            (.030) (.063) (.055) (.077) (.060) (.078)
                                                *                 *
Tokyo                                    .121         .365             .031        .122         .153        —.017
(TKC—TKO)                            (.031) (.060) (.054) (.081) (.085) (.079)
                                                *                             *
Pacific                              —.129          —.192             —.430       —.195        —.010         .004
(TK0—NYC1)                           (.053) (.179) (.119) (.146) (.112) (.090)

                                         .02          .16              .04         .01          .00         —.01

SE                                       .42          .37              .45         .44          .34          .45


                                                                      Test Results
           Tests                   I—V                I                II         III                IV             V
Dickey—Fuller with
 time trend
                                  2.493             0.422             2.256       0.837          2.912         2.814
$3
observations                       1559               208               432         306            378           235
p—value                           '.10              '.99              '.10        '.975          '.10          '.10

Previous 3 segments=0
F—statistic
                                          *                   *               *
                                  6.001     10.071                    8.342       0.778          1.523         0.012
degrees of freedom                (3,1555) (3,204)                    (3,428) (3,302) (3,374)                 (3,231)
p—value                             .001      .000                     .000         .506             .207       .998

Day—of—Week Dummies=0                                         *
F—statistic                       2.502             2.636             1.911       0.037          0.866         1.584
degrees    of freedom             (4,1551) (4,200) (4,424) (4,298)                              (4.370) (4,227)
p—value                            .058              .035              .108         .997             .485          .179

.Jumps=0
                                                                                           *
F—statistic                       1.951             1.877             1.308       3.986          2.039        1.898
degrees of freedom                (3,1552) (2,202) (3,425) (1,301) (3,371) (3,228)
p—value                            .119              .131              .270         .008             .107          .128

Number of absolute fitted
 values greater than .10 Yen
number                              530              148                244          88                60            0
total observations                 1559              208                432         306               378          235

NOTES: See the notes in Table 3.
                                               TABLE 6

           Predictability   of Exchange Rate Movements: Pacific (TKO —
                                                                                             NYC1)


                                         Coefficient           Estimates and Suary Statistics
                       Period:           I—V              I         II         III          IV              V
                                                *                                                                  *
Constant                             —.013            .014         —.006 —.007             —.013  —.057
                                     (.005)          (.010) (.009) (.010)                  (.008) (.019)
                                                          *                                        *
New York                             —.010          —.091    .016   .008                   —.105            .051

(NYC1—NYO1)
                                     (.012)         (.027) (.019) (.022)                   (.024) (.042)
                                                                           *          *
Europe                                   .012        .069 —.113
                                                    —.034                                  —.018    .088
                                     (.014) (.025) (.022) (.030)                           (.028) (.053)
(NY01—TKC1)
                                                *              *                                                   *
Tokyo                                    .060         .051          .023       .001         .063            .223
                                     (.014) (.025) (.022) (.034)                           (.038) (.051)
(TKC1—TKO1)

                                         .01          .04           .02        .04          .04             .09

SE                                       .20          .14           .18        .17          .16             .29


                                                                   Test Results
       Tests                       1—V                I             II          III              IV                V
Dickey—Ful ler with
 time trend                               *                   *
                                 10.618             9.498          1.597        0.908        2.631            0.265

observations                       1553               206            429          303          382                233
p—value                           <.01              <.01           >.lO         '.975        '.10               >.99

Previous 3 segments0                    *         *                        *                                             *
P—statistic                       3.666    5.081                   4.892        2.272        1.348              6.385
degrees of freedom               (3.1549) (3,202)                  (3.425) (3.299) (3.378) (3,229)
                                   .012      .002                   .002         .078            .257             .000
p—value

Day-of-Week Dummies=0                      *                                                            *                *
F—statistic                       2.660             1.469          0.419        0.930        3.594              2.587
degrees of freedom               (4,1545) (4,198) (4,421) (4,295) (4,374) (4.225)
                                    .047             .213           .795         .447            .007             .038
p—value

Jumps0                                                                                                  *
F—statistic                       2.269             0.226          0.583        1.387        6.372              0.600
degrees of freedom                (3,1346) (2,200) (3,422)                     (2,297) (3,375) (3.226)
                                    .079             .878           .626         .245            .000             .615
p—value

Number of absolute fitted
 values greater than .10 Yen
number                                54                  39          56              68           75              102
total observations                  1553              206            429             303          382              233

NOTES: See the notes in Table 3.
                                             TABLE 7

                          Behavior of the Exchange Rate Around Jumps


                                                Number of Days with Absolute Changes
                                                ________ of 1 Percent or More
                                                Tokyo         Europe         New York      Pacific

Jan. 1, 1980 —      Sept.    29, 1986            36             22              57           8
Jan. 1, 1980 — Nov. 30, 1980                     10              5               7           0
Dec. 1, 1980 —      Oct.    4, 1982              13              8              15           2
Oct. 5, 1982 —      Jan.    31, 1984              4              2             13            1
Feb. 1, 1984 —      Sept.    22, 1985             2              3               6           1

Sept. 23, 1985 —       Sept. 29, 1986             7              4             16            4


                                        Estimation Results

                              Jump = a + b(previous change) + e
                                                                                     —2
Previous Change:                                      a              b               R      SE
                                                          *
previous    segment                             —.3570         —.2470                .00   1.28
                                                (.1213)         (.2049)
                                                          *
previous    2 segments                          —.3780         —.1143           —.00       1.28
                                                (.1230)         (.1614)

previous 3 segments                             _359Ø*         —.0002           —.01       1.28
                                                (.1219)         (.0015)

previous week                                   _.3699*        —.0430           —.00       1.29
                                                (.1297)         (.0509)

                   (change in subsequent segment) = a +          b(junip) + e
                      N                                                          —2
    Jump:                                             a                  b       R          SE

> 1%                  121                      —.0437          _.1319*               .09    .27
                                                (.0487)         (.0366)

• 1.25%                21                        .4484         —.4493                .02    .40
                                                (.5663)         (.3789)

>    1.5%               6                     —2.1347           .9741           —.16        .52
                                               (3.1158)       (1.7200)


NOTES: Numbers in parentheses below coefficient estimates are standard errors.
        N is the number of observations.

*
    Significant   at the 5 percent level.
                                                TABLE 8

Response    of U.S. Stock Prices to Yen/Dollar Exchange Rate Movements (NYSP                             — &YSP1)


                                       Coefficient            Estimates and Summary Statistics
                         Period:       1—V                I        II          III           IV            V
Constant                                .022         .019        —.037    .057              .028      .076
                                       (.030)       (.120)       (.072) (.055)             (.038)    (.065)
                                            -
                                                *                       *
Europe                                —.268         —.119        —.499 —.304               —.010     —.144
(NY0—TKC)                              (.085)       (.294)       (.180) (.167)             (.139)    (.169)

Tokyo                                 —.137         —.205   —.086 —.289                    —.076     —.086
(TKC—TKO)                              (.088)       (.277) (.174) (.190)                   (.184)    (.170)
                                                *                       *
Pacific                               —.423         —.065        —1.15 —.099               —.399     —.177
                                       (.151)       (.839)       (.385) (.317)             (.246)    (.195)
(TKO—NYC1)
                                        .01         —.01          .03         .01          —.00      —.00

SE                                    1.19          1.67         1.47        0.94          0.73      0.97



                                                    Tests of Information Content

          Tests                      1V               I           II            III           IV               V

 Previous 3 segments0                       *                            *
 F—statistic                        5.233    0.543    3.761                    1.232         1.046    0.714
 degrees of freedom                (3.1530) (3,199) (3,419)                   (3,298)       (3.371) (3.227)
 p—value                             .001     .653     .010                     .297          .371             .544

 Jumps0                                                                                *             *                *
 F—statistic                        0.145           1.089        0.329         3.546        11.539        11.906
 degrees of freedom                (3,1527) (2,197) (3,416) (1,297) (2,369) (3.224)
 p—value                             .933            .353         .804          .014          .000             .000


tCTES: The dependent variable in the regressions is the change in the natural log-
        arithm of the Standard & Poors 500 Index, multiplied by 100, from the close
        in day t—1 to the close in day t. Numbers in parentheses below the estimated
        coefficients are estimated standard errors, The null hypothesis for the
        jumps test correspon4s to the specification in the top part of the table.
        The test of the significance of exchange rate movements in the three previous
        segments also is performed in this specification using White's (1980) heter—
        oscedasticity—consistent covariance matrix.

 *
     Significant   at the 5 percent level.
                                                       TABLE 9

Response of Japanese Stock Prices to Yen/Dollar Exchange Rate
                                                                                        Novemeits (TKSP — 1KM


                                             Coefficient Estimates and Summary Statistics
                              Period:            I—V                I       II    III              IV            V
     Constant                                    .058
                                                        *
                                                                  .039
                                                                                         *                            *
                                                               —.005   .110                       .056         .145
                                                (.024) (.034) (.069) (.033)                      (.037) (.050)
     Pacific                                —.051   —.191  —.103 —.182                           —.003         .077
     (TK0—Nyc1)                              (.119) (.235) (.73) (.190)                          (.236) (.162)
     New York                               —.170    .080  —.106 —.432                           —.348    .017
     (NYC1—Nyo1)                            (.056) (.086) (.149) (.073)                          (.113) (.106)
     Europe                                 —.416            —.311       —.566 —.461             —.293        —.303
     (NY01—TICC1)                           (.067) (.084)                (.179) (.102)           (.127) (.135)
                                                .03           .06         .02     .15             .03          .01
     SE                                     0.92             0.48        1.41    0.56            0.71         0.74


                                                              Tests of Information Content
              Tests                       i—v                 i           II      III               IV               V
 Previous 3 segments=0
 F—statistic                                     *                  *                        *            *
                                        10.985              3.825        2.351    9.768    4.931
 degrees of freedom                                                                                             1.991
                                        (3,1535) (3,202) (3,419)                 (3,294) (3,378)               (3,226)
 p—value                                  .000               .010         .071     .000     .002                .113
 Jumps0
 F—statistic                                                        *
                                        0.871               3.695        0.929    0.671           0.368
 degrees of freedom                                                                                             0.703
 p—value
                                        (3,1532) (1.201) (3,416) (1,293) (3,375) (3,223)
                                         .455                .011         .426     .570            .776          .550



 NOTES: The dependent variable in the regressions is the change in the natural log-
         arithm of the Nikkei—Doi., 225 Index, multiplied
                                                          by 100, from the close in
         day t—l to the close in day t.    See the notes in Table 8.

 *
     Significant      at the 5 percent level.
