INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL EFFECTS OF SOCIAL
       DISTANCING IN A PANDEMIC
             Maryam Farboodi
              Gregor Jarosch
              Robert Shimer
          WORKING PAPER 27059
                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL EFFECTS OF SOCIAL DISTANCING IN A PANDEMIC

                                     Maryam Farboodi
                                      Gregor Jarosch
                                      Robert Shimer

                                     Working Paper 27059
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27059


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                            April 2020, Revised July 2020




We thank SafeGraph for making their data freely available to the research community. We are
grateful for comments from Fernando Alvarez, Eric Budish, Luis Bettencourt, Charles I. Jones,
Pete Klenow, Michael Kremer, Benjamin Moll, Simon Mongey, and Laura Pilossoph, as well as
numerous seminar participants. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Maryam Farboodi
has received financial support from MIT for this research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Maryam Farboodi, Gregor Jarosch, and Robert Shimer. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Internal and External Effects of Social Distancing in a Pandemic
Maryam Farboodi, Gregor Jarosch, and Robert Shimer
NBER Working Paper No. 27059
April 2020, Revised July 2020
JEL No. E1,H0,I1

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a quantitative framework for exploring how individuals trade off the utility benefit of
social activity against the internal and external health risks that come with social interactions
during a pandemic. We calibrate the model to external targets and then compare its predictions
with daily data on social activity, fatalities, and the estimated effective reproduction number R(t)
from the COVID-19 pandemic in March-June 2020. While the laissez- faire equilibrium is
consistent with much of the decline in social activity that we observed in US data, optimal policy
further imposes immediate and highly persistent social distancing. Notably, neither equilibrium
nor optimal social distancing is extremely restrictive, in the sense that the effective reproduction
number never falls far below 1. The expected cost of COVID-19 in the US is substantial, $12,700
in the laissez-faire equilibrium and $8,100 per person under an optimal policy. Optimal policy
generates this large welfare gain by shifting the composition of costs from fatalities to persistent
social distancing.

Maryam Farboodi                                  Robert Shimer
MIT Sloan School of Management                   Department of Economics
100 Main Street, E62-627                         University of Chicago
Cambridge, MA 02142                              1126 East 59th Street
and NBER                                         Chicago, IL 60637
m.farboodi@gmail.com                             and NBER
                                                 shimer@uchicago.edu
Gregor Jarosch
Department of Economics
Princeton University
195 Julis Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
gregorjarosch@gmail.com
1    Introduction
A key parameter in workhorse models of disease transmission is the rate at which sick
people infect susceptible people. During the COVID-19 outbreak in 2020, all policy
measures against the disease were, in one way or another, aimed at reducing this rate.
Our starting point is the observation that the disease is primarily transmitted through
social interactions, which in turn depend on individuals’ level of social activity, such
as meeting with friends, dining at restaurants, shopping at retail stores, working in
offices, and flying to travel destinations. These social activities always have costs and
benefits, but the emergence of COVID-19 created a significant new cost, an elevated
risk of disease transmission. We argue that standard economic tools are well-suited
for modeling the behavioral response to COVID-19 and for assessing the costs and
benefits of policies like widespread social distancing.
    Our main contribution in this paper is to develop a simple model where individuals
value social activity but face a risk of getting sick when they have social interactions
with other people who are already infected. In a laissez-faire economy, forward-
looking and rational individuals understand the risk of getting sick and the cost of
the disease. This creates an internal benefit to social distancing, and individuals
curtail their activity accordingly. Self-interested people do not, however, internalize
the risk of making other people sick once they are already ill, an external benefit of
social distancing. This creates a role for mandatory social distancing policies.
    We evaluate a quantitative version of a model capturing these features and com-
pare the predictions with data on social activity, disease dynamics, and fatalities in
the US and other countries. We find that the internal benefits of social distancing
alone reduced mortality by 70 percent in the US by July 1, 2020, from 1,925,000 to
564,000 deaths. A combination of altruistic behavior and mandatory widespread so-
cial distancing policies reduced it by an additional 77 percent, to the observed 129,000
deaths. On the other hand, a fully optimal policy would have resulted in only 5,500
deaths by that date, at the cost of a greater reduction in social activity.
    We start the paper by using data from SafeGraph and Google to depict the evo-
lution of social activity. Using several different metrics, we show that individuals
in the US and elsewhere substantially reduced their social activity before state and
local governments imposed the first “stay-at-home” or “shelter-in-place” restrictions.

                                           1
Conversely, as the level of infection either passed its peak or remained relatively low,
social activity increased before those restrictions were relaxed.1 This is consistent
with our hypothesis that individuals’ desire to avoid getting sick is an important de-
terminant of their social activity. Nevertheless, we also find that mandatory social
distancing reduced activity below the level in laissez-faire settings. Our results are
remarkably similar across metrics, data sets, and locations.
    We then show how to integrate both individual behavior and policy analysis into
an otherwise standard epidemiological model (Kermack and McKendrick, 1927). Liv-
ing individuals are either susceptible to COVID-19, currently infected by it, or recov-
ered. Susceptible individuals may catch the disease from infected individuals through
the interaction between their social activity. We capture an important feature of
COVID-19, that much of the transmission appears to be either pre-symptomatic or
asymptomatic, through an assumption that individuals do not know when they are
infected. Otherwise individuals are forward-looking and rational. They understand
how their past behavior affects the probability that they are currently infected. They
also understand how other people behave, the prevalence of the disease, and the risk
of dying from it. In short, they know the costs and benefits of their own social activ-
ity. Finally, we assume that a cure which eliminates the health risk associated with
the disease arrives stochastically, creating a strong incentive to delay getting sick.
    We use optimal control theory to derive two ordinary differential equations (ODEs)
which capture the internal cost of being susceptible and infected, along with an op-
timality condition which determines the level of social activity. Together with two
standard differential equations from the epidemiological model, the resulting system
of four ODEs fully summarize the model and can easily be solved on a computer.
    We also derive the corresponding system of ODEs which characterize the sym-
metric Pareto optimal allocation. Optimal policy chooses a time path for the amount
of social activity, recognizing the internal and external health consequences of social
activity. A comparison with the laissez-faire benchmark elucidates that the internal
effects of social distancing capture the fact that higher social activity increases the
risk of susceptible people getting infected. The external effects capture that higher
   1
    As we write this version of the paper, infection rates are rising rapidly across much of the
southern part of the US, including Florida, Texas, and Arizona. We expect that social activity will
again decline in these parts of the country.


                                                2
social activity increases the risk of infected people making susceptible people sick.
While individuals weigh the risk of getting sick against the internal benefit of social
activity, optimal policy also recognizes that purely self-interested individuals ignore
the external cost of transmitting infections.
    We then calibrate the model to US data. The calibration targets various epi-
demiological findings such as the initial growth rate of the disease, the duration of
infectivity, and the fatality rate, along with the value of a statistical life. We use the
quantitative model for two primary purposes. First, we highlight key observations
about the laissez-faire economy and optimal policy which are robust to a wide range
of values for the model parameters. Second, we quantify the cost of the pandemic
and show how its level and decomposition into health and economic cost varies with
policy choices.
    Our most important observations are the following. First, the laissez-faire reduc-
tion in social activity due to the internalized cost of infection is strong. Compared to
a naı̈ve model without any social distancing, the peak outbreak is delayed and much
lower, substantially reducing the expected number of fatalities. However, individuals
only reduce activity once the risk of infection becomes non-negligible.
    Second, and in contrast, optimal social distancing starts as soon as the disease
emerges, discontinuously imposing social distancing, e.g. through stay-at-home orders.
This discrete drop in activity delays the spread of infections and hence buys time.
Because of the hope for a cure, this enormously reduces expected fatalities and yields
a substantial welfare gain, albeit at the cost of a reduction in social activity.
    Third, optimal social distancing is persistent, remaining in place for years or until
a cure is found. This is the flip side of delaying the spread of infections, since it means
that the share of people who are susceptible to the disease falls very slowly. Never-
theless, we find that social activity asymptotically returns to normal and infections
stop as the population achieves herd immunity.
    Fourth, social distancing is never too restrictive in the sense that the effective
reproduction number R(t) never falls far below 1. This is equivalent to saying that
infections decline very slowly after they peak. Instead, optimal policy gradually allows
social activity to climb back to normal and in doing so effectively rolls over infections.
R(t) behaves similarly in a laissez-faire setting.


                                            3
    The finding that R(t) never falls far below 1 reflects a combination of two factors.
First, the costs and benefits of social activity naturally stabilize the infection rate
and the amount of social activity. If the infection rate is low, the risk of getting sick
is small and so social activity is high. High levels of social activity then naturally
lead to increased infections through epidemiological dynamics, which in turn reduce
social activity through economic incentives. The opposite is true if the infection rate
is high. When R(t) = 1, infections are constant by definition and so these forces are
in balance. Second, since individuals do not know their disease status, social activity
also depends on the relative likelihood of being susceptible versus infected. Because
the infection rate is low in our calibrated model, the probability of being susceptible
declines only slowly. That is, both state variables, the susceptible and infected rates,
are slow-moving. Social activity then inherits this stickiness and only changes very
slowly, which in turn implies that infections remain almost constant. This means that
once the effective reproduction number R(t) reaches 1, it stays close to it.
    Using our calibrated model, we also derive quantitative results about the expected
cost of COVID-19 and the benefits of policy. We first show that both the time path
of the cost and its composition differ sharply between laissez-faire and optimal policy.
Under laissez-faire, almost 90 percent of the costs associated with the pandemic are
pure health costs, while optimal policy substantially reduces health costs but leads
to much higher costs from social distancing. Further, under laissez-faire most of the
costs are incurred during the first year of the pandemic. In contrast, optimal policy
delays infections and hence has higher costs further in the future.
    Overall, the expected cost of COVID-19 for the US is drastic. Under a laissez-
faire path, the expected total cost amounts to 28 percent of one year’s GDP. While
large, this cost is still far below the cost of the no-response benchmark, highlighting
that individual behavior is a powerful force in curtailing the fallout from the disease.
Under the optimal policy, the expected total cost is significantly smaller but still
substantial, 18 percent of one year’s GDP. The expected discounted flow cost per
capita under the optimal policy starts at $13 per person per day and is still at $4
per day two years later. In light of what is thus far known about the economic and
health costs brought about by the pandemic, these numbers appear to be a plausible
lower bound on the expected cost.


                                           4
    Finally, we validate the model by contrasting it with data along various dimen-
sions. We first show that it accounts well for the overall decline in social activity
which we measure in both the Google and SafeGraph data. The laissez-faire version
of our model predicts a 40 percent decline in social activity occurring within a four
week period. In the US, we observed a 30 percent decline in activity during the week
of March 13, 2020, the first week with widespread public awareness of the dangers
of the disease. Notably, there were few stay-at-home orders issued during that week,
so we believe that this reflects the laissez-faire dynamics of the model. On the other
hand, it would have been optimal to reduce social activity immediately by about 40
percent and maintain those restrictions for a much longer period of time.
    Second, we contrast the aformentioned prediction that R(t) stays close to 1 after
peak infections with two independent measures of R(t) which cover a wide variety of
locations, Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020) and https://rt.live. We show
that this prediction bears out remarkably well in the data. Following peak infection,
the stock of infected individuals has been slowly rolled over in most locations, keeping
R(t) close to 1.
    Third, we consider the evolution of fatalities in the US. We show that total US
fatalities by late June were substantially below what would have occurred under
laissez-faire. At the same time, the actual 129,000 deaths vastly exceed the 5,500
deaths that the US would have seen by July 1st if it had adopted the optimal policy
starting on March 13th .
    Overall, the models predictions align well with the data along various dimensions
given what is thus far known about the disease. It is therefore a natural laboratory for
quantitatively evaluating both policies that we have observed, like widespread social
distancing, and policies that have been proposed but not yet implemented, including
massive testing, test-trace-and-quarantine, and antibody testing.
    The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 relates our paper to the literature; Sec-
tion 3 documents the evolution of social activity; Section 4 lays out the model and
defines laissez-faire equilibrium as well as the optimum; Section 5 calibrates the model
and presents our main quantitative results; Section 6 compares our model to data;
Section 7 summarizes our main qualitative observations; Section 8 discusses the role
of several key assumptions and modeling choices; and Section 9 concludes.


                                           5
2       Related Work
Our basic approach builds on the susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR) model (Ker-
mack and McKendrick, 1927). There exists a small body of pre-COVID-19 work
which aims at integrating optimal control of economic or social activity with a model
of disease dynamics (e.g. Philipson and Posner, 1993, 1995; Philipson, 2000; Kremer,
1996; Fenichel, 2013; Greenwood, Kircher, Santos and Tertilt, 2019; Toxvaerd, 2019).
Prior to 2020, quantitative evaluations of epidemiological models with standard eco-
nomic features have, to the best of our knowledge, been limited to HIV/AIDS, a very
different disease than COVID-19.
    There is now a rapidly growing body of work which applies a mix of the basic
epidemiological model and dynamic optimization tools from economics to think about
various aspects of COVID-19.2 Relative to these papers, we focus on writing down the
simplest possible model that can capture the costs and benefits of widespread social
distancing in a manner that is quantitative and in line with available evidence. Our
quantitative objective means that we focus throughout on the fact that the disease
can be transmitted through many types of social interactions, only some of which are
captured by consumption or labor supply. Fortuitously, this allows us to map our
model into newly available high-frequency data from Google and SafeGraph on social
activity. This type of data only became available to researchers after the onset of
COVID-19. Our focus on social activity also allows us to connect our model with the
policy that was actually employed, social distancing.
    Arguably what is most distinctive about our approach is that we offer a host of
evidence on various aspects of both individual behavior and disease characteristics
which we use to quantitatively evaluate the performance of the model. We discuss
the evidence not only on social distancing but also on mortality and on the effective
reproduction number R(t). We also take advantage of the model’s tractability to pro-
    2
    An incomplete list includes Acemoglu, Chernozhukov, Werning and Whinston (2020), Alvarez,
Argente and Lippi (2020), Atkeson (2020), Barro, Ursua and Weng (2020), Bethune and Korinek
(2020), Bognanni, Hanley, Kolliner and Mitman (2020), Brotherhood, Kircher, Santos and Tertilt
(2020), Budish (2020), Dewatripont, Goldman, Muraille and Platteau (2020), Eichenbaum, Rebelo
and Trabandt (2020), Garibaldi, Moen and Pissarides (2020), Glover, Heathcote, Krueger and Rios-
Rull (2020), Hall, Jones and Klenow (2020), Jones, Philippon and Venkateswaran (2020), Kaplan,
Moll and Violante (2020), Keppo, Kudlyak, Quercioli, Smith and Wilson (2020), Krueger, Uhlig and
Xie (2020), Piguillem and Shi (2020), Rowthorn and Toxvaerd (2020), and Toxvaerd (2020).


                                               6
vide intuition for why the laissez-faire and optimal policies give rise to the outcomes
that we observe.
    Because of the significant overlap in the models, our paper leads to broadly similar
qualitative conclusions as other papers in the rapidly growing literature on COVID-19.
Individual optimality alone leads to social distancing, yet not enough. Optimal policy
imposes immediate social distancing but allows the disease to spread until we reach
herd immunity. Relative to these papers, we develop a unified and tractable approach
to study both equilibrium and optimum, offer new evidence on equilibrium behavior
in the early stages of the COVID-19 outbreak, and give a systematic assessment of
the model’s quantitative performance using a host of data on various aspects of the
epidemic. Our quantitative prediction that optimal policy is persistent but not overly
restrictive appears to be novel in this literature. In particular, we believe we are the
first to connect these properties of optimal policy to the effective reproduction number
R(t), a fundamental concept in epidemiology, and show that it stabilizes close to 1.
    At a more fine-grained level, our paper differs from most others in its information
structure. We assume that newly-infected individuals do not know their infection
status and so spread the disease unknowingly. This means that policy cannot dis-
criminate between susceptible and infected people, which in turn means that social
distancing policies must be wide-spread, rather than targeted on infected individuals.
The aforementioned papers typically make different assumptions about individuals’
information sets. On a related point, other papers focus on a broader set of policy
tools. We deliberately focus on widespread social distancing because it was ubiqui-
tous in the early stages of the COVID-19 outbreak and is likely to be proposed again
for future outbreaks. Moreover, targeted policies like test-trace-and-quarantine still
appear unavailable or dysfunctional many months after the outbreak.
    The paper is also related to an older literature on social externalities, including Di-
amond and Maskin (1979) and Kremer and Morcom (1998). In particular, Diamond
and Maskin (1979) introduce the distinction between a quadratic and a linear match-
ing technology. With quadratic matching, additional social activity by others raises
the likelihood of social contact and thus disease transmission for all individuals. For
example, with more individuals in parks, restaurants, and public transit, any given
trip to a park/restaurant/subway is more likely to lead to disease. Such a matching


                                            7
function has a search externality that, traditionally, is viewed as positive (Diamond,
1982), but that turns negative in the context of disease. It stands in contrast to a
linear search technology where an individual’s total social contacts merely depend on
her own social activity and not on those of others. We believe that such a technology
applies to cases where social contacts are explicitly sought out. We therefore argue
that the quadratic technology is appropriate to model the dynamics of COVID-19,
while a linear technology might be the right tool to model an epidemic like HIV.


3       Declining Social Activity, Early and Everywhere
In this section, we use newly available data which document substantial social dis-
tancing across the US and in other countries even before any policy measures were
taken. To do so, we use Google’s publicly available Community Mobility Reports
complemented with data from SafeGraph. Both data sources are based on cellphone
tracking data. Importantly, since we will model the choice of social activity directly,
our setup can connect directly with this type of data.
    Google Community Mobility Reports (https://www.google.com/COVID19/mobility/)
use Google devices’ location history to track the number of visits and length of stay
at places recognized as locations on Google maps. The activity metric is the percent
change in activity relative to a baseline period of January 3 to February 6, 2020.
We restrict attention to four categories of activity, each constructed by Google: “Re-
tail and Recreation,” “Transit stations,” “Workplace,” and “Residential.”3 Figure 1
shows the percent change in activity in these categories across the US. The thin black
lines in each figure plot Google’s activity metric across the fifty US states and the
District of Columbia. The thick black line shows the cross-sectional median change
in activity at any given date.
    On March 13, 2020, indicated by a dotted line in Figure 1, the US government
issued a proclamation declaring COVID-19 to be a national emergency. While this
proclamation had little formal content, it reflected a growing awareness of the dangers
    3
    We drop two categories, “Grocery and Pharmacy” and “Parks”. Both categories have compli-
cated relationships with social distancing. For example, visits to grocery stores surged as people
stocked their cupboards in the middle of March, while visits to parks depended on whether they
were open in a particular location.


                                                8
                                   Retail and Recreation                                                  Transit Stations




                                                                                                                                                                 stay-at-home share
                     50                                                                                                                                    1
percent change



                      0                                                                                                                                    2/3


                   −50                                                                                                                                     1/3


                  −100                                                                                                                                     0
                                               Workplaces                                                        Residential




                                                                                                                                                                 stay-at-home share
                     50                                                                                                                                    1
percent change




                      0                                                                                                                                    2/3


                   −50                                                                                                                                     1/3


                  −100                                                                                                                                     0
                       02/15

                               02/29

                                       03/14

                                                 03/28

                                                         04/11

                                                                 04/25

                                                                         05/09

                                                                                 05/23

                                                                                         02/15

                                                                                                 02/29

                                                                                                         03/14

                                                                                                                   03/28

                                                                                                                           04/11

                                                                                                                                   04/25

                                                                                                                                           05/09

                                                                                                                                                   05/23
                                               date in 2020                                                      date in 2020
                 Notes: Each thin line corresponds to the Google Community Mobility Report for one of the
                 51 US states and the District of Columbia; see the text for a description of this measure. We
                 retrieved this data from https://www.google.com/COVID19/mobility/ on June 1, 2020. The
                 thick black line marks the median state for that day. These are shown on the left hand scale.
                 The red line shows the fraction of the US population subject to stay-at-home or shelter-in-
                 place orders and is shown on the right hand scale. The population subject to these orders is
                 based on authors’ own calculations using https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/
                 coronavirus-stay-at-home-order.html. The vertical dotted line indicates March 13, 2020,
                 the date of the declaration of national emergency.

                                  Figure 1: Declining Activity, Early and Everywhere I


posed by the novel coronavirus in the US. In the following week, retail and recreation
fell an average of 34 percentage points, transit stations by 27 percentage points, and
workplaces by 29 percentage points. Over the same week, residential increased by 13
percent. All this occurred before any significant fraction of the US population was
subject to stay-at-home orders, as indicated by the red lines in Figure 1. In the next
week, as those orders spread across half the country, the first three categories fell by
a further 10, 12, and 10 percentage points, respectively, while residential increased
by another 5 percentage points. There was little change in the mobility index during
the week after that.

                                                                                 9
    After Easter Sunday, April 12, the trends started to reverse, with a noticeable
increase in the first three mobility metrics and a decline in the residential metric.
And as stay-at-home orders were eased in some states in late April and early May,
there was no break in that trend. Instead, we saw a gradual ramp-up in the first
three activities and a decline in the fourth during the second half of April and early
May. We interpret this as confirming that there was widespread social distancing in
the US, but that the majority of it was unrelated to mandatory stay-at-home orders.
Instead, it reflected the desire of individuals to reduce their exposure to the disease.
    Google Mobility Trends offers information on international locations as well. We
use that to compare the evolution of social activity in Chicago with three Scandinavian
capitals, Oslo, Copenhagen, and Stockholm. These three cities are arguably similar
in a lot of ways, but they experienced quite different policies. While Norway and
Denmark locked down on March 12 and 13, respectively, Sweden is widely considered
an outlier in that it instituted few restrictions on social activity.
    Figure 2 shows that social activity started falling in all four cities around March
13. The decline was sharpest in Oslo and Copenhagen, which were subject to formal
stay-at-home orders, and more gradual in Stockholm and Chicago, which were not.
Then on March 21, Illinois issued a shelter-in-place order. After that, the levels
of retail, transit, and workplace activity in Chicago, Oslo, and Copenhagen were
remarkably similar to each other and noticeably below Stockholm. Still, the significant
decline in activity in Stockholm is consistent with our hypothesis that voluntary social
distancing can substantially reduce activity even without formal stay-at-home orders.
    We complement this analysis with data from SafeGraph.4 Among other things,
SafeGraph provides disaggregated and detailed high-frequency information on indi-
vidual travel in the US. The underlying data source is a panel of opt-in, anonymized
smartphone devices, and is well balanced across US demographics and space.
    In early April 2020, SafeGraph made several datasets freely available to researchers.5
The main dataset we use is their first “COVID-19 Response Dataset,” named “Weekly
   4
     Attribution: SafeGraph, a data company that aggregates anonymized location data from numer-
ous applications in order to provide insights about physical places. To enhance privacy, SafeGraph
excludes census block group information if fewer than five devices visited an establishment in a
month from a given census block group.
   5
     For detailed information on the datasets we use, see https://docs.safegraph.com/docs/
weekly-patterns and https://docs.safegraph.com/docs/social-distancing-metrics.


                                               10
                   Retail and Recreation                                                      Transit Stations
     50                                                                     50

      0                                                                      0

   −50                                                                    −50

  −100                                                                    −100
                                Workplaces                                                           Residential
     50                                                                     50

      0                                                                      0
                                                                                                                  Chicago
                                                                                                                  Oslo
   −50                                                                    −50
                                                                                                                  Copenhagen
                                                                                                                  Stockholm
  −100                                                                    −100
       02/15

               02/29

                        03/14

                                  03/28

                                          04/11

                                                  04/25

                                                          05/09

                                                                  05/23


                                                                             02/15

                                                                                     02/29

                                                                                             03/14

                                                                                                       03/28

                                                                                                               04/11

                                                                                                                       04/25

                                                                                                                               05/09

                                                                                                                                       05/23
                                date in 2020                                                         date in 2020
   Notes: Figure constructed equivalently to Figure 1 but only these four cities. Activity metric
   is number of visits and length of stay at places recognized as locations on google maps, relative
   to a baseline period (January 3–February 6, 2020). Categories constructed by data provider.
   Retrieved from https://www.google.com/COVID19/mobility/.

                       Figure 2: Declining Activity, Early and Everywhere II


Patterns.” This registers GPS-identified visits to Points of Interest (POIs) (primarily
businesses) with exact known location in the US at an hourly frequency in a bal-
anced panel. We use data covering the time period from March 1 to May 16, 2020.
The dataset is large: on March 1, the dataset recorded approximately 32.1 million
individual visits to approximately 3.9 million POIs.
    For each state and the District of Columbia, we count the total number of visits to
POIs during each day. We express this variable as a percent change from a baseline
week, the corresponding day during the first week of March. This gives us, for each
state, a measure of the decline of social activity that naturally maps to the model.
Figure 3 reports our results. We again plot thin lines for each state, as well as a
thicker line for the median across states. The figure shows a remarkably uniform

                                                                    11
                                         50                                 1




                                                                                  stay-at-home share
                       percent change
                                          0                                 2/3



                                         -50                                1/3



                                        -100                                0
                                           03/08
                                           03/15
                                           03/22
                                           03/29
                                           04/05
                                           04/12
                                           04/19
                                           04/26
                                            05/3
                                           05/10
                                           05/17
                                               date in 2020
      Notes: Visits to Points of Interest in SafeGraph’s “Weekly Patterns” COVID-19 Response
      Dataset. We sum daily visits within each state and report the percent decline from the same
      day during the baseline week (first week of March 2020). Each thin line corresponds to one of
      the 51 US states and the District of Columbia. The thick black line marks the median state in
      terms of the decline relative to baseline at any given day. The solid red line is the percent of the
      population subject to stay-at-home or shelter-in-place orders, indicated on the right-hand axis.
      The population subject to these orders is based on authors’ own calculations using https:
      //www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-stay-at-home-order.html. The
      vertical dotted line indicates March 13, 2020, the date of the declaration of national emergency.

                   Figure 3: Declining Activity, Early and Everywhere III


contraction of social activity across US states beginning on March 13 and leveling
off fifty percent below the baseline towards the end of March. Starting in late April,
the data display a mild recovery that is somewhat more heterogeneous across states.
These patterns are in line with the Google Community Mobility Reports.6
    In Appendix A.1, we complement this with two other metrics from another dataset
provided by SafeGraph, the fraction of devices that leave their home location at least
once daily and the median time away from the home location, each at the census block
level. These two variables display a somewhat smaller decline of 20 to 30 percent
relative to baseline, perhaps natural given the difference in measures. The basic
pattern, however, remains the same. Social activity started to contract substantially,
rapidly, and before the first stay-at-home measures throughout the US.
  6
    Figure 3 shows a sharp decline visits to POIs on March 20–22. For the median state, it falls
from −41 on March 19 to −55 on March 20 to −69 on March 21 and then recovers equally abruptly
to −54 on March 22 and −44 on March 23. This drop does not appear in the Google data and we
are unsure what it represents. Ignoring those three days makes the similarity with Figure 1 even
sharper.


                                                    12
    One might be concerned that the decline in social activity reflects the closure of
POIs rather than self-imposed restrictions on activity. To address this, we use the
data to construct a measure of POI closures and then show that foot traffic declined
substantially prior to closure; see Appendix A.2.
    Finally, we note that in a recent working paper, Goolsbee and Syverson (2020) use
SafeGraph data and conclude that, while social activity fell by 60 percentage points,
stay-at-home orders explain only 7 percentage points of that. This is very much in
line with our analysis here.
    The bottom line is that we have direct and readily available measures of social
activity. This is both the key endogenous variable in our model and the key driver
of the pandemic. Since we model social activity rather than, say, consumption, our
model can directly connect with this high-frequency data. In Section 6 we will con-
front the quantitative properties of our model with this evidence and argue that it
offers a close account of the decline in social activity in March 2020.


4     Model
4.1    Setup
The basic epidemiological framework is a continuous time SIR model with a possi-
bility of death, i.e. a SIRD model. We embed this into an economic model where
individuals get utility from their social activity. Those who are susceptible to the dis-
ease can become infected through social interactions with infected individuals. The
infected stochastically recover or die. Recovery confers immunity to the disease. In-
dividuals do not know if they are susceptible or infected, but they can tell when they
have recovered from the disease. Individuals are otherwise homogeneous.

Preferences over Social Activity Individuals discount the future at rate ρ and
live forever unless they die from the disease. At any time t ≥ 0, each living individual
gets utility u(a(t)) from a level of social activity a(t) ≥ 0. We assume u is single-
peaked and its maximum is attained at a finite value a∗ . Without loss of generality,
normalize a∗ = 1 and u(a∗ ) = 0. The first normalization keeps the notation the same
as the basic SIR model in the absence of a behavioral response to a disease outbreak.


                                           13
The latter allows us to use u as a measure of the utility cost of social distancing, i.e.
of setting a < a∗ .

Social Interactions and Disease Transmission At each point in time, indi-
viduals are in one of the four states, susceptible (s), infected (i), recovered (r), or
deceased (d). Let Nθ (t), θ ∈ {s, i, r, d}, denote the measure of individuals in each
state. To make the environment nontrivial, assume that Ni (0) > 0, so there is a seed
of infection, and Ns (0) > 0, so there are people who can get infected.
    Disease transmission depends on social interactions, defined as the interaction be-
tween individuals’ social activity. Let Aθ (t) denote the amount of social activity by
each individual of type θ ∈ {s, i, r}. We assume throughout that all individuals of a
given type choose the same level of social activity, although when we study equilib-
rium, we consider the deviation of a single individual to a different level of activity.
The rate at which some individual of type θ has a social interaction with some other
individual of type θ0 is proportional to Aθ (t)Nθ (t)Aθ0 (t)Nθ0 (t), the product of the
total amount of social activity of the two types. In particular, the rate at which sus-
ceptible individuals get infected is βAs (t)Ns (t)Ai (t)Ni (t), where β > 0 captures the
ease of transmitting the disease. Formally, this is a quadratic matching technology
with random search.7 We stress that there are not only social interactions between
the susceptible and the infected, but also between all other groups. For instance, the
recovered can optimally choose Ar (t) without fear of infection; and susceptible indi-
viduals meet one another without consequences. Our model allows these interactions
to happen, but implies that they do not affect the number of interactions where the
disease gets transmitted.
    The assumptions that preferences u depend on social activity while disease trans-
     7
     An alternative would be a linear technology, in which case type θ individuals interact with type
θ individuals at rate AθP
 0                       (t)Nθ (t)Aθ0 (t)Nθ0 (t)
                                                   . This formulation makes sense if type θ individuals desire
                           θ 00 Aθ 00 (t)Nθ 00 (t)
to interact with somebody at rate Aθ (t). With a linear technology, changing social activity by other
people changes the distribution of social interactions without changing the level. Such an alternative
might be the appropriate modeling choice for other epidemics such as HIV (Kremer and Morcom,
1998). See also Fenichel (2013). However, for COVID-19 it seems unlikely that additional social
activity by non-infected individuals would reduce the infection risk of the susceptible, all else equal.
We highlight, however, that this assumption is crucial for certain outcomes. For example, with a
linear technology, it is optimal to boost the social activity of the recovered in order to moderate
meetings between susceptible and infected people.



                                                     14
mission depends on social interactions are central to our view of social distancing.
The former captures the idea that individuals value social activity (going to a restau-
rant, going for a walk, going to the office) and, absent health issues, are indifferent
about whether other people are also engaging in social activity.8 On the other hand,
if an individual goes for a walk and doesn’t encounter anybody, they cannot get sick.
Thus interactions are critical for disease transmission.
    This disease transmission function captures the idea that if a particular group
chooses little social activity, so Aθ (t) is small, then one is unlikely to make social con-
tact with them. As a consequence, social activity displays a negative externality: it
increases other people’s social interactions, putting them at a higher risk of infection.

Recovery and Death Infected individuals recover at rate (1 − π)γ and die at rate
πγ, where π ∈ [0, 1] is the infection fatality rate,9 the fraction of infected individuals
who eventually die from the disease, and 1/γ is the expected duration of infection.
We assume that at the moment an individual dies, he pays a utility cost v, the value
of a statistical life. Equivalently, all individuals pay a utility cost κ ≡ πv when they
exit the infected state.
    We assume that recovering from the disease confers lifetime immunity, so a recov-
ered individual no longer transmits the disease and can no longer become sick. We
recognize that the empirical evidence on the latter point is still unclear.

The End of the Disease We assume a cure for the disease is found at rate δ. For
simplicity we assume that a cure, once found, is perfect and immediately wipes out
all costs of the disease.

Information Individuals do not know whether they are susceptible or infected, but
they know when they have recovered from the disease. We capture this through the
measurability restriction that As (t) = Ai (t) and use A(t) to denote this common level
   8
     For an environment where interactions are critical, see Diamond (1982). One can imagine reasons
why the marginal utility of social activity is increasing or decreasing in the social activity of others.
   9
     We assume that the infection fatality rate π is independent of the number of infected people,
thus shutting down the possibility that the disease overwhelms the healthcare system. This is not
meant to dispute that notion that “healthcare capacity” (or “ICU”) constraints are potentially an
important feature of the COVID-19 outbreak. Instead, we do this to highlight that key properties—
e.g. that optimal policy “flattens the curve”—arise even without such a constraint. We discuss this
point further in Section 8.


                                                   15
of social activity. In Appendix C.2, we show that our results are quantitatively very
similar if we assume that individuals also do not know when they have recovered from
the disease, so As (t) = Ai (t) = Ar (t).

Reproduction Number Our model has notions of two important epidemiologi-
cal concepts, the basic and effective reproduction numbers. The basic reproduction
number R0 is defined as the expected number of susceptible people infected by a
sick person in a world where almost everyone is susceptible and unaware of the dis-
ease. This was relevant, for example, when the disease first emerged. This is simply
R0 = β/γ. Throughout, we impose the natural parameter restriction that β > γ
since otherwise the disease never breaks out.
    The effective reproduction number is the expected number of others infected by
a sick person, given the current level of social activity A(t) and the current fraction
of susceptible people Ns (t). This is R(t) = R0 A(t)2 Ns (t). Social distancing drives
the ratio of the effective reproduction number to the fraction of susceptible people,
R(t)/Ns (t), below the basic reproduction number R0 . We show below that the number
of infections grows (shrinks) if R(t) is bigger (smaller) than 1.


4.2    Laissez-faire Equilibrium
In this section, we consider the problem of an individual choosing his own social
activity, taking the social activity of others and the number of others with each
health status as given. We then impose the equilibrium restriction that individual
outcomes must coincide with the aggregate.
    An individual has rational beliefs about his own probabilities of being susceptible,
infected, and recovered, which we denote by ns (t), ni (t), and nr (t), respectively. The
individual knows when he is recovered but cannot distinguish between the susceptible
and infected states. He thus chooses two time paths for social activity, a(t) when he
is susceptible or infected and ar (t) when he is recovered. Finally, the individual
discounts future utility at rate ρ and recognizes that the problem ends at rate δ when
a cure is found. Putting this together, the individual solves
                      Z   ∞
                              e−(ρ+δ)t (ns (t) + ni (t))u(a(t)) + nr (t)u(ar (t)) − γni (t)κ dt
                                                                                            
         max
      {a(t),ar (t)}   0



                                                     16
subject to                  n0s (t) = −βa(t)ns (t)A(t)Ni (t),                             (1)
                            n0i (t) = βa(t)ns (t)A(t)Ni (t) − γni (t),                    (2)
                           n0r (t) = (1 − π)γni (t),
                           n0d (t) = πγni (t),

with ns (0) = Ns (0), ni (0) = Ni (0), nr (0) = Nr (0), and nd (0) = Nd (0) given. Note
that through the choice of a(t), an individual affects his own transitions across differ-
ent health statuses. An individual transitions from susceptible to infected at a rate
proportional to the product of his own activity level a(t), his own probability of being
susceptible ns (t), and the total activity by infected people A(t)Ni (t). He exits the
infected state at rate γ, either recovering or dying, paying an expected cost κ. The
individual solves this problem taking the time path of A(t)Ni (t) as given.
    To solve the individual’s problem, first note that ar (t) affects the objective but
none of the constraints. It is thus optimal to set ar (t) = a∗ = 1 and thus u(ar (t)) =
0 for all t. Dropping this control variable and the unnecessary third and fourth
constraints, write the current value Hamiltonian as

  H(ns (t), ni (t), a(t), λs (t), λi (t)) = (ns (t) + ni (t))u(a(t)) − γni (t)κ
                                                                                          
                    − λs (t)βa(t)ns (t)A(t)Ni (t) + λi (t) βa(t)ns (t)A(t)Ni (t) − γni (t) ,

where λs (t) and λi (t) are the co-states associated with the two remaining constraints.
   There are three necessary first order conditions for optimal control. First, the
derivative of the Hamiltonian with respect to the control variable a(t) is zero:

                 (ns (t) + ni (t))u0 (a(t)) = (λs (t) − λi (t))βns (t)A(t)Ni (t).         (3)

This states that the returns from social activity balance the risk of getting infected.
Additionally, the derivatives with respect to the state variables ns (t) and ni (t) are
equal to minus the time derivative of the costate, with a correction for discounting:

             (ρ + δ)λs (t) − λ0s (t) = u(a(t)) + (λi (t) − λs (t))βa(t)A(t)Ni (t),        (4)
             (ρ + δ)λi (t) − λ0i (t) = u(a(t)) − γ κ + λi (t) .
                                                               
                                                                                          (5)


                                                 17
There are two more necessary conditions for optimality, the transversality conditions

                            lim e−(ρ+δ)t λs (t)ns (t) = lim e−(ρ+δ)t λi (t)ni (t) = 0.           (6)
                            t→∞                         t→∞


   Equilibrium requires that individual and aggregate behaviors are consistent at
every point in time, ns (t) = Ns (t), ni (t) = Ni (t), and a(t) = A(t) for all t > 0.
Imposing those restrictions on equations (1)–(6) gives us

                                        Ns0 (t) = −βA(t)2 Ns (t)Ni (t),                          (7)
                                        Ni0 (t) = βA(t)2 Ns (t)Ni (t) − γNi (t),                 (8)
              (Ns (t) + Ni (t))u0 (A(t)) = (λs (t) − λi (t))βA(t)Ns (t)Ni (t),                   (9)
                       (ρ + δ)λs (t) − λ0s (t) = u(A(t)) + (λi (t) − λs (t))βA(t)2 Ni (t),      (10)
                       (ρ + δ)λi (t) − λ0i (t) = u(A(t)) − γ κ + λi (t) ,
                                                                         
                                                                                                (11)
                   lim e−(ρ+δ)t λs (t)Ns (t) = lim e−(ρ+δ)t λi (t)Ni (t) = 0.                   (12)
                   t→∞                            t→∞


These equations and initial conditions for Ns (0) and Ni (0) fully summarize the model.
    Note from equation (8) that the growth rate of infections, Ni0 (t)/Ni (t), is γ(R(t) −
1), where R(t) ≡ R0 A(t)2 Ns (t) is the effective reproduction number. Thus infections
grow if and only if the effective reproduction number exceeds 1. This is why a low
effective reproduction number is critical for reducing the prevalence of the disease.
    We solve this model through a backward shooting algorithm. We provide a de-
tailed description of our numerical solution algorithm in Appendix B


4.3      Social Optimum
We now solve the problem faced by a benevolent social planner who dictates the time
path of social activity A(t) and Ar (t). The planner, like the individual, recognizes that
a reduction in contacts lowers utility directly, but she also recognizes the externalities
associated with infections. The planner solves
                   Z    ∞
                            e−(ρ+δ)t (Ns (t) + Ni (t))u(A(t)) + Nr (t)u(Ar (t)) − γNi (t)κ dt
                                                                                          
      max                                                                                       (13)
   {A(t),Ar (t)}    0




                                                        18
subject to equations (7) and (8) and Nr0 (t) = (1 − π)γNi (t). As in equilibrium, it is
optimal to set Ar (t) = a∗ = 1 and so u(Ar (t)) = 0 for all t, since this does not affect
the evolution of the state variables. We can again write down a Hamiltonian. The
necessary first order condition with respect to the control A is

              (Ns (t) + Ni (t))u0 (A(t)) = 2(µs (t) − µi (t))βA(t)Ni (t)Ns (t),          (14)

while the necessary costate equations are

   (ρ + δ)µs (t) − µ0s (t) = u(A(t)) + (µi (t) − µs (t))βA(t)2 Ni (t),                   (15)
   (ρ + δ)µi (t) − µ0i (t) = u(A(t)) + (µi (t) − µs (t))βA(t)2 Ns (t) − γ κ + µi (t) .
                                                                                    
                                                                                         (16)

Finally, the planner also has necessary tranversality conditions

                   lim e−(ρ+δ)t µs (t)Ns (t) = lim e−(ρ+δ)t µi (t)Ni (t) = 0.            (17)
                  t→∞                          t→∞


Together with the state equations (7) and (8), we again have a system of four differ-
ential equations and one static equation. We again solve it using a backward shooting
algorithm, searching for the terminal value of Ns (T ) for given Ni (T ).
    There are two key differences between the equilibrium equations (9)–(11) and the
corresponding optimal equations (14)–(16). First, the planner recognizes that raising
A(t) increases meetings at rate proportional to 2A(t), while in equilibrium raising
a(t) increases meetings at rate proportional to A(t). This creates an extra factor of 2
in equation (14) compared to equation (9). Second, the planner recognizes that sick
people get other people sick, while in equilibrium individuals do not care about this
outcome. This shows up as an extra term on the right hand side of equation (16)
compared to equation (11).


4.4    Perfect and Imperfect Altruism
In the laissez-faire setting, people only care about their own health. In reality, diseases
are often transmitted to family and friends, and so it seems plausible that many people
would like to reduce the risk of transmitting the disease, not just the chance of getting
it. We show how our basic setup can be extended to a model of imperfect altruism,

                                              19
indexed by an altruism parameter α ∈ [0, 1]. At one extreme, α = 0, individuals
would not socially distance if they knew they were sick. This is the laissez-faire
equilibrium. At the other extreme, α = 1, individuals fully internalize the cost of
making others sick.
   We modify the individual objective function to incorporate that individuals are
concerned about making others sick:
                  Z   ∞
     max                  e−(ρ+δ)t (ns (t) + ni (t))u(a(t)) + nr (t)u(ar (t))
  {a(t),ar (t)}   0
                                                                                                 
                                             − γni (t)κ − αβa(t)ni (t)A(t)Ns (t)(λs (t) − λi (t)) dt.

The new piece is the last term. When an individual infects a susceptible person,
at rate βa(t)ni (t)A(t)Ns (t), she suffers a utility loss equal to a fraction α of the
difference λs (t) − λi (t), where again λθ (t) is the costate variable on nθ (t), θ ∈ {s, i}.
This difference represents the private cost of getting sick.
    With this modification to the objective function, we can again write down the
Hamiltonian and find the optimality and costate equations as well as the transversality
conditions. Imposing ns (t) = Ns (t), ni (t) = Ni (t), and a(t) = A(t) for all t > 0 gives

  (Ns (t)+Ni (t))u0 (A(t)) = (1 + α)βA(t)(λs (t) − λi (t))Ns (t)Ni (t),                           (18)
     (ρ + δ)λs (t) − λ0s (t) = u(A(t)) + βA(t)2 Ni (t)(λi (t)−λs (t)),                            (19)
      (ρ + δ)λi (t) − λ0i (t) = u(A(t)) + αβA(t)2 Ns (t)(λi (t)−λs (t)) − γ(κ+λi (t)), (20)
  lim e−(ρ+δ)t λs (t)Ns (t) = lim e−(ρ+δ)t λi (t)Ni (t) = 0.                                      (21)
  t→∞                                  t→∞


If α = 0, this returns the equilibrium equations (9)–(12). If α = 1, this returns the
equations (14)–(17) describing the planner’s solution in the setting where there is
no altruism. Intermediate values of α capture some degree of imperfect altruism in
the laissez-faire setting. We note that this logic does not imply that the equilibrium
is efficient under perfect altruism. The reason is that the planning problem itself
changes when individuals are altruistic.




                                                       20
 Parameters
 Parameter Description                  Parameter             Value                               Target
 Conditional transmission prob.                   β         0.3 + γ                Initial doubling time
 Rate that infectiousness ends                    γ               1/7      Duration until symptomatic
 Infection fatality rate (IFR)                    π          0.0062      Hall, Jones and Klenow (2020)
 Value of a statistical life (VSL)                v          31,755      Hall, Jones and Klenow (2020)
 Arrival rate of cure                             δ          0.67/365     Exp. time until vaccine/cure
 Discounting                                      ρ          0.05/365              Annual discount rate
 Fraction initially affected                 Ni (0)      0.0000527       Deaths before March 13, 2020
 Other
 Basic reproduction number                      R0             3.1                    Implied by γ and β
 Expected cost of infection                       κ            197                    Implied by π and v
 Fraction initially susceptible              Ns (0)      0.9999223      no social distancing before t = 0
    Note: We calibrate the model at a daily frequency.

                              Table 1: Calibration to US data


5     Quantitative Analysis
5.1     Calibration
We calibrate the model to US data on the COVID-19 outbreak after March 13, 2020,
the date of the proclamation declaring COVID-19 to be a national emergency in the
US. Table 1 summarizes our calibration.
    We normalize the time unit to be a day. We then set ρ = 0.05/365 to capture
a 5 percent annual discount rate. In addition, we set δ = 0.67/365, which implies
an expected time until cure of 1.5 years. We highlight that this jointly implies that
individuals heavily discount future payoffs.
    Next, we set γ = 1/7, which implies that the average length of sickness is 1 week.
We recognize that the disease lasts longer on average, particularly for people who
develop serious symptoms. We choose this large value for γ to capture the length
of the period when people are infectious and either asymptomatic, pre-symptomatic,
or have mild symptoms. Lauer et al. (2020) report a median incubation period for
COVID-19 of five days and that 98 percent of people who develop symptoms after an
exposure do so within 11.5 days.

                                               21
    We calibrate β to capture an initial 30 percent daily growth rate of the stock of
infected, consistent with a doubling time of approximately three days. Specifically, if
Ns (t) = A(t) = 1, equation (8) implies Ni0 (t)/Ni (t) = β − γ, and so β = 0.3 + γ =
0.443 implies an initial daily growth rate of 0.3. These values in turn imply a basic
reproduction number of R0 = β/γ = 3.1.10 Some recent estimates suggest an even
higher value for R0 (Sanche et al., 2020) and several authors work with a lower γ (e.g.
Alvarez, Argente and Lippi, 2020). We therefore offer a robustness exercise below
where we use a lower value of γ and a correspondingly higher value of R0 , while still
hitting the initial 30 percent daily growth rate.
    We work with the following period utility function,

                                      u(a) = log a − a + 1.                                      (22)

We think of the first part as the gross returns from social activity, in particular
consumption, and of the second part as the cost associated with it. This function has
an interior maximum of 0 achieved at a = a∗ = 1.
    To measure the cost of disease κ, we build largely on Hall, Jones and Klenow
(2020). Recall that κ is the product of the infection fatality rate (IFR) π and the
value of a statistical life (VSL) v. The first term is relatively uncontroversial. Hall,
Jones and Klenow (2020) work with two baseline IFRs of π = 0.0081 and 0.0044, and
so we choose the intermediate value π = 0.0062.11
    The VSL is a more controversial number, even though it is familiar in the economic
analysis of environment regulation.12 We follow Hall, Jones and Klenow (2020), who
calculate a value of $270,000 for each remaining year of life. They also offer a value of
14.5 years for the average remaining life expectancy of COVID-19 victims. This gives
  10
     There is still considerable disagreement on the uncurtailed doubling time or, alternatively, R0
of COVID-19. Johns Hopkins University’s Center for Systems Science and Engineering reports a
doubling time of 2–5 days in the US in the early stages of the epidemic (Dong, Du and Gardner,
2020). Pan et al. (2020) report an effective reproduction rate slightly above 3.0 in January in Wuhan.
  11
     Robert Redfield, the director of the CDC, said during a call with reporters on June 25, 2020
that “Our best estimate right now is that for every case that was reported, there actually were 10
other infections” (https://n.pr/3dC55bu, retrieved June 26, 2020). With a current case count of
2,697,326 and 129,007 deaths, this would give π = 0.0043, close to the lower value in Hall, Jones
and Klenow (2020) (https://coronavirus.1point3acres.com/en, retrieved July 1, 2020)
  12
     See Greenstone and Nigam (2020) for a useful discussion of this value and the use of VSL in
calculations such as ours.


                                                 22
v = $3,915,000. Roughly speaking, this means that the typical victim of COVID-19
would pay $3,915 to avoid a 0.1 percent probability of death. With a discount rate
of ρ̂, this is equivalent to paying a constant stream of ρ̂×$3,915 per day to avoid this
death risk.13 Compare this to current US per capita consumption of approximately
$45,000 per year (Hall, Jones and Klenow (2020)), and we reach the conclusion that
people would permanently give up $3,915×365
                                        $45,000
                                                ρ̂ = 31.755ρ̂ percent of their consumption
to avoid a 0.1 percent death risk.
    To see how to map this into our model, ask someone with preferences as in equa-
tion (22) what fraction x of her consumption she would be willing to give up to avoid
a 0.1 percent probability of death. If the answer is 31.755ρ̂, then v solves

                            log(1)            log (1 − 31.755ρ̂)
                                   − 0.001v =
                              ρ̂                      ρ̂

or v = −1000 log (1 − 31.755ρ̂) /ρ̂ ≈ 31,755 in our model units. The approximation
is valid when ρ̂ is small, as is the case when we use a daily discount rate. Note that
this represents an “exchange rate” from model utils to US dollars of 31,755/3,915,000
≈ 1/123. We use that rate when reporting on the dollar cost of the disease below.
    These values are similar to the ones chosen in several other recent paper on the
outbreak. For instance, Alvarez, Argente and Lippi (2020) fixed the IFR at one
percent and the VSL at $1.33 million. Furthermore, summing the age-specific VSL
from Greenstone and Nigam (2020) and weighting them by the CDC estimates of
age-specific death rates leads to a VSL of $4.5 million, very similar to the number we
use. We also offer a robustness exercise below where we consider reducing κ by fifty
percent to reflect a lower IFR or VSL.
    Finally, we calibrate the initial infection rate, Ni (0), to match the 51 people who
died from COVID-19 in the US on or before March 13, 2020, the date when people
began to socially distance (https://coronavirus.1point3acres.com/en, retrieved
July 1, 2020). Given a population of 328 million individuals and an IFR of π = 0.0062,
                                          51
this implies that Nr (0) + Nd (0) = 328×10   6 π = 0.0000251. We assume that prior to

date 0, people were unaware of the disease and so set A(t) = a∗ = 1 for t < 0.
  13
    This notation allows for ρ̂ to differ from ρ for expositional purposes, taking into account the
short remaining life expectancy of the average COVID victim. It will turn out that the following
calculations are (approximately) independent of the discount rate.


                                                23
Following the dynamics of the SIR model, this implies Ni (0) = 1 − (Nr (0) + Nd (0)) −
exp(−R0 (Nr (0) + Nd (0))) = 0.0000527, leaving the remaining share 0.9999223 of the
people susceptible to the disease.
    We check the robustness of our results to the choices made in this section in
Appendix C.1. We change preferences, lower the cost of the disease κ, increase the
duration of infectivity 1/γ, reduce the cure probability δ, and start with a higher
stock of initially infected Ni (0). For each of these exercises we contrast the paths of
Ns , Ni , A, R with our baseline for both equilibrium and optimum. The main features
that we discuss and highlight in the body of the paper are robust to those changes.


5.2      Basic SIRD Model
We next turn to our quantitative results. As a simple benchmark, we begin with the
basic SIRD model and then turn to laissez-faire equilibrium and the social optimum.
    The green line in Figure 4 plots the dynamics of the pandemic in the SIRD model,
that is without any behavioral response, A(t) = a∗ = 1, under the assumption that a
cure is not found. The top panel shows the share of people susceptible in levels. The
second panel shows the share infected on a log scale. According to this model, the
pandemic would have unfolded rapidly even though the infection rate started at half
a basis point in mid March. The infection rate would have peaked in the second half
of April at above 31 percent. As a consequence of the rapid spread of the disease, the
benefits of herd immunity would not have kicked in before almost everyone is sick.
by June 1st, only 5.5 percent of the population would have remained susceptible.
    This model fails to capture the experience in places that did not institute any re-
strictions on social activity. For instance, Sweden hit 1063 total cases, approximately
0.01 percent of the population, on March 15, 2020. One month later, this number
rose to 12,443 confirmed cases, 0.12 percent of the population, despite the laissez-
faire approach taken by the Swedish government.14 In contrast, our calibrated SIRD
model without any behavioral response predicts that it should take about eight days
for the total case rate to rise from 0.01 percent to 0.12 percent of the population.
Even if the total case rate is understated by an order of magnitude, approximately
exponential growth implies that it still takes only nine days for the infection rate to
 14
      Retrieved from https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/country/sweden/.


                                           24
                                                           1



                     share susceptible Ns
                                                    0.8
                                                    0.6
                                                    0.4
                                                    0.2
                                                           0
           share infected Ni




                                      10−1
                                      10−2
                                      10−3
                                      10−4
                                      10−5

                                                           1
                     social activity A




                                                    0.8
                                                    0.6
                                                    0.4
                                                    0.2
                                                           0
                                   reproduction number R




                                                           3

                                                           2

                                                           1

                                                           0
                                                           03/13/20

                                                                      06/13/20

                                                                                 09/13/20

                                                                                            12/13/20

                                                                                                        03/13/21

                                                                                                                   06/13/21

                                                                                                                              09/13/21

                                                                                                                                         12/13/21

                                                                                                                                                    03/13/22




                                                                                                        date
Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. The second plot is drawn on a log scale.

                               Figure 4: SIRD vs. Laissez-Faire vs. Optimal Policy.
                                                                                                   25
increase from 0.1 percent to 1.2 percent of the population in the SIRD model.
    Likewise, SafeGraph and Google data document a sharp decline in individual
social activity even in laissez-faire settings. The basic SIRD model with constant
parameters misses the fact that individual behavior responds to the risk of infection.


5.3    Laissez-Faire Equilibrium
We next turn to the disease dynamics in our laissez-faire equilibrium, which we depict
as the blue line in Figure 4. The difference between laissez-faire and the basic SIRD
model is stark. Despite the government not intervening at all, the peak infection rate
is less than one tenth of the level in the SIRD model, 2.6 percent at the beginning of
May. In turn, the response of individual behavior substantially prolongs the epidemic,
with the infection rate staying elevated for a much longer time. That is, equilibrium
social distancing flattens the infection curve.
     The third panel shows that individuals reduce their social activity by as much as
40 percent. However, the contraction in social activity does not occur immediately.
Instead, it happens rapidly once the infection rate exceeds 0.1 percent. Conversely,
activity starts to recover shortly after the infection rate peaks.
     The fourth panel depicts the dynamics of the effective reproduction number R(t).
It is nearly equal to R0 at the onset of the pandemic and then drops rapidly because
of self-imposed social distancing. It falls below 1 in early May, exactly when the
infection rate starts declining. Remarkably, it stays very close to 1 after this, never
falling below 0.935. This is in line with the observation that Ni decays only slowly.


5.4    Optimal Policy
The red line in Figure 4 shows the optimal policy. Reflecting the external effects of
social activity, one key property of the optimal policy is immediate social distancing
in order to delay the spread of the infection and buy time to find a cure. While peak
infection in the SIRD model occurs after 36 days and the equilibrium behavioral
response delays the peak until 50 days have lapsed, the optimal policy delays it
for almost a year. Because infections increase more slowly, the peak infection rate is
almost forty times lower under the optimal policy than with laissez-faire, 0.07 percent.


                                          26
    On the other hand, once the infection rate peaks, it declines extraordinarily slowly
along the optimal path. One way to quantify this is through the effective reproduction
number R(t), which never falls below 0.996. This means the infection rate never
declines by more than 0.4 percent per week. We stress that this strong desire to
“flatten the curve” is true even though there is no cost of peak-loading infection
rates, i.e. even though κ is constant. A healthcare capacity constraint, where the cost
κ is an increasing function of Ni , would make the case for flattening the curve even
stronger. We have opted to omit this from the analysis to highlight that the optimal
policy aggressively flattens the curve even without such a constraint.


5.5    Cost of the Disease
We now explore the cost of the disease. In Figure 5, we plot expected flow utility in
the laissez-faire equilibrium and under optimal policy. We break each of these into two
components, the total health cost at any point in time, κγNi (t), and the total utility
cost created by social distancing, (Ns (t)+Ni (t))u(A(t)). We then discount these back
to time 0, accounting both for impatience and for the chance of a cure. Finally, we
convert utils into US dollars using the exchange rate discussed in Section 5.1.
    In Table 2, we integrate these curves over the infinite future to find the expected
present value of the disease and its components. We do this not only in the laissez-
faire equilibrium and social optimum, but also under two extreme policies: the basic
SIRD model, where A(t) = 1 for all t by assumption; and a policy of permanently
                                     √
suppressing the disease, A(t) = 1/ R0 for all t, which ensures that R(t) = Ns (t) < 1,
so the disease always shrinks and herd immunity never emerges. The first column of
the table reports the expected per capita health cost of the disease in dollars. The
second column calculates the per capita dollar value of the expected reduction in
social activity. Finally, the third column gives the total cost.
    We first note that the composition of the cost differs sharply between the four
policies. In the SIRD model, there is only a health cost by assumption. With a
                                     √
permanent lockdown at A(t) = 1/ R0 , the health cost is negligible since the disease
never takes off. The two more interesting policies fall in between. In the laissez-
faire equilibrium, about 90 percent of the cost is health, while under the optimal
policy, about 90 percent is the cost of social distancing. Figure 5 shows that this

                                          27
                       Daily per Capita $ Cost
                                                 100
                                                 80
                                                 60
                                                 40
                                                 20
                                                  0
                                                   03/13/20
                                                              06/13/20
                                                                         09/13/20
                                                                                    12/13/20
                                                                                               03/13/21
                                                                                                          06/13/21
                                                                                                                     09/13/21
                                                                                                                                12/13/21
                                                                                                                                           03/13/22
                                                                                               date
   Notes: Below dashed line: total daily per capita health cost κγNi (t) in period t. Between dashed
   and solid line: total daily per capita cost from social distancing, (Ns (t) + Ni (t))u(A(t)). We
   multiply each of those with e−(ρ+δ)t to discount to time 0. We convert utils to US dollars using
   a factor of 123 as discussed in Section 5.1. Equilibrium in blue, optimum in red.

                     Figure 5: Cost of Disease and its Components


decomposition does not vary dramatically over time.
     Figure 5 also shows that the time path of the cost differs sharply between laissez-
faire and optimum. The planner flattens the curve through persistent social distancing
while the laissez-faire economy is effectively at herd immunity after 2 years. As a
consequence, the expected flow costs are concentrated in the first year under laissez-
faire, while a far larger fraction of the cost falls further into the future under the
optimal path. At the same time, we see that the planner also incurs immediate costs
from social distancing in excess of those that would occur in equilibrium.
     Next, we note that the disease is very costly. The expected discounted flow cost
per capita even under the optimal policy starts at $13 per person per day and is
still at $4 per day two years later, with much of the decline reflecting the 74 percent
possibility of a cure within that horizon. Under laissez-faire, the peak cost is $93 per
day by early May, but then it declines rapidly. By the start of 2021, the expected
daily flow costs under laissez-faire fall below those of the optimal path.
     This observation is evident in aggregate costs as well. Again using $45,000 as
annual per capita consumption, the expected present value of the cost of the disease
amounts to over 28 percent of annual per capita consumption under laissez-faire and

                                                                                      28
                                             Health     Activity   Total
                          SIRD              $21,223            0 $21,223
                          Laissez-Faire     $11,374      $1,277 $12,652
                          Optimum              $860      $7,227 $8,087
                          A(t) = √1R0           $78      $8,334 $8,412
      Notes: First column: present value of per capita pure health cost of disease. Second column:
      present value of per capita cost of reduction in social activity. Third column: total cost. First
      row is the SIRD model, second row is the equilibrium, third row is the optimum, and the last
      row is a permanent lock down from the outset that never allows the disease to take off, A = √1R .
                                                                                                     0
      We convert utils to US dollars using a factor of 123, as discussed in Section 5.1.

                         Table 2: Per Capita Welfare Cost of Disease


18 percent under the optimal policy. While these numbers are large, they are much
smaller than the naı̈ve calculation without a behavioral response would suggest, a
health cost equal to 47 percent of annual per capita consumption. Moreover, these
numbers seem reasonable in light of the events we have seen in the Spring of 2020. As
we write this paper, almost 130,000 people have died, while the US unemployment
rate has declined only slightly from record levels, with second quarter GDP forecast
to contract by almost fifty percent.15
    The benefits from pursuing the optimal policy are large. Comparing the aggregate
costs in Table 2, the planner is able to cut expected per capita costs by 36 percent
compared to laissez-faire. This reflects that the negative externalities of social ac-
tivity in the COVID-19 outbreak were large, making the case for mandatory social
distancing was strong. On the other hand, an extreme policy of cutting social activ-
         √
ity to 1/ R0 until a cure is found would reduce the mortality cost by another order
of magnitude but would cause too much economic hardship, pushing total costs 4
percent above the optimal level. The fact that the gains from the optimal policy are
small compared to what is achieved by a strict lockdown reflects the fact that the
optimal time path for social activity is very flat (Figure 4).
    Finally, we can express the health cost in terms of fatalities. Health costs amount
to 0.29 percent of the value of a statistical life under laissez-faire and 0.022 percent
under the optimal policy. Given a US population of 328,000,000 people, this makes
the health cost of laissez-faire equilibrium equivalent to around 953,000 immediate
 15
      Atlanta Fed NowCast, https://tinyurl.com/yc46b392, retrieved June 26, 2020.



                                                   29
deaths, vastly more than the 72,000 immediate deaths associated with the optimal
policy. Put differently, the expected economic cost of $5,950 incurred by each US
citizen due to mandatory social distancing rules would have saved over 881,000 lives in
expectation. Of course, the US has already experienced more than 72,000 immediate
deaths by mid-2020, which suggests that the implemented policies were not optimal.
    An important caveat is that these calculations correspond to the expected present
value cost, where uncertainty comes from the timing of the cure. If a cure comes very
late, the realized present value will be larger under the optimal policy. This reflects
the sharp difference in the time path of costs, with optimal policy delaying the disease
in the hope of a cure. If there is no cure, then fatality rates are similar under the
optimal policy and in laissez-faire, while the optimal policy imposes far greater costs
of social distancing.
    In the robustness Appendix C.1 we show how the level and composition of the
cost of the pandemic vary with substantial changes to our calibration. We find that
the laissez-faire results are quite robust, with health costs always accounting for more
than 80 percent of the total. The gains from, and cost compositions of, optimal
policy are more sensitive to the calibration. When the gains from social distancing
are smaller because a cure is less likely or health costs are lower, we find that optimal
policy allows an initial wave of infections. The same thing happens when the basic
reproduction number is higher. In this case, effective social distancing requires a
bigger reduction in activity, which the planner finds too costly. This means that in
those cases, the laissez-faire policy is less inefficient and that the health costs of the
two policies are more similar.


6     Model versus Data
This section compares our model’s predictions with evidence on social activity, on
the effective reproduction number, and on mortality in order to evaluate our model’s
quantitative predictions and interpret Spring 2020 through the lens of the model.




                                           30
6.1    Social Activity
We first re-visit the quantitative evidence from Google and SafeGraph from Section 3
and contrast it with our model’s implications for social activity. We note that we did
not target the response of social activity to the COVID-19 outbreak in our calibration.
We do not claim that the hastily-implemented lockdowns and mobility restrictions
were close to the social optimum, but we believe that the response in individual
behavior witnessed prior to implementation of any policy measures should be picked
up by the laissez-faire equilibrium.
    Figures 1, 2, and 3 show a 40 to 50 percent decline in activity across the different
metrics and data sets we study. In the US, much of this decline occurred before
stay-at-home orders were issued and the decline was remarkably uniform across a
variety of locations. Since the empirical metrics we have studied all have an inherent
cardinality, their decline is quantitatively meaningful. Moreover, we can also compare
these metrics to the decline in A(t) in the laissez-faire equilibrium. As can be seen in
Figure 4, individual activity declines by up to 40 percent in equilibrium. Thus, the
model captures the magnitude of the decline in activity quite well.
    On the other hand, while the speed of the decline in activity in the model is fast,
the speed of decline in the data was even faster. In the model, A(t) falls by 1.6
percent during the week of March 13–20 and takes three more weeks to fall by 31
percent, while in the data we observe a decline of that magnitude during the first
week, before stay-at-home orders were implemented. This may reflect the possibility
that individuals overestimated the risk of infection during this first week, a reasonable
possibility given the scarcity of data and abundance of rumors. Alternatively, it may
reflect altruistic behavior, which made the initial decline more in line with the red line
in Figure 4, i.e. an immediate 39 percent drop in activity as soon as people became
aware of the disease.
    We could have directly targeted this type of data in our calibration, for example
to select a value for the cost of the disease κ. That is, a natural approach would be to
let the individual behavioral response “reveal” the perceived cost of infection instead
of relying on direct measures of the infection mortality rate, π, and the value of a
statistical life, v. Instead, we have opted with the direct measures which allows us to
use the data on individual pre-lockdown behavior as model validation.


                                           31
6.2    Effective Reproduction Number: Roll-over after Peak
A robust feature of our analysis is that the effective reproduction number R(t) remains
close to 1 after crossing this threshold. This implies infections decline very slowly both
under laissez-faire and under the optimal policy. We now contrast this feature with
two direct empirical counterparts. Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020) develop a
method to invert the SIR model and estimate R(t) from time series on deaths alone.
They do so for 88 countries, states, and cities (not mutually exclusive); see https://
web.stanford.edu/~chadj/JFV_Jones_DetailedResults.xlsx.16 We complement
this with an alternative measure of R(t) provided by the website rt.live. This uses
time series on testing volumes and positive tests, rather than deaths. It offers separate
measures for all 50 US states and the District of Columbia.17
    To focus on the behavior of R(t) around peak infections and after we proceed as
follows. For each location in the respective data set, we identify the date when the
estimated R(t) falls below 1 for the first time following the outbreak. We then track
the evolution of R(t) around that date (from 25 days prior to 60 days past) and plot
it in Figure 6 in various different ways.
    The top panel plots the evolution of R(t) for both an unweighted average across
all locations studied by Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020) and for the US only.
We benchmark this with the equilibrium version of our model. The evolution of R(t)
after aligns remarkably well with our laissez-faire model. It appears like both the US
and the world average have been rolling over infections much like our model predicts.
    The second panel plots the same across all 87 locations studied by Fernández-
Villaverde and Jones (2020). We plot, for each day around peak infections, the
following percentiles of R(t) across locations: 10, 25, 50, 75, 90. Again, the median
aligns closely with the model. There is substantial dispersion across locations but we
note that the data contains locations such as Armenia, Estonia, Moldova, Andorra,
along with many US states and cities; those have small populations and imperfect
data so some noise is to be expected.
    The third panel proceeds identically but plots the data provided by rt.live for
 16
   We drop the time series for Hubei, China which ends on Feb 19th and only covers 24 days.
 17
   Data retrieved from download link on https://rt.live, https://d14wlfuexuxgcm.
cloudfront.net/COVID/rt.csv, on 6/24/2020.



                                            32
            US and World from Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020)
               2
                 1.5
          R(t)
                  1
                 0.5
                             US       World      Equilibrium
                  0
                   World from Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020)
                   2
                                    10    25     50     75    90
                 1.5
          R(t)




                  1
                 0.5
                  0
                             US States from https://rt.live
                  2
                 1.5
          R(t)




                  1
                 0.5
                  0
                                              Model
                  2
                                         Equilibrium           Optimum
                 1.5                     Eqm (low κ)           Opt (low κ)
          R(t)




                  1
                 0.5
                  0
                       -20

                             -10

                                     0

                                           10

                                                     20

                                                          30

                                                                 40

                                                                       50

                                                                              60




                                  days after first with R(t) < 1
Notes: For location specific results we use results from Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020)
and rt.live who estimate location-specific time series for R(t). For the plot we identify, for each of
the location in the data-set, the first day R(t) falls below 1 following the COVID-19 outbreak and
plot R(t) 25 days prior and 60 days past that date. Model counterpart corresponds to baseline
calibration, except in the bottom panel, where the dotted lines reduce the cost of disease κ by
half, as in Figure 12.

    Figure 6: Effective reproduction number R(t) around peak infections.

                                                33
all 50 US states plus the District of Columbia. All 51 locations display the same
quantitative pattern. After peak infections, R(t) stays in close vicinity of 1.
    In the bottom panel, we plot the evolution of R(t) around peak not only in the
laissez-faire version of our setup but also under the optimal policy. What is clear
from the figure is that, under the optimal policy just as under laissez-faire, R(t) stays
very closely below 1 after peak infections. Again, this feature of the optimal policy
is very robust and arises for the same reason. The state variables are moving slowly,
which makes optimal behavior and policy sticky and implies the roll-over feature.
    However, optimal policy prior to peak infections is much “flatter” under the base-
line calibration and, as a consequence, does not align with the observed time series.
As mentioned, it is hard to judge to what extent the policy measures taken in the
Spring of 2020 correspond to the optimal policy. However, we highlight that this
mismatch is not generic to the model. Indeed, if the expected cost of disease is 50
percent lower (a case we study in Appendix C.1 and depict in Figure 12), then the
optimal path for R(t) prior to peak infections aligns more closely with the data.
    Taken together, the figure shows that data on the effective reproduction number
aligns with our setup. In particular, the data are consistent with the roll-over feature
that we have highlighted in the model. R(t) remains closely below 1 for as long
as we currently have data in the US and many other locations. The dispersion is
surprisingly small given the wide range of locations studied and the inherent difficulty
in measuring R(t), which creates measurement error. We show in Appendix C.1 that
the finding that R(t) never falls far below 1 after the infection rate peaks holds with
substantially different calibrations of the model; see the bottom panel in Figures 11–
15. In Section 7, we provide some intuition for this result.


6.3    Fatalities
We conclude this section by contrasting the model with data on US COVID-19 fa-
talities. In Figure 7, we plot the cumulative fatality rate in our model, which is just
π(1 − Ns (t) − Ni (t)), multiplied by the US population of 328 million people. We
plot this for the basic SIRD model along with the laissez-faire and optimal policy
paths of our model. All four plots start with total COVID-19 fatalities for the US
on March 13, 2020. According to the SIRD model, 1,925,000 Americans would have

                                           34
                 Cumulative Deaths
                                     106

                                     104
                                                                        US                      SIRD
                                     102
                                       03/13                            equilibrium             optimum

                                               03/27

                                                       04/10

                                                               04/24

                                                                            05/08

                                                                                    05/22

                                                                                            06/05

                                                                                                    06/19

                                                                                                            07/03
                                                                 date in 2020
       Notes: Cumulative fatalities (without a cure) in the model and data. US data comes from
       https://coronavirus.1point3acres.com/en, retrieved on July 1, 2020. We calibrate the
       model to match data on cumulative deaths on March 13.

                                                Figure 7: Cumulative Fatalities


died by July 1st from the disease without any social distancing. Equilibrium behavior
reduced that by 70 percent, to 564,000. Actual deaths were yet another 77 percent
lower, 129,000, showing the importance of some combination of altruism and man-
dated social distancing. On the other hand, the optimal policy would have crushed
this outcome, with only 5,489 dead.18


7        Key Qualitative Features
In what follows we summarize a few key properties that are either common between
equilibrium and optimum, or help to distinguish them. This discussion enables us to
better frame the observed empirical patterns in the context of our model. We first
highlight two features which distinguish optimum from the laissez-faire, and then
move to characteristics which are more similar.

Immediate Social Distancing The optimal policy delays the onset of the disease
by imposing immediate social distancing, as depicted in the third panel of Figure 4.
In particular, the bottom panel shows that the optimal effective reproduction number
  18
    It is worth noting that this mortality rate, 0.002 percent, is lower than Germany’s (0.011 percent)
but higher than South Korea’s or New Zealand’s (both 0.0005 percent).



                                                                       35
is initially far below its uncurtailed counterpart R0 = 3.1. Even if a full outbreak
is eventually inevitable, the social gains from immediate social distancing are of first
order because of discounting and because of the hope for a cure. The cost, however,
are of second order, since u0 (a∗ ) = 0.19
    On the other hand, there is no noticeable reduction in social activity under laissez-
faire at the initial outbreak of the disease. As a result, the laissez-faire effective
reproduction number is indistinguishable from R0 in the early days of the disease.
This reflects the fact that there is little private incentive to lower social activity when
the risk of individual infection is negligible, and so individuals do not restrict activity
until infections are rampant.

Persistent Social Distancing Under laissez-faire, social activity is almost back to
its pre-pandemic level after 2 years. This is not the case under the optimal solution,
which curtails activity for decades or until a cure is found. That is the flip-side of
delay. The optimal solution delays the onset of the disease in the hope of finding a
cure. If no cure is found, herd immunity only builds very slowly and so restrictions
on social activity must persist far longer than under laissez-faire.

Long Run We now highlight three observations about the long run, common to
both equilibrium and the social optimum.20 Of course, those are only relevant in the
case where no cure is found for a long time.
    First, the disease vanishes in the long run. This reflects three assumptions. First,
the population is finite and there are no newly-born individuals added to the pop-
ulation. Second, individuals attain permanent immunity after infection. Without
either of these assumptions, an “interior steady state” with a strictly positive stock
of infections would naturally emerge. Third, the probability that an individual stays
sick for t periods converges to 0 as t grows large, a natural assumption.
    The next observation is that social distancing vanishes asymptotically with social
  19
      In contrast, Alvarez, Argente and Lippi (2020) assume the population without disease is in a
corner and so reductions in social activity, lockdowns in their words, have a first order cost.
   20
      Since we only plot the time series for 2 years these are hard to see for the planner. These are,
however, numerically accurate observations. We solve the model until the infection rate falls to
Ni (T ) = 10−9 , which takes 569,000 days, or sometime in the year 3578. The probability of not
finding a cure by then is vanishingly small.


                                                 36
activity returning to its pre-pandemic level a∗ . This is not obvious ex-ante because it
is feasible to suppress social activity permanently in order to further improve health
                                                 √
outcomes, for example by setting A(t) = 1/ R0 . To gain some intuition for this
result, suppose the planner pursued a path of permanently suppressing social activity.
Eventually, allowing a bit more social activity becomes arbitrarily cheap because the
number of infected people is so small that any meaningful outbreak of the disease is
pushed far off into the future. In contrast, there is a first order gain from the increase
in social activity because there are always susceptible individuals suffering from the
suppression of activity.
    The key assumption here is that the disease cannot be eradicated through social
distancing, which seems a plausible assumption. For example, even if the disease is
temporarily pushed out of the human population, there is evidence that it can survive
in animals and then reenter the human population through zoonotic transmission.
    An immediate consequence of vanishing social distancing is that the population
eventually reaches herd immunity, with Ns (t) falling below 1/R0 . This is because
when social distancing vanishes, A(t) → 1, infections shrink if and only if Ns (t) <
1/R0 ; see equation (8). Put differently, vanishing social distancing and a disappearing
disease are only mutually consistent if there is herd immmunity in the long-run.
    The last two observations are closely intertwined. The disease does not vanish
due to permanent social distancing, but due to herd immunity. We stress that there
are feasible paths where non-negligible levels of social distancing remain until there
is a cure, and so herd immunity is never achieved. Such paths are not optimal. Of
course, the optimal path towards herd immunity is extremely slow and, given that a
cure eventually puts an end to the disease, one that is highly unlikely to fully unfold.

Mild Social Distancing: the Effective Reproduction Number At the onset
of the pandemic, the effective reproduction number R(t) differs significantly between
the laissez-faire equilibrium and social optimum. Specifically, under the optimal path
it drops immediately due to social distancing, while the decline is more continuous
under laissez-faire. But under both policies, R(t) eventually crosses 1 and after this
point, the two paths are remarkably similar, with R(t) never falling far below 1,
effectively rolling over the stock of infections.


                                           37
     To understand why R(t) never falls much below one, it helps to consider the evo-
lution of the state variables Ns (t) and Ni (t). Consider first the point when infections
reach their peak, that is when R(t) = 1. At this stage, the state Ni (t) does not
move by definition. One sick person gets replaced by another. As a consequence, the
only reason this is not actually a steady state is that the pool of susceptibles drains,
Ns0 (t) < 0. But since under our calibration Ni (t) is never very high, Ns (t) moves
slowly. The slow moving state variables imply optimal behavior is also slow moving,
and so R(t) must stay very close to 1 even after the peak in infections.
     We add two observations to this. First, Ni (t) is higher and hence Ns (t) moves
faster under laissez-faire than under the optimal policy. This is why R(t) falls further
under laissez-faire compared to the optimum. Second, suppose the peak level of
infections was much higher, as would be the case if the cost of the disease were low.
In this case, Ns (t) would be fast moving and we would see a bigger decline in R(t)
after the peak of infections. We verify this in Figures 12–14 in Appendix C.1. In each
figure, we change some parameter to increase the peak infection rate. R(t) declines
by more, but the decline is modest in each case.
     Another perspective is that there is an important stabilizing force pushing R(t)
towards 1. When R(t) is larger than 1, the number of infections grows, discouraging
social activity. But a lower level of social activity mechanically reduces R(t). The
reverse happens when R(t) is smaller than one. The only reason R(t) does not
converge to 1 is because of the decline in the number of susceptible people. This also
works to make individuals more cautious, reducing A(t) and hence R(t). This is why
R(t) slightly overshoots 1.
     Finally, we offer another way to think about the finding that social distancing is
never too extreme. In both the laissez-faire equilibrium and optimal policy, the level
                                              √
of social activity A(t) never falls below 1/ R0 , the critical value below which social
distancing would wipe out the disease for any Ns (t) ≤ 1. This result is robust to a
wide range of parameters. The only exception is if the initial infection rate is large.
                                       √
Even in this case, we have A(t) < 1/ R0 initially, but social activity later rises above
this threshold and never falls below it again.




                                           38
8     Discussion of Key Assumptions
Information Structure We have assumed that individuals do not know they are
sick until they recover or die. Most of the papers that we cite in Section 2 assume
that individuals always know their health status. As a consequence, individuals ramp
up their social activity (or consumption and labor supply) at the moment that they
become sick because they have nothing left to lose. We do not believe that this is
realistic, both because many individuals are pre-symptomatic or asymptomatic after
they are infected, and because many people try not to get others sick.
    In any case, if individuals know whether they are sick, eliminating the disease
becomes both feasible and cheap with appropriate policy instruments. A planner
that can directly gear policy towards the infected can isolate them and curb the
spread of the disease at little cost. In practice, however, this only becomes relevant
once widespread test-and-trace (and possibly quarantine) is available and functional.
    We have also assumed that the recovered know that they have gotten infected.
This is inconsistent with the observation that many infected people never develop any
symptoms. It is also inconsistent with the observation that the recovered were subject
to the same restrictions on social activity as other people. Assuming the opposite
has two opposing effects. On the one hand, social distancing is an even costlier tool
of disease prevention because it applies to a larger population, especially in the later
stages of the pandemic when many people have recovered. On the other hand, since
social activity is still suppressed for recovered people, acquiring immunity through
infection is somewhat less attractive. In Appendix C.2, we work through the math
of the model and characterize both the laissez-faire policy and the social optimum.
We find that changing this assumption does not have a big quantitative impact on
either the laissez-faire policy or the optimal policy. Under laissez-faire, social activity
already reverts back to normal fairly quickly after infections peak. It reverts back
slightly faster when individuals do not realize they have recovered. Under the optimal
policy, few people get sick and so the recovered population is of negligible size. The
planner suppresses activity slightly more.

Available Policy Instruments The policy maker in our setting only has access
to a very blunt policy tool: widespread social distancing. Perhaps most importantly,


                                            39
there is no test, trace, and quarantine alternative to complement social distancing.
This is a natural benchmark given the information structure we just discussed and
given the realities of the pandemic thus far in the US and much of Europe.
    The availability of a test, trace, and quarantine policy could alter our conclusions
because eradicating the disease may become optimal. The key observation is that
when the share of infected Ni (t) becomes small, widespread social distancing is a
blunt tool because it primarily affects the large pool of susceptible individuals, Ns (t).
On the other hand, test, trace, and quarantine scales with the size of the infected
population and so the cost vanishes as the disease vanishes. The important takeaway
is that widespread social distancing is not a tool that should be used with the aim of
eradicating the disease.

Healthcare Capacity Constraint We have assumed that the probability of death
π and hence the cost of the disease κ are independent of the number of infected people
Ni (t). This ignores the possibility that a sudden surge in infections may overwhelm
the healthcare system. This is not because we want to deny the relevance of healthcare
capacity constraints. They were clearly an important consideration during the early
weeks of the COVID-19 outbreak; see https://twitter.com/drewaharris/status/
1233267475036372992. Instead, our point is that economic logic would push us to
flatten the curve even if there were no healthcare capacity constraints.

Heterogeneity The fatality risk of COVID-19 is far higher for older individuals and
those who have certain pre-existing conditions. Our setup abstracts from such het-
erogeneity. We believe that this picks up the realities of policy during the pandemic,
which was applied across the board in a non-discriminatory fashion. Of course, for
this reason our laissez-faire setting might look particularly bad since it does not take
into account that those at a high risk would naturally reduce activity more and those
with little risk less so. Nonetheless, we do not think that our key takeaways with
respect to voluntary distancing, optimal policy, and the evolution of R(t) after peak
infections would be substantially altered in a setting with heterogenous individuals.
    Another source of heterogeneity lies in the propensity to spread the disease. In
particular, epidemiologists have commented on the importance of super-spreaders for
COVID-19. For example, Endo et al. (2020) estimates that about ten percent of


                                           40
infected people account for 80 percent of new infections. If doing so were feasible, it
would be optimal to focus social distancing on those people with a high propensity to
be super-spreaders. Since it is unclear whether such people can be identified before
the super-spreading events, the alternative is to focus social distancing policies on the
activities where super-spreading is most likely, such as prisons, elder care facilities,
and bars.

Deterministic Arrival of a Cure We have assumed that a cure for the disease
arrives stochastically at rate δ. Alternatively, we can solve the model when the cure
arrives deterministically at date T . This has little qualitative impact on our results in
the initial phase of the disease. In particular, A, Ns , Ni , and R all behave very simi-
larly to our benchmark, both in equilibrium and optimum. As T gets closer, however,
social activity rises since the cost of infection falls to zero at the terminal date. This
leads to a large increase in infections both in equilibrium and optimum, an implica-
tion that strikes us as problematic given the uncertainty inherent in medical progress.

Vaccine versus Cure Finally, we have experimented with both a stochastic and
a deterministic arrival rate of a vaccine, rather than a cure. A vaccine effectively
shifts people from susceptible to recovered but does not protect infected people. This
alternative has no interesting quantitative impact on our results.


9     Conclusion
This paper uses a standard dynamic economic model to integrate privately optimal
behavior and policy analysis into an epidemiological model of COVID-19. The model
speaks to data on social activity and does a good job of describing observed behavioral
patterns after the US woke up to the dangers posed by the disease in mid-March 2020.
    Our quantitative exercises reveal several robust patterns. Even in laissez-faire,
individuals significantly lower social activity in order to reduce the risk of getting
infected. This behavior does not internalize the risk of getting other people sick,
however. An optimal policy that internalizes this cost immediately curtails social
activity to buy time. Still, social distancing is mild in the sense that it does not try
to eradicate the disease. Instead, if there is no effective treatment, optimal social


                                           41
distancing only vanishes in the very long run, once the population achieves herd
immunity. Along the way, it is optimal to roll over a small stock of infections, which
means that the effective reproduction number stays very close to 1.
    Our framework is general and tractable. Equilibrium behavior and optimal policy
are encoded in a set of two differential equations that can jointly be solved with the
epidemiological block of the model. We therefore view the tools offered here as a
natural building block to explore the role of alternative policies. The model can also
be extended to analyze issues like heterogeneity and to explore the role of geography
in determining disease transmission.


References
Acemoglu, Daron, Victor Chernozhukov, Iván Werning, and Michael D
 Whinston, “Optimal targeted lockdowns in a multi-group SIR model,” 2020.

Alvarez, Fernando, David Argente, and Francesco Lippi, “A Simple Planning
 Problem for COVID-19 Lockdown,” March 2020.

Atkeson, Andrew, “What will be the economic impact of COVID-19 in the US?
 Rough estimates of disease scenarios,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Eco-
 nomic Research 2020.

Barro, Robert J, José F Ursua, and Joanna Weng, “The Coronavirus and
 the Great Influenza Epidemic-Lessons from the coronavirus potential effects on
 mortality and economic activity,” 2020.

Bethune, Zachary and Anton Korinek, “COVID-19 Infection Externalities: Pur-
 suing Herd Immunity or Containment?,” Technical Report, Working Paper 2020.

Bognanni, Mark, Doug Hanley, Daniel Kolliner, and Kurt Mitman,
 “Economic Activity and COVID-19 Transmission: Evidence from an Estimated
 Economic-Epidemiological Model,” July 2020.

Brotherhood, Luiz, Philipp Kircher, Cezar Santos, and Michèle Tertilt,
 “An economic model of the Covid-19 epidemic: The importance of testing and
 age-specific policies,” 2020.

                                         42
Budish, Eric, “R < 1 as an Economic Constraint: Can We “Expand the Frontier”
 in the Fight Against Covid-19?,” April 2020.

Dewatripont, Mathias, Michel Goldman, Eric Muraille, and Jean-Philippe
 Platteau, “Rapid identification of workers immune to COVID-19 and virus-free:
 A priority to restart the economy,” Technical Report, Discussion paper, Universit
 Libre de Bruxelles 2020.

Diamond, Peter A., “Aggregate demand management in search equilibrium,” Jour-
 nal of Political Economy, 1982, 90 (5), 881–894.

   and Eric Maskin, “An Equilibrium Analysis of Search and Breach of Contract,
  I: Steady States,” The Bell Journal of Economics, 1979, 10 (1), 282–316.

Dong, Ensheng, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner, “An interactive web-based
 dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time,” The Lancet infectious diseases, 2020.

Eichenbaum, Martin S., Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt, “The
  Macroeconomics of Epidemics,” April 2020.

Endo, Akira, Sam Abbott, Adam J Kucharski, Sebastian Funk et al., “Es-
 timating the overdispersion in COVID-19 transmission using outbreak sizes outside
 China,” 2020.

Fenichel, Eli P, “Economic considerations for social distancing and behavioral based
  policies during an epidemic,” Journal of Health Economics, 2013, 32 (2), 440–451.

Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús and Chad I. Jones, “Estimating and Simulating a
  SIRD Model of COVID-19 for Many Countries, States, and Cities,” May 2020.

Garibaldi, Pietro, Espen R. Moen, and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Mod-
 elling contacts and transitions in the SIR epidemics model,” Technical Report,
 CEPR Covid Economics Working Paper, Issue 5 2020.

Glover, Andrew, Jonathan Heathcote, Dirk Krueger, and Jose Victor Rios-
 Rull, “Health versus Wealth: On the Distributional Effects of Controlling a Pan-
 demic,” Technical Report, Working Paper 2020.

                                        43
Goolsbee, Austan and Chad Syverson, “Fear, Lockdown, and Diversion: Com-
 paring Drivers of Pandemic Economic Decline 2020,” 2020.

Greenstone, Michael and Vishan Nigam, “Does Social Distancing Matter,”
 March 2020.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Philipp Kircher, Cezar Santos, and Michèle Tertilt,
 “An equilibrium model of the African HIV/AIDS epidemic,” Econometrica, 2019,
 87 (4), 1081–1113.

Hall, Robert E., Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow, “Trading off Con-
 sumption and COVID-19 Deaths,” 2020.

Jones, Callum, Thomas Philippon, and Venky Venkateswaran, “Optimal
  Mitigation Policies in a Pandemic: Social Distancing and Working from Home,”
  2020.

Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Gianluca Violante, “Pandemics According
 to HANK,” Technical Report, Working Paper 2020.

Keppo, Jussi, Marianna Kudlyak, Elena Quercioli, Lones Smith, and An-
 drea Wilson, “For Whom the Bell Tolls: Avoidance Behavior at Breakout in
 COVID19,” Technical Report, Working Paper 2020.

Kermack, William Ogilvy and Anderson G McKendrick, “A contribution to
 the mathematical theory of epidemics,” Proceedings of the royal society of london.
 Series A, Containing papers of a mathematical and physical character, 1927, 115
 (772), 700–721.

Kremer, Michael, “Integrating behavioral choice into epidemiological models of
 AIDS,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1996, 111 (2), 549–573.

   and Charles Morcom, “The effect of changing sexual activity on HIV preva-
  lence,” Mathematical biosciences, 1998, 151 (1), 99–122.

Krueger, Dirk, Harald Uhlig, and Taojun Xie, “Macroeconomic Dynamics and
 Reallocation in an Epidemic,” Technical Report, CEPR Covid Economics Working
 Paper, Issue 5 2020.

                                        44
Lauer, Stephen A, Kyra H Grantz, Qifang Bi, Forrest K Jones, Qulu
  Zheng, Hannah R Meredith, Andrew S Azman, Nicholas G Reich, and
  Justin Lessler, “The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
  from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and application,” Annals of
  internal medicine, 2020.

Pan, An, Li Liu, Chaolong Wang, Huan Guo, Xingjie Hao, Qi Wang, Jiao
 Huang, Na He, Hongjie Yu, Xihong Lin, Sheng Wei, and Tangchun Wu,
 “Association of Public Health Interventions With the Epidemiology of the COVID-
 19 Outbreak in Wuhan, China,” JAMA, 05 2020, 323 (19), 1915–1923.

Philipson, Tomas J., “Economic epidemiology and infectious diseases,” Handbook
 of Health Economics, 2000, 1 (B), 1761–1799.

   and Richard A. Posner, Private choices and public health: The AIDS epidemic
  in an economic perspective, Harvard University Press, 1993.

   and , “The microeconomics of the AIDS epidemic in Africa,” Population and
  Development Review, 1995, pp. 835–848.

Piguillem, Facundo and Liyan Shi, “The optimal covid-19 quarantine and testing
  policies,” Technical Report, Einaudi Institute for Economics and Finance (EIEF)
  2020.

Rowthorn, Bob RE and Flavio Toxvaerd, “The optimal control of infectious
 diseases via prevention and treatment,” Technical Report 2020.

Sanche, Steven, Yen Ting Lin, Chonggang Xu, Ethan Romero-Severson,
  Nick Hengartner, and Ruian Ke, “Early Release-High Contagiousness and
  Rapid Spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2,” 2020.

Toxvaerd, Flavio, “Rational disinhibition and externalities in prevention,” Inter-
  national Economic Review, 2019, 60 (4), 1737–1755.

  , “Equilibrium Social Distancing,” Technical Report 2020.




                                       45
                               Online Appendix

A      Additional SafeGraph Results
A.1     Time at Home
SafeGraph has a second data set named “Social Distancing Metrics.” It assigns smart-
phones a home address using their night-time location and then considers individual
foot traffic. The dataset goes back to January 1, 2020 and currently runs until April
24. Again, it is large. On March 1, the dataset contains information from over 20
million devices across 220,000 census block groups with at least 5 devices. Among
other things, it reports, for each census block group, the median number of minutes a
device dwells at its home location (variable median home dwell time). In addition, it
also measures the number of devices that spend the entire day at the home location
(variable completely home device count).
    We proceed in the same fashion as with our main measure. We subtract the
median minutes spent at home from 24 × 60 = 1440 and take a daily state-wide
average across census block groups using the device count as weights.21 We similarly
construct the state-wide fraction of all devices that leave the house at least once
during any day. Both are expressed relative to a benchmark of the first week of
March. Figure 8 plots the evolution of these two metrics the same way as Figure 3
does for our main variable.


A.2     Closures
We work with the following closure criterion. We diagnose a POI as closed on the first
of three consecutive days where daily traffic never exceeds 20 percent of the average
daily traffic during a baseline period (first week of March). We only use POIs with
10 or more average daily visitors during baseline which are covered during all days
the dataset covers and restrict attention to NAICS codes 44, 45, 71, 72 (retail trade;
arts, entertainment, and recreation; accommodation and food services). Proceeding
  21
    There are very few observations with median dwell time larger than 1440. We omit those from
the analysis.


                                              46
                                          Leave House                                          Time Spent out of House
                    50                                                                                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                        stay-at-home share
percent change




                     0                                                                                                                            2/3




                   -50                                                                                                                            1/3




                  -100                                                                                                                            0
                      03/08

                              03/15

                                      03/22

                                              03/29

                                                      04/05

                                                              04/12

                                                                      04/19

                                                                              04/26

                                                                                      03/08

                                                                                              03/15

                                                                                                      03/22

                                                                                                              03/29

                                                                                                                      04/05

                                                                                                                              04/12

                                                                                                                                      04/19

                                                                                                                                              04/26
                                          date in 2020                                                    date in 2020
                 Notes: Social activity based on SafeGraph’s “Social Distancing Metrics” COVID-19 Response
                 Dataset. Left Panel Metric: Fraction of devices that leave assigned “home” at least once during
                 any day. Right Panel Metric: One minus fraction of time spent at home location of median
                 device. Metrics computed at census block level, then averaged to the state level (with device-
                 count as weight). Each thin line corresponds to one of the 51 US states and the District of
                 Columbia. The thick black line marks the median state in terms of the decline relative to baseline
                 at any given day. The solid red line is the percent of the population subject to stay-at-home
                 or shelter-in-place orders, indicated on the right-hand axis. The population subject to these
                 orders is based on authors’ own calculations using https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/
                 2020/us/coronavirus-stay-at-home-order.html. The vertical dotted line indicates March
                 13, 2020, the date of the declaration of national emergency.

                                 Figure 8: Declining Activity, Early and Everywhere IV


this way, we find that 43 percent of the 655,185 POIs had closed by the end of our
sample (May 16).
    In Figure 9 (left panel) we plot the average daily traffic (relative to same day-of-
week traffic during baseline) in the 10 days prior to store closure. The main takeaway
is that, prior to store closure revealed in this fashion, foot traffic to POIs declined
substantially. This suggests that closures are not the driving force of the decline in
activity that preceded the official lockdown measures.
    One concern is that the pre-closure decline may reflect the closure of other busi-
nesses or offices. To address this, we separately restrict attention to POIs that receive,
in the baseline week, over 50 percent of their traffic on Saturdays and Sundays. We
plot the corresponding decline in pre-closure traffic in the right panel. The basic pic-

                                                                              47
             1                                                         1
 activity




                                                           activity
            0.5                                                       0.5


             0                                                         0
                  −8 −6 −4 −2              0                                −8 −6 −4 −2              0
                  days relative to closing                                  days relative to closing
      Notes: NAICS codes 44, 45, 71, 72 only. Only POIs with at least 10 average daily visitors
      during first week of March and only POIs which are covered all days. POI closure identified on
      first of first three consecutive days where daily traffic is below 20 percent of average daily traffic
      during baseline week (first week of March 2020). Closures March 11 and after. The left panel
      plots the number of daily visits relative to same day-of-week during baseline period (first week
      of March). The right panel does the same but only for POIs that, in the baseline week, receive
      at least 50 percent of their total traffic on the weekend.

                     Figure 9: Declining POI Visits Prior to Closing Date



ture remains the same, although notably visits to “weekend places” was noticeably
higher than normal until a few days before they shut down.


B           Computational Algorithm
We seek to solve the model with α ∈ [0, 1], as described in 4.4. Recall that α = 0
corresponds to the laissez-faire equilibrium and α = 1 corresponds to the planner’s
problem. The model is described by the state equations (7)–(8), the optimality con-
dition (18), the costate equations (19)–(20), and the transversality condition (21).
    Note that if u(a) = log a − a + 1 or u(a) = −(1 − a)2 /2, we can solve equation (18)
explicitly for A(t) as a function of the state and costate variables. We use this in our
solution and so have a system of four ordinary differential equations.
    Our main computational approach numerically solves the state and costate equa-
tions using a backward shooting algorithm. We normalize the terminal date to 0 and
set Ni (0) = 10−9 . We then pin down the terminal values of the costate variables
by solving equations (19)–(20) with A(0) = 1 and λ0s (0) = λ0i (0) = 0. Note that the


                                                     48
solution to the differential equation system is not very sensitive to the terminal values
of the costate variables, particularly at dates in the distant path.
    Finally, we search for the terminal value Ns (0). For a given value of Ns (0), we can
numerically solve the differential equation system backwards through time. Our aim is
to solve backwards to an unknown time T < 0 with a known value of Ns (T ) and Ni (T ),
e.g. Ns (T ) = 0.9999223 and Ni (T ) = 0.0000527 in our benchmark calibration. If our
guess of Ns (0) is too large, we find that there is a finite date t with Ns (t) = 0.9999223
and Ni (t) > 0.0000527. If our guess of Ns (0) is too small, we find that there is a finite
date t with Ns (t) < 0.9999223 and Ni (t) = 0.0000527. Thus we can easily search for
the value of Ns (0) that takes us back to the desired initial condition.
    A difficulty arises because the state equations are unstable when we solve back-
wards in time. Given issues of numerical precision, this means that we may not be
able to find a value of Ns (0) for which Ns (T ) = 0.9999223 and Ni (T ) = 0.0000527.
Instead, two nearby values may lead to widely divergent paths. We illustrate this
with the blue lines in Figure 10. The two paths are similar for a while, but ultimately
diverge by a substantial amount. The correct value of Ns (0) lies in between the value
on these two curves, but we are unable to find it directly.
    Instead, we look for the first time that the two paths diverge substantially, defined
as the ratio of any of Ns , Ni , λs , and λi across the two paths exceeding a tolerance
threshold, which we set to 10−6 . Call the first (i.e. least negative) date when this
occurs T1 . We have now found the solution to the differential equation between T1
and 0. We then fix the value of Ni , λs , and λi at the saddle path value at T1 and again
search for the value of Ns (T1 ) which takes us back to our desired initial condition,
e.g. Ns (T ) = 0.9999223 and Ni (T ) = 0.0000527. Once again, we may find two paths
near the saddle path which diverge by an amount that exceeds our tolerance. In this
case, we call the first (least negative) such date T2 and repeat the procedure.
    Figure 10 plots the joint path of the state variables under laissez-faire and our
main calibration. We highlight three of the splits.22 The path labeled ‘1’ starts at
T1 = −3050 with Ns (T1 ) = 0.317 and Ni (T1 ) = 0.00000332. The path labeled ‘2’
starts at T2 = −5110 with Ns (T2 ) = 0.364 and Ni (T2 ) = 0.00101. Finally, the red
path label ‘3’ starts at T3 = −5520 with Ns (T3 ) = 0.504 and Ni (T3 ) = 0.00551. This
  22
     In fact, there are five splits in total. The first two splits occur very early on, and we do not plot
them.

                                                   49
                                100
                                          0
                                          1
                              10−2        2
                Infected Ni               3
                              10−4

                              10−6

                              10−8

                              10−10
                                      0       0.2    0.4      0.6    0.8         1
                                                    Susceptible Ns
    Notes: The figure corresponds to the laissez-faire version of the model (α = 0) in the baseline
    calibration.

                                          Figure 10: Saddle Path


one reaches Ns (T ) = 0.9999223 and Ni (T ) = 0.0000527 at T = −5786, our desired
terminal condition.
    Finally, in plotting the results in the text, we use an alternative normalization
of time, defining date T to be March 13, 2020. This does not require resolving the
model, just changing the time index.


C      Robustness
C.1      Robustness to Parameters and Functional Forms
In this section, we show the laissez-faire and optimal dynamics with reasonable
changes to most of the parameters. Given the large uncertainty around many of
the key model parameters, fairly large changes are reasonable. We find that our main
findings are robust to alternative parameter choices. In particular, we find a strong
laissez-faire equilibrium reduction in social activity; an immediate and persistent op-
timal reduction in social activity that only disappears in the very long run; and an
optimal path that keeps the effective reproduction number very close to 1 after peak

                                                     50
                                  Laissez-Faire                             Optimum
 Calibration                Health Activity     Total                Health Activity           Total
 Baseline                  $11,374       $1,277      $12,652           $860       $7,227 $8,087
 u(a) = − 12 (1 − a)2       $9,948       $1,435      $11,384           $214       $5,616 $5,830
 κ = 98.5                   $6,763         $611       $7,373         $3,942       $2,358 $6,300
 R0 = 6.4                  $15,973       $1,799      $17,772         $8,776       $6,630 $15,406
 δ = 0.33/365              $13,541       $1,293      $14,834         $7,883       $4,735 $12,618
 Ni (0) = 0.01             $11,745       $1,327      $13,072         $1,852       $7,164 $9,016
   Notes: Columns 1 and 4: present value of per capita pure health cost of disease. Columns 2 and
   5: present value of per capita cost of reduction in social activity. Columns 3 and 6: total cost.
   First three columns are for the laissez-faire equilibrium, last three are for the optimum. Each
   row corresponds to a different calibration. We convert utils to US dollars using a factor of 123,
   as discussed in Section 5.1.

               Table 3: Per Capita Welfare Cost of Disease: Robustness


infections.
    While the equilibrium amount of social distancing and the health costs of the
pandemic are robust to parameter changes, we find some sensitivity under the optimal
policy. Table 3 summarizes the total cost under both equilibrium and optimum,
along with their breakdown into health and activity cost. When the gains from
social distancing are smaller because the health cost of infection κ is lower or the
arrival rate of a cure δ is lower, we find that optimal policy allows for an initial wave
of infections. The same thing happens when the basic reproduction number R0 is
higher. In this case, effective social distancing requires a bigger reduction in activity,
which the planner finds too costly. The resulting wave of infections shifts optimal
costs away from reduced activity and towards the health side.
    We now discuss each of the modifications in turn, along with its impact on the
dynamics of the pandemic.

Alternative Utility Function In Figure 11, we modify the utility function to
u(a) = − 12 (1 − a)2 . This leaves u(1) = u0 (1) = 0 and also leaves u00 (1) unchanged.
The latter assumption ensures the value of a statistical life is unchanged. However, it
implies less curvature in the utility function and in particular that u0 (0) is finite. This
modification reduces the marginal value of social activity, and so both equilibrium and


                                                51
optimal social activity fall with this calibration. Still, all of our takeaway messages
hold with this calibration. Optimal policy has an immediate and sustained reduction
in social activity, although the extent of it is limited and so the effective reproduction
number remains close to 1.

Cost of Disease Here we show the results for κ = 98.5, that is we cut our baseline
parameter value of the expected cost of infection in half. This can be viewed as cap-
turing a lower infection fatality rate or a lower VSL. We show the resulting dynamics
for optimum and laissez-faire in Figure 12.
    Cutting the cost of infection increases the peak equilibrium infection rate. The
peak optimal infection rate increases by a much larger amount, from a very low
level of 0.07 percent to a peak close to equilibrium. The delay induced by the optimal
policy is also decreased considerably, and the peak of the infection rate under optimal
policy is less than 100 days after the equilibrium peak. With a lower VSL, the cost
of persistent social distancing exceeds its health care returns.

Higher Duration of Infectivity and Higher R0 Some authors use a considerably
longer duration of infectivity γ1 . For instance, Hall, Jones and Klenow (2020) set
      1
γ = 18  . We follow them here but maintain the target of a 30 percent daily growth
                                                                                 1
rate in a world without social distancing. We therefore adjust β = 0.3 + 18        . This
gives a substantially higher basic reproduction number of R0 = 6.4.
    We report the corresponding results in Figure 13. This has qualitatively little
impact on the results, but there are significant quantitative differences. Most notice-
ably, with a much higher basic reproduction number, social distancing is less effective
at reducing the infection rate. The peak infection rate in equilibrium is substantially
elevated. Even more noticeably, optimal policy now allows for a substantial wave of
infections, since the cost of suppressing it is prohibitive. Conversely, both equilibrium
and optimal policy see an even larger contraction of social activity. In either case,
optimal policy still keeps R(t) marginally below 1 after peak infections.

Lower Cure Probability We have so far assumed that the expected time until a
cure is 1.5 years. Figure 14 shows what happens if we double this to 3 years. The
laissez-faire equilibrium dynamics are effectively the same, reflecting the fact that

                                           52
                                                            1



                      share susceptible Ns
                                                     0.8
                                                     0.6
                                                     0.4
                                                     0.2
                                                            0
            share infected Ni




                                       10−2

                                       10−3

                                       10−4

                                       10−5
                                          1
                      social activity A




                                                     0.8
                                                     0.6
                                                     0.4
                                                     0.2
                                                            0
                                    reproduction number R




                                                            3

                                                            2

                                                            1

                                                            0
                                                            03/13/20

                                                                       06/13/20

                                                                                  09/13/20

                                                                                             12/13/20

                                                                                                         03/13/21

                                                                                                                    06/13/21

                                                                                                                               09/13/21

                                                                                                                                          12/13/21

                                                                                                                                                     03/13/22




                                                                                                         date
Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. Only change: We assume the utility from social activity is
u(a) = − 12 (1−a)2 . Solid lines show the baseline calibration and dashed lines show the robustness
check. The second plot is drawn on a log scale.

       Figure 11: Optimal Policy vs Laissez-Faire with quadratic utility.


                                                                                                    53
                                                           1



                     share susceptible Ns
                                                    0.8
                                                    0.6
                                                    0.4
                                                    0.2
                                                           0
           share infected Ni




                                      10−2

                                      10−3

                                      10−4

                                      10−5
                                         1
                     social activity A




                                                    0.8
                                                    0.6
                                                    0.4
                                                    0.2
                                                           0
                                   reproduction number R




                                                           3

                                                           2

                                                           1

                                                           0
                                                           03/13/20

                                                                      06/13/20

                                                                                 09/13/20

                                                                                            12/13/20

                                                                                                        03/13/21

                                                                                                                   06/13/21

                                                                                                                              09/13/21

                                                                                                                                         12/13/21

                                                                                                                                                    03/13/22




                                                                                                        date
Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. Only change: We set κ = 98.5 instead of κ = 197. Solid
lines show the baseline calibration and dashed lines show the robustness check. The second plot
is drawn on a log scale.

    Figure 12: Optimal Policy vs Laissez-Faire with low cost of infection.


                                                                                                   54
                                                           1



                     share susceptible Ns
                                                    0.8
                                                    0.6
                                                    0.4
                                                    0.2
                                                           0
                                      10−1
           share infected Ni




                                      10−2
                                      10−3
                                      10−4
                                      10−5
                                         1
                     social activity A




                                                    0.8
                                                    0.6
                                                    0.4
                                                    0.2
                                                           0
                                   reproduction number R




                                                           6

                                                           4

                                                           2

                                                           0
                                                           03/13/20

                                                                      06/13/20

                                                                                 09/13/20

                                                                                            12/13/20

                                                                                                        03/13/21

                                                                                                                   06/13/21

                                                                                                                              09/13/21

                                                                                                                                         12/13/21

                                                                                                                                                    03/13/22




                                                                                                        date
Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. Only change: We set γ = 0.056 (instead of γ = 0.143) and
β = 0.356 such that R0 = 6.4 (instead of 3.1). Solid lines show the baseline calibration and
dashed lines show the robustness check. The second plot is drawn on a log scale.

Figure 13: Optimal Policy vs Laissez-Faire with long duration of infectivity.


                                                                                                   55
individuals are insensitive to the discount rate, and difficulties in finding a cure are
equivalent to a reduction in discounting. The dynamics of the disease, however, differ
sharply under the optimal policy. In particular, the planner allows a substantial wave
of infections to occur, so the expected number of sick (and hence fatalities) rises much
more quickly. This reflects a reduction in the benefits of delay.
    Still, the path of optimal policy does not change qualitatively. Immediate and
long-lasting social distancing is optimal but the optimal effective reproduction number
stays close to 1 after peak infections.

Stock of Initially Infected We have experimented with the stock of the initially
infected for several reasons. First, one might think that as the fraction of initially
infected individuals becomes exceedingly small one of our key policy lessons—that
the optimal policy immediately curtails social activity to buy time—no longer holds.
This is indeed true in the limit: for Ni (0) small enough, the expected uncurtailed
outbreak date is so far in the future that the (social) gains from social distancing
must vanish. However, suppose we start with Ni (0) = 1/7·109 , i.e. patient zero, a
natural lower bound on the initial seed. With β − γ = 0.3, in just 30 days Ni (t)
exceeds 10−6 if there is no social distancing. The delay motive we have appealed to
above therefore remains quantitatively powerful.
    Second, we have also substantially increased Ni (0) up to 1 percent. This could for
instance capture the situation in places where COVID-19 appeared first, or it could
capture the situation in places where the initial policy response was botched or indi-
viduals did not respond because of, say, false information. We plot the corresponding
time paths for equilibrium and optimum in Figure 15.
    The qualitative patterns are largely unchanged but the optimal policy acts more
aggressively. An important observation, shown in the bottom panel of the figure,
is that in this case optimal policy suppresses social activity immediately to such an
extent that Ni (t) falls from the outset. As a consequence of the high initial stock of
infections, the planner has less room to delay the wave of infections and so drives down
the stock of infections from the outset. Nonetheless, optimal policy monotonically
relaxes social distancing, ultimately relying on a reduction in the share of susceptible
individuals for the continued decline in infections. The equilibrium time path, in


                                          56
                                                           1



                     share susceptible Ns
                                                    0.8
                                                    0.6
                                                    0.4
                                                    0.2
                                                           0
           share infected Ni




                                      10−2

                                      10−3

                                      10−4

                                      10−5
                                         1
                     social activity A




                                                    0.8
                                                    0.6
                                                    0.4
                                                    0.2
                                                           0
                                   reproduction number R




                                                           3

                                                           2

                                                           1

                                                           0
                                                           03/13/20

                                                                      06/13/20

                                                                                 09/13/20

                                                                                            12/13/20

                                                                                                        03/13/21

                                                                                                                   06/13/21

                                                                                                                              09/13/21

                                                                                                                                         12/13/21

                                                                                                                                                    03/13/22




                                                                                                        date
Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. The only change is that we set δ = 0.33                 0.67
                                                                           365 (instead of 365 ).
Solid lines show the baseline calibration and dashed lines show the robustness check. The second
plot is drawn on a log scale.

   Figure 14: Optimal Policy vs Laissez-Faire with low probability of cure.


                                                                                                   57
turn, remains largely unchanged. Starting with more infections just shifts it ahead in
time.


C.2     No Information about Recovery
Throughout the paper, we have assumed that people know when they have recovered
from the disease and that recovery confers lifelong immunity. This implies that the
recovered’s choice of social activity is unaffected by the pandemic, ar (t) = Ar (t) =
a∗ = 1. Here we change the first part of that assumption. We still assume that
recovery confers lifelong immunity, but we assume that infected people pay a cost
pay v = κ/π if they die and otherwise are unaware that they were sick. This means
that susceptible, infected, and recovered individuals all have the same information
and so must choose the same level of social activity a(t). Similarly, the social planner
applies any social distancing requirements to all living individuals.
   If individuals do not know their health status, they maximize
                       Z    ∞
                                e−(ρ+δ)t (ns (t) + ni (t) + nr (t))u(a(t)) − γni (t)κ dt
                                                                                     
              max
              {a(t)}    0


subject to unchanged law of motions for the states, equations (7) and (8). Since
a fraction π of the individuals who are not susceptible or infected have died, the
remaining fraction 1 − π are recovered, nr (t) = (1 − π)(1 − ns (t) − ni (t)). That
implies ns (t) + ni (t) + nr (t) = 1 − π(1 − ns (t) − ni (t)). The Hamiltonian can then be
written without an additional co-state variable as

  H(ns (t), ni (t), a(t), λs (t), λi (t)) = (1 − π(1 − ns (t) − ni (t)))u(a(t)) − γni (t)κ
                                                                                             
                       − λs (t)βa(t)ns (t)A(t)Ni (t) + λi (t) βa(t)ns (t)A(t)Ni (t) − γni (t) .

The static first order condition is

          (1 − π(1 − ns (t) − ni (t)))u0 (a(t)) = (λs (t) − λi (t))βns (t)A(t)Ni (t).        (23)




                                                     58
                                                             1



                       share susceptible Ns
                                                      0.8
                                                      0.6
                                                      0.4
                                                      0.2
                                                             0
             share infected Ni




                                        10−2

                                        10−3

                                        10−4

                                        10−5
                                           1
                       social activity A




                                                      0.8
                                                      0.6
                                                      0.4
                                                      0.2
                                                             0
                                     reproduction number R




                                                             3

                                                             2

                                                             1

                                                             0
                                                             03/13/20

                                                                        06/13/20

                                                                                   09/13/20

                                                                                              12/13/20

                                                                                                          03/13/21

                                                                                                                     06/13/21

                                                                                                                                09/13/21

                                                                                                                                           12/13/21

                                                                                                                                                      03/13/22




                                                                                                          date
 Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. Only change: We set Ni (0) = 10−2 instead of Ni (0) =
 0.0000527. This also reduces the initial value of Ns (0) to 0.985 instead of 0.9999223. Solid lines
 show the baseline calibration and dashed lines show the robustness check. The second plot is
 drawn on a log scale.

Figure 15: Optimal Policy vs Laissez-Faire with higher stock of initially infected.

                                                                                                     59
The derivatives with respect to the state variables ns (t) and ni (t) are

           (ρ + δ)λs (t) − λ0s (t) = πu(a(t)) + (λi (t) − λs (t))βa(t)A(t)Ni (t),         (24)
           (ρ + δ)λi (t) − λ0i (t) = πu(a(t)) − γ κ + λi (t) .
                                                              
                                                                                          (25)

The transversality conditions are unchanged

                   lim e−(ρ+δ)t λs (t)ns (t) = lim e−(ρ+δ)t λi (t)ni (t) = 0.             (26)
                   t→∞                         t→∞


As usual, we impose the equilibrium restrictions a(t) = A(t), ns (t) = Ns (t), and
ni (t) = Ni (t) to get a set of differential equations that can be solved with the state
equations (7) and (8).
     The Hamiltonian for the planner is

  H(Ns (t), Ni (t), A(t), µs (t), µi (t)) = (1 − π(1 − Ns (t) − Ni (t))u(A(t)) − γNi (t)κ
                         − µs (t)βA(t)2 Ns (t)Ni (t) + µi (t) βA(t)2 Ns (t)Ni (t) − γNi (t) .
                                                                                           


The necessary first order condition with respect to the control A is

      (1 − π(1 − Ns (t) − Ni (t))u0 (A(t)) = 2(µs (t) − µi (t))βA(t)Ni (t)Ns (t),         (27)

while the necessary costate equations are

  (ρ + δ)µs (t) − µ0s (t) = πu(A(t)) + (µi (t) − µs (t))βA(t)2 Ni (t),                 (28)
  (ρ + δ)µi (t) − µ0i (t) = πu(A(t)) + (µi (t) − µs (t))βA(t)2 Ns (t) − γ κ + µi (t) . (29)
                                                                                    


Finally, the planner also has unchanged necessary tranversality conditions

                   lim e−(ρ+δ)t µs (t)Ns (t) = lim e−(ρ+δ)t µi (t)Ni (t) = 0.             (30)
                  t→∞                          t→∞


Again, we solve these differential equations with the state equations (7) and (8).
   Figure 16 shows the results. If individuals do not know when they have recovered,
they increase their social activity under laissez-faire when susceptible or infected, com-
pared with the benchmark model. This reflects the fact that as the disease progresses,

                                              60
they are increasingly likely to have acquired immunity. In contrast, the optimal policy
suppresses activity when the planner is unaware of recovery status. This reflects the
opposing force, that acquiring immunity is less valuable when people who are immune
must also be subject to social distancing requirements.




                                          61
                                                              1



                        share susceptible Ns
                                                       0.8
                                                       0.6
                                                       0.4
                                                       0.2
                                                              0
              share infected Ni




                                         10−2

                                         10−3

                                         10−4

                                         10−5
                                            1
                        social activity A




                                                       0.8
                                                       0.6
                                                       0.4
                                                       0.2
                                                              0
                                      reproduction number R




                                                              3

                                                              2

                                                              1

                                                              0
                                                              03/13/20

                                                                         06/13/20

                                                                                    09/13/20

                                                                                               12/13/20

                                                                                                           03/13/21

                                                                                                                      06/13/21

                                                                                                                                 09/13/21

                                                                                                                                            12/13/21

                                                                                                                                                       03/13/22




                                                                                                           date
   Notes: See Table 1 for calibration. Only change: We assume individuals do not know their
   recovery status. Solid lines show the baseline assumption and dashed lines show the robustness
   check. The second plot is drawn on a log scale.

Figure 16: Optimal Policy vs Laissez-Faire when individuals do not know whether
they have recovered.

                                                                                                      62
