                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 CORPORATE IMMUNITY TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

                                          Wenzhi Ding
                                          Ross Levine
                                           Chen Lin
                                           Wensi Xie

                                       Working Paper 27055
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27055


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Wenzhi Ding, Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Corporate Immunity to the COVID-19 Pandemic
Wenzhi Ding, Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Wensi Xie
NBER Working Paper No. 27055
April 2020
JEL No. F23,G3,I10,M12,M14

                                            ABSTRACT

Using data on over 6,000 firms across 56 economies during the first quarter of 2020, we evaluate
the connection between corporate characteristics and stock price reactions to COVID-19 cases.
We find that the pandemic-induced drop in stock prices was milder among firms with (a) stronger
pre-2020 finances (more cash, less debt, and larger profits), (b) less exposure to COVID-19
through global supply chains and customer locations, (c) more CSR activities, and (d) less
entrenched executives. Furthermore, the stock prices of firms with greater hedge fund ownership
performed worse, and those of firms with larger non-financial corporate ownership performed
better. We believe ours is the first paper to assess international, cross-firm stock price reactions to
COVID-19 as functions of these pre-shock corporate characteristics.


Wenzhi Ding                                        Chen Lin
University of Hong Kong                            Faculty of Business and Economics
Hong Kong                                          The University of Hong Kong
wenzhi.ding@connect.hku.hk                         Hong Kong
                                                   chenlin1@hku.hk
Ross Levine
Haas School of Business                            Wensi Xie
University of California at Berkeley               Department of Finance
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)        Chinese University of Hong Kong
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900                            Hong Kong
and NBER                                           wensixie@cuhk.edu.hk
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
                                                                                                  1


1. Introduction

       The global economic crisis triggered by COVID-19 is different from past crises. Former

Chair of the U.S. Federal Reserve, Ben Bernanke (2020), stressed that while financial imbalances

and risks grew over many years to produce the 2008 global financial crisis, the COVID-19 crisis

was caused by a viral pandemic that abruptly and severely constricted global economic activity.

Carmen Reinhart (2020)—who along with Kenneth Rogoff (2009) documented the striking

similarities of crises during the eight centuries prior to COVID-19—recently emphasized that the

COVID-19 crisis is truly different from past crises with respect to the cause, scope, and severity.

These observations motivate research into the factors shaping the response of countries, firms, and

individuals to the COVID-19 crisis. In this paper, we examine the resilience of firms to the

pandemic, focusing on the differential, cross-firm stock price reactions to COVID-19 cases.

       The COVID-19 pandemic has triggered enormous—and heterogeneous—stock price

movements. During the first quarter of 2020, the S&P 500 fell by 34% from its high to its low,

while the exchanges in Brazil, Hong Kong, Italy, and Japan experienced high-low declines of 46%,

25%, 42%, and 31%, respectively. There have also been large differences in stock price
movements across firms within the same industry and country. For example, the average U.S.

manufacturing firm saw stock prices fall by 29% over the first quarter with a standard deviation of

24%, and where similar cross-firm heterogeneity exists among more refined industrial categories.

These developments raise the question, which firm characteristics make some companies more

“immune” to the COVID-19 shock than others?

       In this paper, we examine the relationship between pre-2020 corporate characteristics and

stock price reactions to the COVID-19 pandemic. Using theories of the corporation to frame our

study and data on over 6,000 firms across 56 economies during the first quarter of 2020, we

consider five pre-2020 firm traits: (1) basic financial conditions, such as cash holdings, leverage,

and profitability, (2) international supply chain and customer exposure to COVID-19, such as the

degree to which a firms’ inputs are purchased from and products sold in countries differentially

exposed to COVID-19, (3) corporate investment in corporate social responsibility (CSR), such as
                                                                                                   2


relations with employees, suppliers, customers, and the communities in which firms operate, (4)

corporate governance, such as executive control of the board, antitakeover provisions, and

executive compensation systems, and (5) ownership structure, such as the extent to which hedge

funds, families, non-financial corporations, and institutional investors hold large stakes in firms.

We believe that ours is the first paper to assess cross-firm stock price reactions to COVID-19 as

functions of these pre-shock corporate characteristics. By examining these characteristics

simultaneously, we can better identify the connection between each corporate characteristic and

stock price reactions to the pandemic.

       Theories of the firm offer insights into and predictions concerning how these five corporate

characteristics shape stock price reactions to the COVID-19 pandemic. The first two traits relate

to the severity of firms’ liquidity constraints and exposure to the pandemic through business

connections. First, given the adverse impact of the pandemic on cash-flows and the tightening of

global liquidity demands, heterogeneity in firms’ access to cash and credit may influence firm

performance and hence market valuations (e.g., Harford 1999; Bates, Kahle, and Stulz 2009; Kahle

and Stulz 2013; Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson 2016; Giroud and Mueller 2017). From this
perspective, firms with more cash, less leverage, and greater access to credit (e.g., more profitable

firms) will experience less severe stock price declines than otherwise identical firms. Second, firms

are connected through networks of suppliers and customers (e.g., Long and Plosser 1983; Hertzel

et al. 2008; Acemoglu et al. 2012; Acemoglu, Ozdaglar and Tahbaz-Salehi 2017). To the extent

that some firms’ networks of suppliers and customers are situated in countries more affected by

COVID-19 than other firms, those more-affected firms are likely to experience greater disruptions

to production and sales and hence larger stock price declines than similar firms with less COVID-

19 exposure. While policy makers and industry practitioners (e.g., the Chair of the Federal

Reserve, Jerome Powell, and the CEO of BlackRock, Larry Fink) have stressed the potential
                                                                                                                  3


impact of global supply chain disruptions on markets, we evaluate empirically firms’ stock prices

and their exposure to COVID-19 through global supply chains and customer locations.1

        Third, research suggests that the relationships between a firm and its workers, suppliers,

customers, and local community can shape corporate performance and resilience to adverse

shocks, including the COVID-19 crisis. Influential theories of the firm (e.g., Coase 1937; Jensen

and Meckling 1976) view the firm as a nexus of contracts between shareholders and other

stakeholders, who provide the firm with resources in exchange for claims, typically defined by

explicit contracts that are enforced by formal legal systems. Arrow (1972), Putnam (1993), La

Porta et al (1997), Knack and Keefer (1997), and Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004, 2008)

explain that most business arrangements cannot effectively and efficiently be contracted for and

enforced only through formal contracts and legal systems, so that most commercial transactions

rely to some degree on trust. From this perspective, a corporation’s performance depends on the

trust that it has established with various stakeholders. Firms can strengthen their connections with

these stakeholders through CSR activities, such as creating safe, healthy workplaces, engaging in

ethical business practices, providing enduring, reliable services to customers, and investing in the

local environment and community more generally. Such CSR activities signal a firm’s

commitment to satisfying implicit contracts, which in turn boosts stakeholders’ willingness to

support a firm’s operations, especially in difficult times (Deng, Kang, and Low 2013).

Furthermore, as shown by Albuquerque, Koskinen, and Zhang (2019), CSR activities strengthen

customer loyalty and hence reduce a corporation’s susceptibility to economic downturns. Thus,

CSR can strengthen the web of connections underlying efficient—and resilient—corporate

activities, as found by Lins, Servaes, and Tamayo (2017).2 There are, however, countervailing

1
   See, for example, https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/03/powell-says-the-fed-saw-a-risk-to-the-outlook-for-the-
economy-and-chose-to-act.html; and https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-03-30/fink-sees-economy-
recovering-from-virus-but-forever-transformed.
2
  Lins, Servaes, and Tamayo (2017) show that high-CSR firms in the United States enjoyed better stock returns during
the 2008 financial crisis. Our work complements their study. We focus on the global economic crisis triggered by
COVID-19, conduct the analyses in an international setting, and examine CSR as one of a constellation of corporate
characteristics that might shape stock price reactions to the pandemic.
                                                                                                                    4


views. Other research suggests that CSR activities provide private benefits to executives by

enhancing their reputations with politicians, foundations, charitable organizations, and other

associations at the expense of shareholders (e.g., Tirole 2001; Pagano and Volpin 2005; Benabou

and Tirole 2010; and Masulis and Reza 2015). From this perspective, more CSR activities may not

enhance and could even be associated with less resilient stock prices.

         Fourth, the structure of corporate governance, managerial entrenchment, and executive

compensation systems may also influence market perceptions of a corporation’s resilience to

COVID-19. For example, given uncertainty about the magnitude and duration of the pandemic,

markets might put a premium on flexibility, including mergers and acquisitions and leadership

changes (Jensen 1988; Jensen and Ruback 1983). This would suggest that corporations with pre-

existing antitakeover devices or other governance structures that protect executives would

experience harsher stock price reactions to the pandemic (Shleifer and Vishny 1997; Gompers,

Ishii, and Metrick 2003; Cremers and Nair 2005; Harford, Mansi, and Maxwell 2008; Bebchuk,

Cohen, and Ferrell 2009; Giroud and Mueller, 2011). Theories of tunneling also suggest that

periods of great uncertainty and tumult can hinder monitoring and create opportunities for insiders
to extract greater resources and rents at the expense of other stakeholders (e.g., La Porta et al.

2000; Johnson et al. 2000; Djankov et al. 2008). This view would also predict that as the COVID-

19 pandemic spread during the first quarter of 2020, stock markets would penalize firms with

stronger takeovers devices. Finally, extensive research explores how the structure of corporate

boards and executive compensation policies shape corporate performance (e.g., Hermalin and

Weisbach 1998, 2003, 2017; Schwartz-Ziv and Weisbach 2013; Guo and Masulis 2015; Jensen

and Murphy 1990; Fahlenbrach and Stulz 2011; Beltratti and Stulz 2012; Murphy 2013; Rau

2015).3 We focus on resilience, and assess the connection between stock price reactions to the



3
  In addition to financial and governance structures, existing research also investigates how firms’ internal
organizational structure affects the response to an economic crisis. For example, Aghion et al. (2017) show that firms
that delegate more power from the headquarters to local plant managers prior to the Great Recession performed better
than other firms.
                                                                                                      5


pandemic and cross-firm differences in corporate board structures and executive compensation

systems.

        Fifth, corporate ownership can also influence corporate resilience. To the extent that a large

proportion of a firm’s owners have both deep-pockets and a long-run commitment to the firm, such

as a large corporation with a strategic interest in the firm, this could influence the firm’s ability to

weather the COVID-19 shock. In response to adverse news about COVID-19 cases, therefore,

stock prices might fall less among firms with a large, corporate blockholder than among otherwise

similar firms with different owners. In contrast, research highlights two interrelated features of

hedge funds that could contribute to large, nonfundamental stock price movements in the firms

with large hedge fund ownership. First, as discussed in Stein (2009) and Khandani and Lo (2011),

hedge funds often employ quantitative trading strategies that can trigger “overcrowding” and fire

sale effects on prices. Second, hedge funds often use short-term funding to lever their positions

(Lo 2008). As a result, disruptions to liquidity, which occurred during the 2008 financial crisis and

the 2020 COVID-19 crisis, can trigger the rapid sale of hedge fund assets, with large,

nonfundamental price movements (e.g., Khandani and Lo 2011). Thus, adverse news about
COVID-19 cases might induce stock prices to fall more among firms with a large, hedge fund

blockholder. Next, consider other institutional blockholders. While pension funds, mutual funds,

and investment management firms may have long-run perspectives, they (a) might be less

committed to particular firms than strategic investors and (b) might be subject to liquidity shocks

and withdrawals of their own. Given the potential importance for corporate ownership on corporate

behavior and resilience (e.g., Morck, Shleifer, and Vishny 1988; La Porta et al. 1999; Claessens,

Djankov, and Lang 2000; Morck, Wolfenzon, and Yeung 2005; Laeven and Levine 2008; Lin et

al. 2011), we examine whether the impact of the pandemic on stock prices varies by the ownership

structure of firms and whether conditioning on ownership structure alters the findings on the other

corporate characteristics.

        To evaluate how corporate characteristics shape stock price reactions to COVID-19, we

proceed as follows. The dependent variable is weekly stock returns, which is computed for over
                                                                                                      6


6,000 firms across 56 economies during the weeks from January 2nd through March 27th, 2020. A

key input into our set of explanatory variables is COVID19, which is the weekly growth rate of the

number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in an economy. As explanatory variables, we interact

COVID19 with pre-2020 corporate characteristics to assess how firms’ stock returns respond to

the pandemic as functions of individual corporate traits.

       In our core analyses, we examine how firm-specific traits influence stock price reactions

to the pandemic, while controlling for economy-time, industry-time, and firm fixed effects. With

these fixed effects, we condition out (a) all time-varying and time-invariant country/economy

traits, such as differences in legal and political systems, policy reactions to the crisis, institutions

and cultural norms, demographic, geographic, and population density characteristics, and other

cross-country traits, and (b) all time-varying and time-invariant industry differences, such as

differences in the intensity of required in-person contact with customers, suppliers, and co-

workers, that might influence stock price reactions to the pandemic. This allows us to better isolate

the differential impact of COVID-19 on stock prices as functions of firms’ (1) basic financial

conditions, (2) international network of suppliers and customers, (3) CSR, (4) corporate

governance systems, and (5) ownership structures.

       We discover the following. First, pre-pandemic financial conditions have shaped stock

price reactions to COVID-19. Firms with more cash, less debt, and larger profits experienced better

stock price performance than otherwise similar firms. As the pandemic depressed corporate sales

and firms sought liquidity to cover costs, stock markets considered firms’ cash reserves, leverage,

and profitability when re-evaluating the value of corporations. The estimated impact of these

financial indicators on pandemic-induced stock price changes are robust to conditioning on

economy-time, industry-time, and firm fixed effects and to simultaneously controlling for other

firm-specific characteristics interacted with COVID19. With respect to magnitudes, our results

suggest the following: Comparing two otherwise similar firms, the low-cash firm—the firm with

one standard deviation lower pre-2020 ratio of cash-to-assets—would experience an almost 6%

(of the sample mean weekly stock return) extra drop in its stock returns in response to the same
                                                                                                  7


COVID-19 shock. Using a similar comparison, a high-leverage firm (one standard deviation

greater pre-2020 leverage than an otherwise similar firm) would experience an extra 10% (of the

sample mean value of weekly stock returns) drop in stock returns according to our estimates.

       Second, the pandemic-induced decline in stock prices has been greater among firms with

more exposure to the COVID-19 pandemic through their international supply chains and

customers in other countries. To measure this exposure, we compute for each firm in each week

(1) Suppliers’ exposure as the weighted average of COVID19 for the country from which the firm

receives suppliers, where the weights are the proportion of the firm’s pre-pandemic supplies from

those countries and (2) Customers’ exposure as the similarly weighted average of COVID19 for

the country in which the firm sells its products. Apparently, markets considered international

exposure to the pandemic in revaluing firms. The estimated impacts are large. For example,

consider (a) two otherwise similar firms except that one firm has Customers’ exposure at the 25th

percentile and the other is at the 75th percentile and (b) the two firms operate in the same foreign

countries. Holding other factors constant, our estimates imply that the stock price of the more

internationally exposed firm would fall by 3.2 percentage points more than the less exposed firm

over two months.

       Third, CSR matters. Firms that invested more in CSR activities prior to the pandemic

enjoyed much better stock price performance in response to the pandemic. These results are
consistent with the view that investments in corporate social responsibility build trust with

stakeholders, so that workers, suppliers, customers, and other stakeholders are more willing to

make adjustments to support the business in response to adverse shocks. The estimated impact is

robust and economically large. Besides the multiplicity of fixed effects, we condition on the

interaction between COVID19 and each firm’s financial condition, international exposure to the

pandemic, corporate governance system, and ownership structure. This allows us to focus on the

independent influence of CSR investments on stock price resilience to COVID-19. To illustrate

the estimated magnitudes, consider two otherwise similar firms in the same industry and economy.

One has a pre-2020 CSR score at the 25th percentile and the other is at the 75th percentile. Our
                                                                                                  8


estimates suggest that the average stock returns of the high-CSR score firm would decline by 2

percentage points less than the low-CSR score firm in response to the average growth of COVID19

cases two months after the outbreak of the pandemic. Ceteris paribus, these estimates suggest that

the stock price reaction to COVID19 for the high-CSR score firm would be 19% less than the low-

CSR score firm.

       Fourth, in response to the COVID-19 crisis, markets penalized firms with more entrenched

executives. We examined firm-level differences in the use of anti-takeover provisions. We include

the interaction of the number of anti-takeover provisions with COVID19. We find that the

interaction term enters negatively and statistically significantly. These results suggest that stock

markets viewed executive entrenchment negatively in assessing a corporation’s comparative

immunity to the pandemic. More generally, these findings are consistent with the views that in

assessing firms’ abilities to respond effectively to the pandemic, markets favorably valued

flexibility, including mergers, acquisitions, and leadership changes, and governance structures that

limit tunneling. With respect to the magnitudes of the estimated economic effects, consider two

otherwise similar firms in an industry. One has pre-2020 Antitakeover Devices at the 25th percentile

of the sample distribution of Antitakeover Devices and the other firm is at the 75th percentile. Our

estimates suggest that, ceteris paribus, the stock market reactions to COVID19 of the high-

Antitakeover Devices firm would be 24% more than the otherwise similar low-Antitakeover
Devices firm. We also examine other features of corporate governance, such as detailed measures

of the structure of each firm’s board of directors and executive compensation policies. We do not

find evidence that corporate stock price reactions to COVID-19 vary systematically with board

structure or executive compensations systems.

       Fifth, we discover strong links between ownership structure and stock price reactions to

the COVID-19 pandemic. We focus on the identities of large blockholders, which are entities that

own at least 5% of a firm’s shares. First, in response to COVID-19 cases, we find that firms’ stock

prices fall by less on average when firms are owned more by nonfinancial corporate blockholders.

One explanation is that when owners have long-run strategic interests in and commitments to a
                                                                                                     9


firm, such as a corporate owner, markets price these characteristics positively when evaluating the

impact of COVID-19 cases on the firm. Second, we find the opposite for hedge fund ownership.

When a larger proportion of a firm’s stock is held by a hedge fund, we find that stock prices fall

much more in response to COVID-19 cases. This finding is consistent with research by Lo (2008),

Stein (2009), and Khandani and Lo (2011), which stresses that the combination of the quantitative

trading strategies employed by hedge funds and their reliance on leverage can contribute to sharp,

nonfundamental price movements in response to adverse shocks. Third, when examining other

types of owners, we do not find a strong connection between the sizes of their ownership stakes

and the stock price sensitivity to COVID-19 cases. For example, the interaction terms between

COVID19 and different institutional, government, and sovereign wealth fund ownership do enter

the stock price regressions significantly in our core analyses. Thus, our findings highlight the

ramifications of two particular types of large blockholders, other companies and hedge funds, with

large corporate owners providing a ballast against the pandemic’s effect on stock prices and stock

prices responding more sharply to the pandemic when hedge funds own a large proportion of firms’

shares.
          We also provide tests of how country characteristics influence stock price reactions to the

pandemic. In particular, we change the core analyses by omitting the country-time fixed effects

and instead conditioning on particular country-specific factors. This modification allows us to (1)

assess the relation between specific country traits and stock returns and (2) evaluate the sensitivity

of the results on firm-specific traits to particular country features. We focus on three country traits

and discover sharp cross-country differences in the response of stock prices to COVID-19 cases.

First, we find that the stock prices of firms in rich countries have weathered the pandemic better

than poorer countries. Given the enormous resources necessary to address the public health crisis

and the accompanying economic crisis, the financial markets of countries with greater resources

have tended to perform much better than poorer countries. Second, stock prices in countries with

a larger proportion of the population over the age of 65 declined more sharply than stocks in

“younger” countries, perhaps reflecting the greater effect of the pandemic on older people. Third,
                                                                                                      10


we examine state and media power. One might argue that countries with more centralized state

power can more easily abrogate individual rights and effectively respond to COVID-19. Another

view stresses that the independent voices of individuals and an active media forced states to

address the pandemic. To proxy for state power, we use the country’s legal tradition since an

influential line of research stresses that civil and socialist legal traditions give greater power to the

state than those with common law tradition (Hayek 1960; La Porta et al. 1998, 1999; Levine 2005).

Based on insights in Djankov et al. (2003), we use indicators from the World Bank to gauge

individual voice and press freedom. Consistent with the view that markets viewed economies with

more powerful states as better able to respond to the pandemic, we find that countries with civil

and socialist legal traditions experienced smaller stock price declines than those with a common

law tradition. With respect to the media, we do not find a robust link between stock price resilience

to COVID-19 and indicators of individual voice or press freedom.



2. Data, Variable, and Sample

In this section, we describe (1) the time-series, country-specific data on reported cases of
coronavirus disease (COVID-19), (2) the stock return data for a large, international sample of

publicly-listed firms, and (3) the data on other corporate characteristics, e.g., basic financial

conditions, international supply chain exposure, social responsibility, governance, and ownership.



2.1 COVID-19

        COVID-19 is an infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome

coronavirus 2. The disease was first identified in December 2019 in Wuhan, China. The first case

of the disease outside of China was diagnosed in Thailand in mid-January 2020, and it spread

rapidly around the world. The World Health Organization (WHO) declared it a Public Health

Emergency of International Concern on January 30, 2020, named the disease COVID-19 on

February 11th, and classified COVID-19 as a pandemic on March 11, 2020. The total number of

confirmed cases around the world is growing at a historically high speed, and has reached more
                                                                                                            11


than 1.6 million as of April 10, 2020. Figure 1 plots the cumulative coronavirus cases reported in

each country/economy at the end of March 2020, demonstrating substantial cross-country

differences in the recent spread of COVID-19.

        We obtain data on COVID-19 cases from Coronavirus COVID-19 Global Cases Database,

which is managed by Dong, Du, and Gardner (2020) at the Center for Systems Science and

Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University (JHU). The database is organized as an

interactive web-based dashboard, tracks the number of new COVID-19 cases around the world in

real time, and has been visited more than 15 billion times (as of March 27, 2020), and is used by

scholars and media (e.g. Financial Times, BBC).4 The JHU team collects daily worldwide data for
more than 180 economies, dating back to January 22, 2020. The team assembles information from

government reports, local media and online news services, social media platforms, and direct

communication with other information sources. It then confirms the case numbers with

international health authorities, such as World Health Organization (WHO), and local health

departments, such as the respective centers for disease control and prevention.

        The case data reported through the CSSE’s dashboard includes (1) the number of new

confirmed cases, (2) the number of deaths, and (3) the number of recoveries. To measure country

exposure to the pandemic, we compute COVID19: the growth rate of the cumulative number of

confirmed cases in a country in a given week. To match COVID19 to weekly stock return data,
COVID19 is calculated from Saturday to Friday. More specifically, for each country/economy c

in week t, we compute COVID19 as follows.

        !"#$%19!,# = )*+1 + !-*./0123 !5626!,# 7 − )*+1 + !-*./0123 !5626!,#$% 7,

where 9 and : index country/economy and week. !-*./0123 !5626!,# represents the cumulative

number of confirmed cases in economy c as of Friday in week t. Thus, !"#$%19!,# measures the

weekly growth of confirmed cases over week t in economy c.

4
 See, for example, https://america.cgtn.com/2020/04/03/billions-are-on-this-covid-19-site-we-talked-to-the-guy-
who-built-it, and https://www.bbc.com/news/world-52120439.
                                                                                                  12


       To document the evolution of COVID19, consider Table 1 and Figure 2. As shown in Table

1, the average value of COVID19 is 1.29, suggesting that cases were more than doubling each

week. Figure 2 illustrates the growth rate in COVID-19 over time by economy, which shows

substantial cross-economy, cross-time variation.



2.2 Stock market data

       We retrieve stock price data during the first quarter of 2020 from the DataStream dataset

in Thomson Reuters Eikon. We obtain data on firms in 56 countries, because these are the countries

from which we can also obtain data on corporate financial statements (Worldscope) and ESG

performance (ASSET4). These countries account for 93% of world gross domestic product (GDP)

and 99% of global stock market capitalization. Following existing research (e.g., Hanselaar, Stulz,

and Van Dijk, 2019), we (a) include stocks that were actively trading in 2020, and (b) calculate

weekly stock returns (in percentage) using dividend-adjusted closing prices on the last trading day

of the week.

       Table 1 and Figure 3 summarize the stock return data. As shown in Table 1, the mean and
median weekly returns is -2.4% and -1% respectively, documenting the general decline in stock

prices. Figure 3 illustrates cumulative global stock returns by economy, showing that almost all

markets fell by 20 to 40% from their 2020 high to their 2020 low during the first quarter.



2.3 Financial conditions

       We retrieve corporate financial data from the Worldscope database of Thomson Reuters

Eikon. We use financial data in 2018, which is the most recent year data.

       In evaluating how a firm’s pre-2020 financial conditions shape its stock price movements

during the COVID-19 pandemic, we consider four basic financial characteristics: Firm Size,

Leverage, Cash, and ROA. Firm Size equals the natural logarithm of the book value of total assets.

Leverage equals the ratio of total debt divided by total assets. Cash equals the total amount of cash

and short-term investments divided by total assets. ROA is the ratio of net income to total assets.
                                                                                                                  13


Given the adverse impact of the pandemic on cash flows and liquidity, preexisting corporate

financial conditions may shape the response of stock prices to the evolution of COVID-19 cases.



2.4 Global supply chain

         We obtain data on firms’ international supply chains and customer locations from FactSet

Revere database. The Revere database includes information from corporate annual reports and

regulatory filings, investor presentations, press releases, websites, and corporate actions. One

unique feature of the Revere data is that it contains both direct relationships (relationships

disclosed by the reporting company) and reverse relationships (relationships disclosed by

companies doing business with the company), so that it offers a relatively comprehensive coverage

of companies’ global supply chain networks. 5 The Revere database provides information on

supplier relationships for more than 20,000 publicly traded companies in 2019, involving over

255,132 such connections. We use each firm’s supply-chain relations to infer the firm’s supply-

chain exposure to each country. Revere also provides data on each firm’s revenues by country in

2019, which we use to measure each firm’s customer exposure by country.

         Specifically, Suppliers’ exposure equals the weighted average of COVID19 among the

foreign countries in which the firm’s suppliers are situated, where the weights are the proportion

of the firm’s pre-pandemic supplies from a country and COVID19 varies weekly as defined above.
Similarly, Customers’ exposure equals the weighted average of COVID19 among the foreign

countries in which the firm sells its products, where the weights are the proportion of the firm’s

pre-pandemic revenues in a country. We use these two measures to examine whether and the extent

to which stock markets “price” a corporation’s exposure to the pandemic via its suppliers and

customers.


5
  For example, Bayerische Motoren Werke AG (BMW) does not report the chemical producer BASF as its supplier.
However, from BASF Group’s reports, we observe that BMW is a customer of BASF, i.e., BASF is a supplier to
BMW. Thus, identifying these types of “reverse relationships” provides a more complete picture of corporate supply
chains. For a detailed description of the Revere database, see https://open.factset.com/products/factset-supply-chain-
relationships/en-us.
                                                                                               14


       As reported in Table 1, the sample mean and standard deviation of Suppliers’ exposure are

0.63 and 0.57 respectively for firms that had some exposure to foreign suppliers. This shows the

large cross-firm differences in exposure to COVID-19 through their international supply chains.

The message holds for firms’ different exposure to COVID-19 through their international

customers. Among firms with non-zero revenues from foreign countries, the sample mean and

standard deviation of Customers’ exposure are 0.47 and 0.5, respectively



2.5 CSR

       We retrieve information on firms’ CSR performance from the Thomson Reuters ASSET4

ESG database, where ESG stand for Environment, Social, and Governance. Since 2002, Thomson

Reuters has collected information from corporate annual reports, stock exchange filings, corporate

socially responsible reports, non-profit organizations, the news media, and a variety of other

sources. It uses this information to quantify CSR performance for large, publicly-traded firms.

When merging the ASSET4 data with our other firm-level data, we obtain CSR performance data

in 2018 on 6,135 publicly listed firms in 56 economies.
       Thomson Reuters ASSET4 collects over 132 individual indicators of firms’ CSR activities

and then forms indexes that focus on particular CSR activities. We focus on three indexes linked

to each firm’s commitment to (1) the environment, including resource use, emissions, and green

innovation, (2) non-shareholder stakeholders and social themes, including employee welfare,

human rights, and the ethical treatment of customers, suppliers, and the communities in which the

firm operates, and (3) operationalizing and implementing CSR activities. We now provide an

overview of these three indexes in Appendix Table A1.

       The Environmental index is composed of information on three subcomponents, Resource

Use, Emission Reduction, and Green Innovation. Resource Use “… reflects a company’s

performance and capacity to reduce the use of materials, energy or water, and to find more eco-
                                                                                                                    15


efficient solutions by improving supply chain management.”6 (Thomson Reuters, 2018, p. 15)

Emission Reduction “… measures a company’s commitment and effectiveness towards reducing

environmental emission in the production and operational processes.”7 (Thomson Reuters, 2018,

p. 15). Green Innovation “… reflects a company’s capacity to reduce the environmental costs and

burdens for its customers, thereby creating new market opportunities through new environmental

technologies and processes or eco-designed products.”8 (Thomson Reuters, 2018, p. 15).

         The Social index aggregates information on the extent to which firms enhance employee

welfare (Workforce), promote human rights (Human Rights), engage in community development

(Community), and fulfill their responsibilities to consumers (Product Responsibility). Workforce

captures “… a company’s effectiveness towards job satisfaction, a healthy and safe workplace,

maintaining diversity and equal opportunities, and development opportunities for its workforce.”9
(Thomson Reuters, 2018, p. 15) Human Rights measures the degree to which a company respects

human rights, e.g., whether a company has a policy to (a) ensure the respect of human rights in
6
  Resource Use aggregates data from 19 indicators that include information on (1) the extent to which companies have
policies to improve water efficiency, energy efficiency, and use sustainable packaging; (2) the actual resource use
efficiency of companies, including measures such as the ratio of energy consumption to net sales, the proportion of
energy generated from renewable energy, and the ratio of water usage to net sales; and (3) the degree to which
companies provide detailed data and reports on achieving their own stated initiatives to reduce the use of toxic
substances, build environmentally friendly or green buildings, and lessen the degradation of land owned, leased, or
managed by the firm or the overall environmental impact of firms in its supply-chain.
7
  Emission Reduction aggregates data from 22 indicators that include information on (1) the extent to which companies
have policies or targets to reduce emissions; (2) firms actual emissions of toxic chemical and other pollutants; and (3)
the degree to which companies provide detailed data and reports on (a) environmental protection expenditures, (b)
their stated initiatives to reduce pollution emissions and their adverse effects on biodiversity, (c) participation in
emissions trading initiative and collaboration with environmentally-focused NGOs or other organizations, (d) whether
firms have policies to recycle electronic waste, such as computers and air conditioners.
8
  Green Innovation aggregates data from 20 indicators that include information on (1) whether companies (a) report
on at least one product line or service that is designed to have positive effects on the environment or which is
environmentally labeled and marketed, (b) develop products or technologies for use in the clean, renewable energy
(such as wind, solar, hydro and geo-thermal and biomass power), (c) develop products or technologies that are used
for water treatment, purification or that improve water use efficiency, (d) develop products and services that improve
the energy efficiency or sustainability of buildings, (e) develop new products to reduce noise emissions, (f) show
initiatives to produce or promote organic products, and (2) actual corporate investments in green technology, such as
the ratio of environmental R&D expenditures to the revenues, the proportion of energy distributed or produced from
renewable energy sources, and average fuel consumption of the firms’ fleet of vehicles.
9
  Workforce aggregates data on 29 indicators that include information on (a) the degree of employee satisfaction,
whether a company provides flexible working hours and day care services for its employees; (b) the number of
occupational-generated diseases, injuries, and fatalities, as well as the amount of company resources to devoted to
employee health and safety; (c) diversity and inclusion, such as the percentage of women employees, women managers,
employees with disabilities, and whether the company has and implements policies to advance diversity and equal
opportunity; and (d) employee training and career development.
                                                                                                                   16


general, (b) ensure the freedom of association of its employees, (c) avoid the use of child labor and

forced labor, and (d) use human rights criteria in selecting suppliers. Product Responsibility gauges

“… a company’s capacity to produce quality goods and services integrating the customer’s health

and safety, integrity and data privacy.”10 (Thomson Reuters, 2018, p. 15). Community measures

“… a company’s commitment towards being a good citizen, protecting public health and

respecting business ethics.” 11 (Thomson Reuters, 2018, p. 15). The Community component

includes inter alia, measures of whether firms (a) publicize a code of conduct to avoid bribery and

corruption, maintain the highest level of general business ethics, improve its good corporate

citizenship, and operate as a fair competitor; (b) sell some products or services at a discount in

emerging markets, conduct research and development on drugs for diseases in the developing

world, and (c) follow international guidelines and provisions such as the OECD Guidelines for

Multinational Enterprises, and Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.

         The CSR Strategy index includes information on the degree to which firms organize,

operationalize, and implement CSR strategies. It covers whether firms (a) have a CSR

sustainability committee, (b) publish CSR/Health&Safety/Sustainability reports, and whether

those reports are published in accordance with the Global Report Initiative Guidelines, (c) have an

external audit on CSR related issues, (d) explicitly integrate financial and extra-financial factors

in the management discussion and analysis section of the annual reports, and (e) explain how it

engages with its stakeholders.



10
   Product Responsibility aggregates data on 12 indicators that include information on whether companies (a) have
policies to protect customer health and safety, protect customer and general public privacy and integrity, adopt
responsible marketing ensuring protection of children, to comply with fair trade rules, regulations, and norms; (b)
develop or market products and services that foster specific health and safety benefits for the consumers (such as safe
cars), and exclude potentially harmful products from its retail offering (e.g., genetically modified organisms (GMOs),
alcohol, tobacco); and (c) monitor the impact of products or services on consumers or the community more generally.
11
   Community aggregates data on 14 indicators that include, inter alia, measures of whether firms (a) publicize a code
of conduct to avoid bribery and corruption, maintain the highest level of general business ethics, improve its good
corporate citizenship, and operate as a fair competitor; (b) sell some products or services at a discount in emerging
markets, conduct research and development on drugs for diseases in the developing world, and (c) follow international
guidelines and provisions such as the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, and Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative.
                                                                                                 17


       We average these three indexes to form an overall measure of CSR performance: CSR

Score. We focus most of our analyses on this aggregate index, but also separately examine the

three underlying indexes: Environmental, Social, and CSR Strategy.



2.6 Corporate governance

       Thomson Reuters ASSET4 also empirically characterizes corporate governance systems

based on over 100 indicators. Using 2018 values, we use measures of the structure of corporate

boards, anti-takeover devices, and executive compensation policies.

       We examine five measures of the structure of corporate boards: (1) Board Size Policy

equals one if the firm has a policy regarding the size of its board; (2) Board Independence Policy

equals one if the firm has a policy regarding the independence of its board; and (3) CEO-Chairman

Duality equals one if an individual holds (or has held) both the position of CEO and chair of the

board of this company. Some research suggests that board size and independence can shape board

integrity and effectiveness, and that separating CEO and board chair responsibilities can influence

executive entrenchment.
       Regarding firms’ anti-takeover devices that can shape executive entrenchment and

corporate flexibility, we use a measure of anti-takeover provisions. Antitakeover Devices equals

the number of anti-takeover devices in place if there are more than two anti-takeover devices and

zero otherwise. The data cover an array of anti-takeover devices, including poison pills, classified

boards, blank checks, supermajority votes, dual-class shares, golden parachutes, limited

shareholder rights to call for special meetings, cumulative voting rights, pre-emptive rights,

company cross shareholdings, confidential voting policies, limited director liability, shareholder

approval of significant transactions, fair price provisions, limitations on removal of directors,

advance notice for shareholder proposals, written consent requirements, and expanded

constituency provisions. Each of these devices can impede takeovers.

       For executive compensation, we consider five features of each firm’s approach to executive

compensation. Executive Compensation Performance Policy equals one if the firm has a
                                                                                                     18


performance-based compensation policy for the higher-level executives and board members.

Executive Compensation LT Objectives equals one if executive and board compensation are

partially linked to longer-term objectives, i.e., objectives that are more than two years in the future.

Given the extensive body research investigating executive compensation (e.g., Jensen and Murphy

1990; Murphy 2013; Rau 2015; Hermalin and Weisbach 2017), we examine whether these

corporate characteristics influence stock price reactions to COVID-19.



2.7 Ownership structure

        Thomson Reuters provides ownership data for publicly listed firms. It gathers information

from a variety of sources, such as regulatory filings, regulatory agencies, company reports, third

party vendors, financial publications, and newspapers. Thus, the ownership data includes holdings

of institutions and fund portfolios, non-financial companies, individuals, and government

agencies. We use each firm’s pre-pandemic ownership structure.

       Based on the Thomson Reuters data, we classify investors into eight investor types (1)

Investment Advisor/Research Firm, referring to mutual funds, investment and asset management
companies, such as Vanguard, Fidelity, BlackRock, and the investment bank, asset management,

and securities of financial companies, (2) Hedge Fund refers to a hedge fund management firm

that is permitted to use aggressive strategies that are unavailable to traditional funds, including

selling short, leverage, program trading, swaps, arbitrage and derivatives. Examples of hedge fund

investors    include     Citadel,    Two      Sigma,     and     Renaissance      Technologies,     (3)

Bank/Trust/Insurance/Pension Fund, referring to traditional financial institutions, including

commercial banks, trust companies, pension funds, and insurance companies, (4) Individual refers

to individual wealthy investors or officers and directors, (5) Corporation that includes holding

companies and non-financial corporations, which represent entities that do not invest for purposes

of investment management, but rather invest for strategic stakes in companies; (6) Government,

referring to government agencies, (7) Sovereign Wealth Fund, and (8) PE/VC that include private

equity and venture capital.
                                                                                                19


       In constructing variables of ownership structure, we focus on blockholders, i.e., investors

who own at least 5% of the total outstanding shares. For each investor type, we construct three

measures of ownership. To illustrate, consider the investor type Hedge Fund. For each firm, we

calculate the (a) the total percentage of shareholdings by Hedge Fund blockholders, (b) the

percentage of shareholdings by the largest Hedge Fund blockholder, and (c) the aggregate

percentage of shareholdings by the top five Hedge Fund blockholders. Each of these three

measures is constructed using ownership structure measured prior to the pandemic. We construct

similar measures for each of the eight investor types.



2.8 Country characteristics

       Although we include economy-time fixed effects in our core analyses to condition out all

time-invariant and time-varying country/economy traits, we also present regression results in

which we omit economy-time fixed effects and instead control for specific country characteristics.

To capture the overall level and growth rate of economic development, we include GDP per capita

(the natural logarithm of GDP per capita) and GDP Growth (the growth rate of GDP) in 2018. We
include these measures as economic development shapes the degree to which countries can

respond effectively to the pandemic and hence how stock markets respond. Furthermore, we

include %population (aged above 65), which is the percentage of population aged above 65 among

the total population of a country. We include this demographic indicator since older people are

especially vulnerable to COVID-19. These data are from the World Bank’s World Development

Indicators for the year of 2018, the latest year with data.

       State power, freedom of expression, and the media can also play a role. We include dummy

variables for the country’s legal heritage: Common, French, German, Scandinavian or Socialist

law. We include these because (1) the popular press in 2020 has suggested that countries with

greater state power, relative to the power of individuals, can marshal a more effective response to

the pandemic and (2) research argues that civil and socialist legal traditions give much greater

power to the state than the common law (Hayek 1960; La Porta et al 1998, 1999; Levine 2005).
                                                                                                     20


We also examine Voice and Accountability, which measures the ability of individuals in an

economy to choose their governments, express their views freely, associate with whom they

choose, experience a free press, and hold government officials accountable. Voice and

Accountability, which is obtained from the World Bank’s World Governance Indicators in 2018,

is constructed so that higher values indicate greater individual voice in public affairs and greater

press freedom.


3. Empirical Results

3.1 Model specification

       To evaluate how corporate characteristics shape stock price movements in response to the

COVID-19 pandemic, we use the following regression model.


     ;2:&,# = <' + = × !"#$%19!,# + ?@.(,)*+,-,- × !"#$%19!,# + A& + A/,# + A!,# + B&,# ,           (1)



where i, c, j, and t index firm, country/economy, industry, and week, respectively. The dependent

variable, Reti,t, is the weekly stock return of firm i from the last trading day in week t-1 to the last
trading day in week t. COVID19c,t is the growth rate of the cumulative number of confirmed cases

in economy c from in week t. Equation (1) includes an array of interactions between pre-pandemic
firm characteristics, @.(,)*+,-,- , and COVID19, where @.(,)*+,-,- includes measures of financial

conditions, international exposure through suppliers and customers, CSR, governance, and

ownership. The inclusion of firm (A& ) and industry-time (two-digit SIC industry by week) fixed
effects (A/,# ) conditions out time-invariant differences across firms and time-varying factors across

industries. Our core analyses also include economy-time fixed effects (A!,# ) to condition out all

time-varying and time-invariant economy traits, such as differences in legal and political systems,

policy reactions to the crisis, institutions and cultural norms, demographic, and other cross-

economy traits. In these core analyses, therefore, the linear COVID19 term, which varies at the

economy-by-time level, drops from the regressions. In some specifications, we omit the economy-
                                                                                                  21


time fixed effects, so that we can shed empirical light on how specific country characteristics

influence stock price reactions to the pandemic. We estimate Equation (1) using ordinary least

squares (OLS), with robust standard errors clustered at the firm level.

       As a preliminary benchmark, we simply assess the relationship between stock returns and

economies’ exposure to the COVID-19 pandemic. That is, we exclude all the interaction terms
(@.(,)*+,-,- × COVID19) and the economy-time fixed effects (A!,# ) and estimate equation (1). As

shown in columns 1 and 2 of Table 2, COVID19 enters negatively and significantly, suggesting

that an economy’s exposure to the pandemic is strongly and negatively correlated with the stock

market performance of firms in that economy. The results hold when including (column 1) or

excluding data from the month of January 2020 (column 2). In terms of economic magnitudes, the

coefficient estimates from column 1 indicate that if the COVID-19 cases grow at the sample

average value (which is about 1.3 of a percentage point) in an economy, then stock prices among

firms in that economy tend to fall by about 1.5 percentage points more per week (=1.3*-1.16). This

is material, as it equals 62.8% of the sample mean value of weekly stock returns over this period

(-2.4 percentage points). Accumulating, the estimated impact of this sample average increase in

COVID19 over two-months translates into an additional 12 percentage point drop in stock prices.

Figure 4 also demonstrates a negative correlation between stock market performance in an

economy and the economy’s exposure to the COVID19 pandemic.



3.2 Corporate financial conditions

       We begin by examining four basic financial conditions and report these results in Table 2.
Using the core specification that includes firm, industry-time, and economy-time fixed effects

(Column 6), we find that the interactions between COVID19 and Cash and ROA enter positively

and significantly, and the interaction with Leverage enters negatively and significantly. These

findings are intuitively plausible: as measured by stock price performance, firms with more cash,

larger profits, and less debt were more resilient to the pandemic’s effect on corporate sales, costs,

and financing and liquidity constraints. The estimated impact of these corporate characteristics on
                                                                                                 22


pandemic-induced stock price changes are robust to (a) excluding economy-time effects and all

country traits (column 3) or (b) excluding economy-time effects and instead conditioning on an

array of specific country characteristics interacted with COVID19 (columns 4 – 5). It is also worth

noting that each of these specific financial conditions enters significantly and robustly when they

are included simultaneously. We do not, however, find a robust relationship between firm size and

stock price reactions to the pandemic that is independent of corporate cash levels, leverage ratios,

and profitability.

        To illustrate the economic impacts of Cash, ROA, and Leverage on the sensitivity of stock

returns to COVID-19, consider the core specification with economy-time effects. The coefficient

estimates from column 6 indicate that a one standard deviation increase in a firm’s pre-2020 Cash

and ROA would reduce the negative stock price reactions to the pandemic by 0.13 (=0.685*0.196)

and 0.2 (=1.94*0.124) percentage points, respectively. And, a one standard deviation increase in

a firm’s pre-2020 Leverage would intensify the negative stock price reaction to the pandemic by

0.25 percentage points (=1.2*0.204), respectively. This is equivalent to 5.6%, 10%, and 10.3% of

the sample mean value of weekly stock returns (-2.4). From another perspective, consider (a) two
otherwise similar firms in the same industry and economy except that one firm has a leverage ratio

at the 25th percentile (0.103) and the other is at the 75th percentile (0.395), and (b) the average

stock price reactions to COVID-19 growth equals -1.16 (column 1 of Table 2). Holding other
things constant, the column 6 coefficient estimates imply that the stock price of the high-leverage

firm would fall by 27% more than the other firm (= (-1.16-1.209 *0.395)/ (-1.16-1.209 *0.103) -

1). Using a similar comparison, a low-Cash firm (pre-2020 Cash = 0.039) would experience 11%

(= (-1.16+0.685*0.039)/ (-1.16+0.685*0.203) -1) more drop in stock returns than a high-Cash firm

(pre-2020 Cash = 0.203).

        Table 2 also provides estimates on country specific factors. First, coefficient estimates on

GDP per capita * COVID19 are positive and statistically significant, suggesting that stock markets

in richer economies have weathered the pandemic better than those in poorer economies. Second,

coefficient estimates on %Population (aged above 65) * COVID19 are negative and statistically
                                                                                                  23


significant, suggesting that stock prices in economies with a larger proportion of the population

aged over 65 have experienced much sharper declines. Third, legal tradition is strongly connected

to stock price changes during the pandemic. In particular, we discover that firms in economies

with French, German, and socialist legal traditions experienced milder stock price declines than

those with a common law tradition. To the extent that legal origin captures state vs.

individual/court power, these results suggest that markets viewed states with more power as better

able to address the public health crisis, mitigating stock price declines. Fourth, we find that the

degree of press freedom and individual voice in the political process is not significantly associated

with stock performance when conditioning on other country traits.



3.3 Global supply chain and international customer exposure

       We next examine how a corporations’ exposure to COVID-19 through their global supply

chains and customer locations affect their stock prices. To the extent that firms’ suppliers and

customers are situated in countries more affected by COVID-19, we expect those firms to

experience greater disruptions to production and sales and hence larger stock price declines. To
evaluate how firms’ international supply chains and customers locations shape their stock price

movements in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, we estimate equation (1) while controlling

for Suppliers’ exposure and Customers’ exposure.

       The results reported in Table 3 show that firms experience larger stock price declines when

their networks of suppliers and customers are situated in economies more affected by COVID-19.

As shown, Suppliers’ exposure and Customers’ exposure enter negatively and statistically

significantly in all columns. The results hold whether including Suppliers’ exposure and

Customers’ exposure separately or simultaneously. Critically, the results are also robust to

including (1) the interactions between COVID19 and corporate financial conditions from Table 2

(Firm Size, Leverage, Cash, and ROA) and (2) the full array of firm, industry-time, and economy-

time fixed (or when instead conditioning on particular country-specific traits). These results
                                                                                                  24


indicate that stock prices reflect the degree to which firms are differentially exposed to COVID-

19 through their international connections.

       To illustrate the estimated economic magnitudes, consider the specification that includes

the most complete set of controls (column 6). The estimates indicate that a one standard deviation

increase in a firm’s suppliers and customers exposure to COVID-19 would raise the negative stock

price reactions to the pandemic by 0.12% (=0.212*0.573) and 0.26% (=0.518*0.505), respectively.

This is equivalent to 5% and 11% of the sample mean value of weekly stock returns (-2.4%). As

another illustration, consider (a) two otherwise similar firms except that one firm has Customers’

exposure at the 25th percentile (0.105) and the other is at the 75th percentile (0.709) and (b) the

two firms operate in the same foreign countries experience value of COVID19 equal to 1.3 (which

is equal to the sample average growth rate). Holding other factors constant, our Table 3 results

from column 6 imply that the stock price of the more internationally exposed firm would fall by

3.25 percentage points more than the less exposed firm (=0.518*(0.709-0.105)*1.3*8) over two

months.



3.4 CSR

       In this subsection, we assess the differential sensitivity of stock price reactions to COVID-

19 as a function of firms’ pre-existing levels of social responsibility. While some research suggests
that CSR activities provide private benefits to executives at the expense of shareholders (e.g.,

Pagano and Volpin 2005; Benabou and Tirole 2010; and Masulis and Reza 2015), other work

emphasizes that CSR builds trust with stakeholders that have both long-run efficiency benefits and

that make firms more resilient to negative shocks (e.g., Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales, 2008; Deng,

Kang, and Low, 2013; Lins, Servaes, and Tamayo, 2017). Thus, our examination contributes to

this debate.

       To make this assessment, we use equation (1) and include the interaction between our firm-

level CSR measures and COVID19. In particular, we separately examine the interaction term using

the overall CSR index (CSR score) and each of its three sub-indexes: Environmental, Social, and
                                                                                                  25


CSR Strategy. In our core regressions presented in the even numbered columns in Table 4, we

condition on each of the firm-specific financial conditions interacted with COVID19, as well as

firm, industry-time, and economy-time fixed effects. For completeness, we report the results that

exclude economy-time effects and instead include the specific country traits discussed above in

the odd numbered columns in Table 4.

       The results presented in Table 4 suggest that the stock prices of corporations with greater

pre-2020 scores of CSR performance fall less in response to COVID-19. This result emerges when

examining the overall index, CSR score, and when examining each of the sub-indexes:

Environmental, Social, and CSR Strategy. In particular, the interaction between COVID19 and

each of these four CSR measures enters positively and significantly. The results are consistent with

the view that CSR investments strengthen the informal ties between a firm and its workers,

suppliers, customers, and other stakeholders, enabling the firm to more effectively and efficiently

work with those stakeholders, and enhance the firm’s likelihood of survival and future success.

       The estimated coefficients suggest that corporate CSR differences materially influence

stock return reactions to COVID-19. Consider, for example, the overall index, CSR score, and our
core specification (from column 2). Consider two otherwise similar firms in the same industry and

economy. One has a pre-2020 CSR score at the 25th percentile and the other is at the 75th percentile.

Our estimates suggest that the average weekly stock returns of the high-CSR score firm would
decline by 0.23 (= 0.548*1.3*(0.674 - 0.343)) percentage points less than the low-CSR score firm

in response to the average growth of COVID19 cases (1.3). Cumulating, the stock price of the high

CSR score firm would be 2 percentage points higher two months after the outbreak of the

pandemic. Thus, the stock price reaction to COVID19 for the high-CSR score firm would be 19%

less than the low-CSR score firm (= (-1.16+0.548 *0.674)/ (-1.16+0.548 *0.343) -1) based on the

average stock price reactions in column 1 of Table 2.
                                                                                                 26


3.5 Corporate governance

        We next examine measures of corporate governance. To the extent that the pandemic

induces stock markets to put a premium on corporate flexibility, including the ability to be

purchased by another firm or to change leadership, stronger antitakeover devices and greater

executive entrenchment might induce larger stock price declines. In addition, theories of tunneling

suggest that periods of great uncertainty and tumult might create opportunities for insiders to

extract private rents at the expense of other stakeholders (e.g., Johnson et al. 2000). This view

predicts that firms that impede the takeovers and grant greater authority to executives and insiders

will suffer greater stock price declines during the spread of COVID-19. To assess these

predictions, we include the interactions of COVID19 with several corporate governance measures

of board structure, anti-takeover devices, and executive compensation policies.

        Results in Table 5 indicate that firms with more entrenched executives tend to experience

greater stock price declines during the COVID-19 crisis. Consider the results on Antitakeover

Devices which tend to impede takeovers and protect executives. As shown in columns 1 and 2, the

interaction between Antitakeover Devices and COVID19 enters negatively and significantly,
indicating that stock prices of firms with more anti-takeover provisions fall faster in response to

COVID-19 than firms with fewer anti-takeover provisions. These results are consistent with the

view that stock markets viewed executive entrenchment negatively in assessing corporation

resilience to the crisis.

        To illustrate the estimated economic importance of executive entrenchment on stock price

reactions to the pandemic, consider the coefficient estimates on the Antitakeover Devices-

COVID19 interaction term. Consider two otherwise similar firms in an industry. One has pre-2020

Antitakeover Devices at the 25th percentile (1) of the sample distribution of Antitakeover Devices

and the other firm is at the 75th percentile (6). The coefficient estimates in column 2 of Table 5

suggest that the average weekly stock return of the high-Antitakeover Devices firm would decline

by 0.25 (= -0.038*1.29*(6-1)) percentage points more than the otherwise similar low-Antitakeover

Devices firm. That is, the high-Antitakeover Devices firm would experience stock price declines
                                                                                                                 27


of 24% more than the low- Antitakeover Devices firm (= (-1.16-0.038 *6)/ (-1.16+0.038 *1) -1)

based on the average stock price reactions in column 1 of Table 2).

        Table 5 provides results on two other features of corporate governance: the structure of the

board of directors and executive compensation policies. We examine several features of the board

emphasized in the literature on corporate governance: the size of the board (Board Size Policy),

the degree of independence of board members from the executive (Board Independence Policy),

and whether the positions of CEO and Board Chair are split (CEO-Chairman Duality). We also

examine two features of executive compensation: whether the company has pay-for-performance

compensation policy (Executive Compensation Performance Policy) and whether pay-for-

performance is connected to long-run objectives (Executive Compensation LT Objectives. As

shown, none of the features of board structure or executive compensation enters significantly.

There is no evidence that corporate stock price reactions to COVID-19 vary systematically with

board structure or executive compensations systems.12



3.6 Ownership structure

        Finally, we examine corporate ownership. In particular, we examine whether stock price

sensitivity to COVID-19 is associated with the identity of a firm’s blockholders (i.e., Investment

Advisor/Research Firm, Hedge Fund, Bank/Trust/Insurance/Pension Fund, Individual Investors,
Corporation, Government, Sovereign Wealth Fund, and PE/VC. The stock prices of firms owned

by different types of investors might react differently to the pandemic. For example, hedge funds

might be more focused on pursuing short-run stock performance and engaging in high-frequency

trading than other blockholders. As a result, they might be more likely to sell shares quickly in

response to news about COVID-19, generating downward pressure on the prices of companies in


12
   In Table 5, we report the results on board structure (columns 3 and 4) while including the three measures of board
structure simultaneously. Similarly, we report the results on executive compensation (columns 5 and 6) while
including the two indicators of executive compensation simultaneously. In Appendix Table A2, we examine each of
the three board measures and two compensation measures independently. Each of these five indicators also enters
insignificantly when examined independently.
                                                                                                                   28


which they are large shareholders.13 As another example, if a firm has a large, strategic corporate

investor as a major block shareholder, then the market might expect this blockholder to provide

support for this firm during the crisis, dampening the impact of COVID-19 on the firm. Empirically

we evaluate these views of ownership structure by adding the interactions of COVID19 with each

of the eight ownership measures to equation 1.

         Results reported in Table 6 suggest that (a) the stock prices of firms owned by hedge funds

perform worse during the COVID-19 crisis, and (b) the stock prices of firms owned by non-

financial corporations perform better. As shown, Hedge Fund * COVID19 enters negatively and

significantly, while Corporation * COVID19 enters positively and significantly in all

specifications.     Other      investor     types,     such     as    Investment      Advisor/Research          Firm,

Bank/Trust/Insurance/Pension Fund, or PE/VC do not exhibit any significant relationship with

corporate resilience to the pandemic. The results hold when measuring each type of ownership

using the percentage of shareholdings among all blockholders, the largest blockholder, and the top

five blockholders. These findings are consistent with the view that hedge funds sell their shares

rapidly in response to new information about COVID-19 cases or to meet liquidity needs (e.g.,

Stein 2009; Khandani and Lo 2011), putting downward pressure on prices, whereas owners with

long-run, strategic commitments to firms (such as large corporations) mute the impact of the

pandemic on stock prices. To illustrate the economic magnitude, we focus on Hedge Fund and

Corporation, using the coefficient estimates from column 2 of Table 6. Consider two otherwise

similar firms in an industry, and one has a pre-existing Corporation ownership equal to one

standard deviation equal to 0.228, the other equal to 0. Our estimates suggest that the average stock

return of the high-Corporation-owned firm would decline by 0.19 (= 0.651*1.29*0.228)

percentage points less per week in response to the average economy-wide exposure to the

COVID19 shock (1.29) than the otherwise similar firm. That is, compared to the firm without any

13
   In 2015, Laurence Fink, the chairman and CEO of BlackRock, the world’s largest institutional investor, argued that
“...response to the acute pressure, growing with every quarter, for companies to meet short-term financial goals at the
expense of building long-term value. This pressure originates from a number of sources–the proliferation of activist
shareholders seeking immediate returns, ...”.
                                                                                                  29


pre-existing Corporation ownership, the stock price of the firm with Corporation ownership equal

to one standard deviation (0.228) would drop less by about 1.5 percentage points two months after

the spread of COVID-19. In contrast, compared to the firm with zero pre-existing Hedge Fund

block ownership, the stock price of the firm with Hedge Fund ownership (equal to one standard

deviation: 0.047) would decline by more than 1.2 percentage points more over two months in

response to an average economy-wide exposure to COVID-19.



3.7 Corporate characteristics: Simultaneous analyses

       In Table 7, we simultaneously examine all five pre-2020 corporate characteristics:

corporate financial conditions, international supply chain and customer exposure to the pandemic,

corporate social responsibility, corporate governance systems, and ownership structure. Using

equation 1 and core specification, we add the five corporate characteristics in a stepwise manner,

ultimately including all of the corporate traits simultaneously in column (3). Since many firm traits

might be correlated, we include them simultaneously to assess the independent connection between

stock price reactions to COVID-19 and each of these corporate characteristics. In particular,
besides conditioning on firm, industry-by-time, and economy-by-time fixed effects, we include

the interactions between COVID19 and (1) the four financial condition indicators (Firm size,

Leverage, Cash, and ROA), (2) the measures of each firms exposure to the pandemic through

international supply chain and customers (Suppliers’ exposure and Customers’ exposure), (3) each

firm’s measure of overall socially responsible activities (CSR score), (4) the extent to which a

firm’s corporate governance system contains antitakeover devices (Antitakeover Devices), which

help entrench executives, and (5) the firm’s ownership structure, in particular the extent to which

a hedge fund or other corporation owns the firm (Hedge Fund and Corporation, respectively).

       As shown in Table 7, each of the indicators enters statistically significantly, with the same

sign and similar estimated coefficient as the earlier findings (Tables 2 – 6). The consistency of

estimated coefficient on these five corporate characteristics across various specifications

highlights the independent connection between each of these corporate characteristics and the
                                                                                                    30


sensitivity of stock prices to the COVID-19 pandemic. This suggests that these indicators of firm

traits indeed capture different aspects of corporate resilience, not the same factor being proxied by

different covariates.



4. Conclusion

       Which characteristics shape corporate immunity to the COVID-19 pandemic? To shed

empirical light on this question, we evaluated the connection between corporate characteristics and

stock price reactions to COVID-19 using data on over 6,000 firms across 56 economies during the

first quarter of 2020. While the economic turmoil triggered by COVID-19 is different from past

crises, we consider corporate characteristics that have been the focus of research for decades. In

particular, we examine stock price reactions to COVID-19 cases as functions of five pre-2020 firm

traits: (1) financial conditions, such as cash holdings, leverage, and profitability, (2) international

supply chain and customer locations, which provides information on each firm’s exposure to

COVID-19 through its international connections, (3) CSR activities, (4) corporate governance

systems, such as antitakeover mechanisms, board structures, and executive compensation policies,
and (5) ownership structures, such as the identities of firms’ large blockholders.

       We find the following. First, firms with stronger pre-2020 financial conditions—more

cash, less debt, and larger profits—experienced better stock price reactions to COVID-19 than

otherwise similar firms. Second, firms’ international exposure to COVID-19 mattered. The

pandemic-induced drop in stock prices was larger among firms that were more exposed to the

COVID-19 pandemic through their international supply chains and customer locations. Third,

firms stronger CSR policies and activities prior to the pandemic experienced superior stock price

performance in response to COVID-19. These findings are consistent with the view that CSR

builds trust with stakeholders, which makes workers, suppliers, and customers more amenable to

making adjustments to support the business in times of duress. Fourth, firms with less entrenched

executives performed better in response to COVID-19 cases. These findings are consistent with

the view that in assessing responses to the pandemic, markets positively priced flexibility,
                                                                                            31


including mergers, acquisitions, and leadership changes, and governance systems that limit

tunneling. Fifth, the identity of firms’ large owners are strongly associated with stock price

reactions to COVID-19 cases: (a) the stock prices of firms owned by hedge funds perform worse,

and (b) the stock prices of firms owned by non-financial corporations perform better. These

findings are consistent with the view that hedge funds sell their shares rapidly in response to

negative information about COVID-19 cases, intensifying downward pressure on prices, while

owners with long-run, strategic commitments to firms (including large corporations), tend to

dampen the adverse impact of the pandemic on stock prices.
                                                                                          32


References

Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, 2012, The
     network origins of aggregate fluctuations, Econometrica 80, 1977-2016.

Acemoglu, Daron, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, 2017, Microeconomic origins
     of macroeconomic tail risks, American Economic Review 107, 54-108.

Aghion, Philippe, Nicholas Bloom, Brian Lucking, Raffaella Sadun, and John Van Reenen, 2017,
      Turbulence, firm decentralization and growth in bad times, National Bureau of Economic
      Research Working Paper Series No. 23354.

Albuquerque, Rui, Yrjö Koskinen, and Chendi Zhang, 2019, Corporate social responsibility and
      firm risk: Theory and empirical evidence, Management Science 65, 4451-4469.

Arrow, Kenneth, 1972, Gifts and exchanges, Philosophy and Public Affairs 343-362.

Bates, Thomas W., Kathleen M. Kahle, and René M. Stulz, 2009, Why do U.S. firms hold so much
        more cash than they used to?, Journal of Finance 64, 1985-2021.

Bebchuk, Lucian, Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell, 2009, What matters in corporate governance?,
      Review of Financial Studies 22, 783-827.

Beltratti, Andrea, and René M. Stulz, 2012, The credit crisis around the globe: Why did some
        banks perform better?, Journal of Financial Economics 105, 1-17.

Bénabou, Roland, and Jean Tirole, 2010, Individual and corporate social responsibility,
      Economica 77, 1-19.

Bernanke, Ben, 2020, Ben Bernanke on COVID-19 downturn, Marketplace, Available at
      https://www.marketplace.org/2020/03/23/former-fed-chair-bernanke-covid19-downturn/.

Claessens, Stijn, Simeon Djankov, and Larry H. P. Lang, 2000, The separation of ownership and
       control in East Asian Corporations, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 81-112.

Coase, R. H., 1937, The nature of the firm, Economica 4, 386-405.

Cremers, K.J. Martijn, and Vinay B. Nair, 2005, Governance mechanisms and equity prices,
      Journal of Finance 60, 2859-2894.

Deng, Xin, Jun-koo Kang, and Buen Sin Low, 2013, Corporate social responsibility and
      stakeholder value maximization: Evidence from mergers, Journal of Financial Economics
      110, 87-109.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2008, The
      law and economics of self-dealing, Journal of Financial Economics 88, 430-465.

Djankov, Simeon, Caralee McLiesh, Tatiana Nenova, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, Who owns the
      media?, Journal of Law and Economics 46, 341-382.
                                                                                              33


Dong, Ensheng, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner, 2020, An interactive web-based dashboard to
      track COVID-19 in real time, The Lancet Infectious Diseases.

Fahlenbrach, Rüdiger, and René M. Stulz, 2011, Bank CEO incentives and the credit crisis,
       Journal of Financial Economics 99, 11-26.

Giroud, Xavier, and Holger M. Mueller, 2011, Corporate governance, product market competition,
       and equity prices, Journal of Finance 66, 563-600.

Giroud, Xavier, and Holger M. Mueller, 2017, Firm leverage, consumer demand, and employment
       losses during the Great Recession, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 271-316.

Gompers, Paul, Joy Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, 2003, Corporate governance and equity prices,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 107-156.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2004, The role of social capital in financial
       development, American Economic Review 94, 526-556.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2008, Trusting the stock market, Journal of
       Finance 63, 2557-2600.

Guo, Lixiong, and Ronald W. Masulis, 2015, Board structure and monitoring: New evidence from
       CEO turnovers, Review of Financial Studies 28, 2770-2811.

Hanselaar, Rogier M., René M. Stulz, and Mathijs A. Van Dijk, 2019, Do firms issue more equity
       when markets become more liquid?, Journal of Financial Economics 133, 64-82.

Harford, Jarrad, 1999, Corporate cash reserves and acquisitions, Journal of Finance 54, 1969-1997.

Harford, Jarrad, Sattar A. Mansi, and William F. Maxwell, 2008, Corporate governance and firm
       cash holdings in the US, Journal of Financial Economics 87, 535-555.

Hayek, Friedrich A., 1960. The Constitution of Liberty (University of Chicago Press).

Hermalin, Benjamin E., and Michael S. Weisbach, 1998, Endogenously chosen boards of directors
      and their monitoring of the CEO, American Economic Review 96-118.

Hermalin, Benjamin E., and Michael S. Weisbach, 2003, Boards of directors as an endogenously
      determined institution: A survey of the economic literature, Economic Policy Review -
      Federal Reserve Bank of New York 9, 7-26.

Hermalin, Benjamin E., and Michael S. Weisbach, 2017. The Handbook of the Economics of
      Corporate Governance (Netherlands: North Holland).

Hertzel, Michael G., Zhi Li, Micah S. Officer, and Kimberly J. Rodgers, 2008, Inter-firm linkages
       and the wealth effects of financial distress along the supply chain, Journal of Financial
       Economics 87, 374-387.
                                                                                              34


Jensen, Michael C., 1988, Takeovers: Their causes and consequences, Journal of Economic
       Perspectives 2, 21-48.

Jensen, Michael C., and William H. Meckling, 1976, Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior,
       agency costs and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.

Jensen, Michael C., and Kevin J. Murphy, 1990, Performance pay and top-management incentives,
       Journal of Political Economy 98, 225-264.

Jensen, Michael C., and Richard S. Ruback, 1983, The market for corporate control: The scientific
       evidence, Journal of Financial Economics 11, 5-50.

Johnson, Simon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2000,
      Tunneling, American Economic Review 90, 22-27.

Kahle, Kathleen M., and René M. Stulz, 2013, Access to capital, investment, and the financial
       crisis, Journal of Financial Economics 110, 280-299.

Khandani, Amir E., and Andrew W. Lo, 2011, What happened to the quants in August 2007?
      Evidence from factors and transactions data, Journal of Financial Markets 14, 1-46.

Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer, 1997, Does social capital gave an economic payoff? A cross-
       country investigation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 1251-1288.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 1999, Corporate ownership
       around the world, Journal of Finance 54, 471-517.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2008, The economic
      consequences of legal origins, Journal of Economic Literature 46, 285-332.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1998, Law
       and finance, Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1999, The
       quality of government, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 222-279.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 2000,
      Investor protection and corporate governance, Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-27.

La Porta, Rafael, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, Trust in large organizations,
       American Economic Review 87, 333-338.

Laeven, Luc, and Ross Levine, 2008, Complex ownership structures and corporate valuations,
      Review of Financial Studies 21, 579-604.

Levine, Ross, 2005, Law, endowments and property rights, Journal of Economic Perspectives 19,
       61-88.
                                                                                                35


Lin, Chen, Yue Ma, Paul Malatesta, and Yuhai Xuan, 2011, Ownership structure and the cost of
       corporate borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics 100, 1-23.

Lins, Karl V., Henri Servaes, and Ane Tamayo, 2017, Social capital, trust, and firm performance:
       The value of corporate social responsibility during the financial crisis, Journal of Finance
       72, 1785-1824.

Lo, Andrew W., 2008. Hedge Funds: An Analytic Perspective (Princeton University Press).

Long, John B., and Charles I. Plosser, 1983, Real business cycles, Journal of Political Economy
       91, 39-69.

Masulis, Ronald W., and Syed Walid Reza, 2015, Agency problems of corporate philanthropy,
       Review of Financial Studies 28, 592-636.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1988, Management ownership and
      market valuation: An empirical analysis, Journal of Financial Economics 20, 293-315.

Morck, Randall, Daniel Wolfenzon, and Bernard Yeung, 2005, Corporate governance, economic
      entrenchment, and growth, Journal of Economic Literature 43, 655-720.

Murphy, Kevin J., 2013, Executive compensation: Where we are, and how we got there, in Milton
      Harris, and René Stulz, eds.: Handbook of the Economics of Finance (Elsevier B.V) 211-
      356.

Pagano, Marco, and Paolo Volpin, 2005, The political economy of corporate governance,
      American Economic Review 95, 1005-1030.

Pinkowitz, Lee, René M. Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2016, Do U.S. firms hold more cash than
      foreign firms do?, Review of Financial Studies 29, 309-348.

Putnam, Robert D., 1993. Making democracy work: Civic traditions in modern Italy (Princeton
      University Press, Princeton, N.J.).

Rau, Raghavendra, 2015, Executive Compensation, Foundations and Trends in Finance 10, 181-
      362.

Reinhart, Carmen M., 2020, This time truly is different, Project Syndicate, Available at
       https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/covid19-crisis-has-no-economic-
       precedent-by-carmen-reinhart-2020-03.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2009. This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of
       Financial Folly (Princeton University Press).

Schwartz-Ziv, Miriam, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2013, What do boards really do? Evidence from
      minutes of board meetings, Journal of Financial Economics 108, 349-366.
                                                                                         36


Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert W. Vishny, 1997, A survey of corporate governance, Journal of
        Finance 52, 737-783.

Stein, Jeremy C., 2009, Presidential address: Sophisticated investors and market efficiency,
        Journal of Finance 64, 1517-1548.

Thomson     Reuters,   2018,     Thomson    Reuters     ESG    Scores,    Available   at
     https://www.refinitiv.com/content/dam/marketing/en_us/documents/methodology/esg-
     scores-methodology.pdf.

Tirole, Jean, 2001, Corporate governance, Econometrica 69, 1-35.
                                                                                                                  37




Figure 1. Cumulative COVID19 Cases
This figure shows the cumulative COVID-19 confirmed cases around the world as of 2020 March 31st. Using data
provided by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University, we classify
economies into five groups based on the confirmed cases, namely (0, 50], (50, 500], (500, 5,000], (5,000, 50,000], and
above 50,000. Darker colors indicate a larger number of confirmed cases.




Figure 2. Growth Rates of COVID19 cases by Economy
This figure demonstrates the growth rate of the number of COVID19 cases in each of the 56 sample economies. The
x-axis denotes the number of days since the 100th confirmed cases in an economy. The y-axis denotes the cumulative
number of confirmed cases in a given economy. (Source: Johns Hopkins University, CSSE)
                                                                                                                 38




Figure 3. Stock Market Returns since the Spread of COVID-19
This figure plots the cumulative stock market returns since mid-January of 2020 for each of the 56 sample economies.
For each economy, we calculate the cumulative return using the dividend-adjusted Global Equity Index provided by
Thomson Reuters.




Figure 4. #COVID19 Confirmed Cases and Stock Return
This figure presents the cross-sectional relation between average weekly stock returns across firms in an economy and
the growth rate of COVID-19 cases. Each spot represents an economy. The x-axis denotes the average weekly growth
rate of COVID-19 cases in an economy since the number of confirmed cases in the economy exceeded 100. The y-
axis represents the weekly stock returns, averaged across the sample firms in an economy.
                                                                                                                                                   39


Table 1 Summary Statistics

This table presents the summary statistics of the key variables used in our analyses. The sample includes global publicly listed firms covered in the
Thomson Reuters Worldscope and ASSET4 ESG database. Firm- and economy-level statistics are calculated using 6,135 firms in 56 economies.

                                                           N         Mean      Std. Dev.      p10         p25          p50         p75       p90
 Weekly stock return                                     79,739     -2.409       9.183      -14.476      -6.257      -0.987       2.090     6.424
 COVID19                                                  728       0.574        0.871         0            0           0         1.099     1.792
 COVID19 (exposed economy-week)                           323       1.295        0.881       0.262       0.693       1.197        1.724     2.427
 Firm characteristics
 Firm size                                               79,739     14.924       1.684      12.787      13.830       14.916      16.030     17.089
 Leverage                                                79,739     0.268        0.204       0.001       0.103       0.253       0.395      0.540
 Cash                                                    79,739     0.164        0.196       0.014       0.039       0.095       0.203      0.425
 ROA                                                     79,739     0.030        0.124      -0.054       0.012       0.041       0.079      0.132
 Suppliers’ exposure                                     59,262     0.360        0.533         0           0         0.103       0.575      1.104
 Customers’ exposure                                     64,684     0.246        0.434         0           0         0.009       0.322      0.855
 Suppliers’ exposure (exposed firm)                      34,068     0.627        0.573       0.080       0.194       0.477       0.922      1.365
 Customers’ exposure (exposed firm)                      33,662     0.473        0.505       0.031       0.105       0.300       0.709      1.174
 CSR score                                               79,739     0.508        0.200       0.258       0.343       0.491       0.674      0.790
 Environmental                                           79,739     0.508        0.223       0.220       0.322       0.497       0.684      0.822
 Social                                                  79,739     0.508        0.212       0.226       0.344       0.509       0.667      0.799
 CSR Strategy                                            79,739     0.508        0.270       0.151       0.354       0.394       0.769      0.901
 Antitakeover Devices                                    79,726     3.517        2.898         0           1           3           6          8
 Board Size Policy                                       78,517     0.777        0.416         0           1           1           1          1
 Board Independence Policy                               78,517     0.681        0.466         0           0           1           1          1
 CEO-Chairman Duality                                    78,517     0.334        0.472         0           0           0           1          1
 Executive Compensation Performance Policy               78,517     0.869        0.337         0           1           1           1          1
 Executive Compensation LT Objectives                    78,517     0.097        0.296         0           0           0           0          0
 Investment Advisor/Research firm                        79,739     0.139        0.151         0           0         0.089       0.244      0.361
 Hedge Fund                                              79,739     0.012        0.047         0           0           0           0          0
 Bank/Trust/Insurance/Pension Fund                       79,739     0.009        0.036         0           0           0           0          0
 Individual                                              79,739     0.043        0.122         0           0           0           0        0.148
                                                                                                    40


                               N      Mean     Std. Dev.   p10     p25      p50      p75      p90
Corporation                  79,739   0.136     0.228       0       0        0      0.198    0.534
Government                   79,739   0.012     0.076       0       0        0        0        0
Sovereign Wealth Fund        79,739   0.007     0.044       0       0        0        0        0
PE/VC                        79,739   0.009     0.056       0       0        0        0        0
Economy Traits
GDP per capita                56      9.822     1.200      8.014   9.085   10.076   10.781   10.972
GDP growth                    56      0.030     0.019      0.012   0.018   0.027    0.040    0.062
%population(aged above 65)    56      12.822    6.761      2.550   6.842   13.792   18.895   21.462
Legor=English                 56      0.375     0.489        0       0       0        1        1
Legor=French                  56      0.375     0.489        0       0       0        1        1
Legor=German                  56      0.161     0.371        0       0       0        0        1
Legor=Scandinavian            56      0.071     0.260        0       0       0        0        0
Legor=Socialist               56      0.018     0.134        0       0       0        0        0
                                                                                                                   41


Table 2 Corporate financial conditions and stock returns in response to the COVID-19
pandemic

This table shows how (a) economy characteristics and (b) firm financial conditions shape stock price movements in
response to the COVID-19 pandemic during the first quarter of 2020. The dependent variable is weekly stock return
of each firm in a week in all columns. The key explanatory variable is COVID19 and its interactions with an array of
economy and firm characteristics. COVID19 is the weekly growth rate of the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases
in an economy. In particular, For economy c in week t, COVID19 = log(1+#confirmed cases in week t) –
log(1+#confirmed cases in week t-1). Economy characteristics include GDP Per Capita, GDP
Growth, %population(aged above 65), and Legal Origin, measured prior to 2020. GDP Per Capita is the natural
logarithm of GDP per capita of an economy; GDP Growth is the annual growth rate of GDP of an
economy; %population(aged above 65) is percentage of population aged above 65 among the total population of an
economy; Legal Origin denotes a set of indicators equal to one if an economy’s legal origin is French, German,
Scandinavian, or Socialist. The omitted group of legal origin is the English common law. We measure firm financial
conditions using Firm Size, Leverage, Cash, and ROA. For each firm, Firm Size is the natural logarithm of the book
value of total assets; Leverage is total debt divided by total assets; Cash is cash and short-term investments divided
by total assets; ROA is net income divided by total assets. Appendix Table A1 provides detailed variable definition.
We include firm, industry (two-digit SIC) by week, and/or economy by week fixed effects. Robust standard errors
clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10%
respectively.

                                                                    Weekly stock return
                                             (1)       (2)           (3)         (4)             (5)         (6)
                                                    Feb-Mar
COVID19                                  -1.164*** -1.677*** -2.398***          -3.675***    -3.779***
                                           (0.032)   (0.055)   (0.277)            (0.733)      (0.793)
Firm size * COVID19                                          0.091***              0.020        0.019     0.031
                                                               (0.017)            (0.019)      (0.019)   (0.019)
Leverage * COVID19                                           -1.364***          -1.248***    -1.252*** -1.209***
                                                               (0.161)            (0.159)      (0.159)   (0.159)
Cash * COVID19                                               0.781***            0.452**      0.441** 0.685***
                                                               (0.170)            (0.178)      (0.179)   (0.177)
ROA * COVID19                                                2.128***           1.912***     1.910*** 1.937***
                                                               (0.331)            (0.334)      (0.334)   (0.334)
GDP per capita * COVID19                                                        0.260***     0.273***
                                                                                  (0.068)      (0.078)
GDP growth * COVID19                                                             -4.884*      -5.508*
                                                                                  (2.622)      (2.920)
%population(aged above 65) *                                                    -0.055***    -0.053***
COVID19                                                                           (0.012)      (0.011)
Legor=French * COVID19                                                          0.668***     0.661***
                                                                                  (0.100)      (0.101)
Legor=German * COVID19                                                          1.366***     1.345***
                                                                                  (0.098)      (0.102)
Legor=Scandinavian * COVID19                                                       0.004        0.005
                                                                                  (0.139)      (0.139)
Legor=Socialist * COVID19                                                       1.793***     1.733***
                                                                                  (0.369)      (0.384)
                                                                                       42

                                                Weekly stock return
                              (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)      (6)
                                      Feb-Mar
Voice and Accountability *                                            -0.036
COVID19                                                               (0.071)
Firm FE                        Y        Y         Y          Y           Y        Y
Industry-time FE               Y        Y         Y          Y           Y        Y
Economy-time FE                N        N         N          N           N        Y
Observations                 89,212   54,895    79,739     79,739     79,739    79,739
Adjusted R-squared           0.466    0.481     0.463      0.465       0.465    0.526
# of firms                   6,864    6,863     6,135      6,135       6,135    6,135
                                                                                                                   43


Table 3 Global supply networks and stock returns in response to COVID-19
This table reports how a firm’s international supply chain and customers exposure to COVID-19 shape stock price
movements in response to the COVID-19 pandemic during the first quarter of 2020. The dependent variable is weekly
stock return of each firm in a week. The key explanatory variable is COVID19 and its interactions with suppliers’
and/or customers’ exposure to the COVID-19. COVID19 is the weekly growth rate of the number of confirmed
COVID-19 cases in an economy. In particular, For economy c in week t, COVID19 = log(1+#confirmed cases in week
t) – log(1+#confirmed cases in week t-1). Suppliers’ exposure measures the extent to which a firm is exposed to
COVID19 in foreign countries through its suppliers. For each firm f in week t, we compute the weighted average of
COVID19 of the firm’s suppliers’ countries, where a country is weighted by the total number of supplying companies
in that country. A suppliers’ country is a country in which firm f has at least one supplying company. Customers’
exposure measures the extent to which a firm is exposed to COVID19 in foreign countries through its customers.
Economy traits * COVID19 denotes the interactions of COVID19 and a set of economy characteristics (GDP Per
Capita, GDP Growth, %population(aged above 65), and Legal origin). Firm traits * COVID19 represents the
interactions of COVID19 and a set of firm financial conditions (i.e., Firm Size, Leverage, Cash, and ROA). Appendix
Table A1 provides detailed variable definition. We include firm, industry by week, and/or economy by week fixed
effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance
levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                 Weekly stock return
                                      (1)            (2)           (3)         (4) (5)       (6)
COVID19                           -3.246***                    -5.512***       -4.563***
                                    (0.870)                      (0.830)         (0.962)
Suppliers’ exposure               -0.451***      -0.298***                     -0.265*** -0.212**
                                    (0.074)        (0.077)                       (0.094)   (0.094)
Customers’ exposure                                        -0.614*** -0.437*** -0.597*** -0.518***
                                                             (0.097)   (0.104)   (0.119)   (0.123)
Economy traits * COVID19              Y               N         Y         N         Y         N
Firm traits * COVID19                 Y               Y         Y         Y         Y         Y
Firm FE                               Y               Y         Y         Y         Y         Y
Industry-time FE                      Y               Y         Y         Y         Y         Y
Economy-time FE                       N               Y         N         Y         N         Y
Observations                        59,262         59,262    64,684    64,684    50,436    50,436
Adjusted R-squared                  0.476           0.531     0.491     0.544     0.492     0.541
# of firms                          4,559           4,559     4,976     4,976     3,880     3,880
                                                                                                                                                                44


Table 4 Corporate social responsibility and stock returns in response to COVID-19
This table shows how firms’ pre-2020 performance in environmental and social (E&S) shape stock price movements in response to the COVID-19 pandemic during
the first quarter of 2020. The dependent variable is weekly stock return of each firm in a week. The key explanatory variable is COVID19 and its interactions with
the CSR score. COVID19 is the weekly growth rate of the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in an economy. In particular, For economy c in week t, COVID19
= log(1+#confirmed cases in week t) – log(1+#confirmed cases in week t-1). CSR score is the average scores of Environmental, Social, and CSR Strategy, capturing
the overall performance of corporate social responsibilities. Environmental score measures a firm’s performance in environmental-related topics, including emission
reduction, resource usage, and green innovation. Social score measures a firm’s commitment to social activities, including employee welfare, human rights,
community contribution, and product responsibilities. CSR Strategy score captures the degree to which a firm operationalizes and implements CSR strategies.
Economy traits * COVID19 denotes the interactions of COVID19 and a set of economy characteristics (GDP Per Capita, GDP Growth, %population(aged above
65), and Legal origin). Firm traits * COVID19 represents the interactions of COVID19 and a set of firm characteristics (i.e., Firm Size, Leverage, Cash, and ROA).
Appendix Table A1 provides detailed variable definition. We include firm, industry by week, and/or economy by week fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered
at the firm level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                                       Weekly stock return
                                        (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)               (6)             (7)              (8)
COVID19                             -3.435***                        -3.555***                    -3.616***                         -3.387***
                                      (0.738)                          (0.736)                      (0.734)                           (0.737)
CSR score * COVID19                 0.577***         0.548***
                                      (0.156)         (0.157)
Environmental * COVID19                                              0.413***         0.356**
                                                                      (0.141)         (0.142)
Social * COVID19                                                                                     0.373***        0.374**
                                                                                                      (0.142)        (0.146)
CSR Strategy * COVID19                                                                                                              0.362***         0.356***
                                                                                                                                     (0.111)          (0.110)
Economy traits * COVID19               Y                N                Y              N                Y              N               Y                N
Firm traits * COVID19                  Y                Y                Y              Y                Y              Y               Y                Y
Firm FE                                Y                Y                Y              Y                Y              Y               Y                Y
Industry-time FE                       Y                Y                Y              Y                Y              Y               Y                Y
Economy-time FE                        N                Y                N              Y                N              Y               N                Y
Observations                         79,739           79,739           79,739         79,739          79,739          79,739         79,739           79,739
Adjusted R-squared                   0.465            0.526            0.465          0.526            0.465          0.526           0.465            0.526
# of firms                           6,135            6,135            6,135          6,135            6,135          6,135           6,135            6,135
                                                                                                                 45


Table 5 Corporate governance and stock returns in response to COVID-19
This table shows how corporate governance practices prior to 2020 shape stock price movements in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic during the first quarter of 2020. The dependent variable is weekly stock return of a firm in a
week. The key explanatory variable is COVID19 and its interactions with measures of corporate governance.
COVID19 is the weekly growth rate of the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in an economy. We use three sets
of measures to measure corporate governance, including anti-takeover provisions, board, and CEO compensation.
Anti-takeover provisions is measured by Anti-takeover Devices. Board-related measures include Board size policy,
Board independence policy, and CEO-Chairman Duality. Executive compensation measures include Executive
Compensation Performance Policy and Executive Compensation LT Objectives. Economy traits * COVID19 denotes
the interactions of COVID19 and a set of economy characteristics (GDP Per Capita, GDP Growth, %population(aged
above 65), and Legal origin). Firm traits * COVID19 represents the interactions of COVID19 and a set of firm
characteristics (i.e., Firm Size, Leverage, Cash, and ROA). Appendix Table A1 provides detailed variable definition.
We include firm, industry by week, and/or economy by week fixed effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the firm
level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                    Weekly stock return
                                             Anti-takeover                                        Executive
                                                                       Board
                                               provisions                                       compensation
                                             (1)         (2)       (3)        (4)               (5)       (6)
                                        -4.247***             -3.928***                     -3.971***
COVID19
                                          (0.744)               (0.732)                       (0.731)
                                        -0.043*** -0.038**
Antitakeover Devices * COVID19
                                          (0.015)     (0.018)
                                                                 0.028      0.119
Board Size Policy * COVID19
                                                                (0.076)    (0.078)
Board Independence Policy *                                      -0.039     0.004
COVID19                                                         (0.062)    (0.065)
                                                                 -0.008     0.099
CEO-Chairman Duality * COVID19
                                                                (0.062)    (0.065)
Executive Compensation                                                                        -0.106      -0.060
Performance Policy * COVID19                                                                  (0.081)     (0.083)
Executive Compensation                                                                        -0.130      -0.089
LT Objectives * COVID19                                                                       (0.109)     (0.111)
Economy traits * COVID19                      Y           N         Y          N                 Y           N
Firm traits * COVID19                         Y           Y         Y          Y                 Y           Y
Firm FE                                       Y           Y         Y          Y                 Y           Y
Industry-time FE                              Y           Y         Y          Y                 Y           Y
Economy-time FE                               N           Y         N          Y                 N           Y
Observations                              79,726      79,726    78,517     78,517             78,517      78,517
Adjusted R-squared                         0.465       0.526     0.465      0.526              0.465       0.526
# of firms                                 6,134       6,134     6,041      6,041              6,041       6,041
F-statistics of Joint Significance Test     8.89        4.47      0.17       1.56               1.63        0.59
                                                                                                                                                              46


Table 6 Ownership structure and stock returns in response to COVID-19
This table shows how pre-2020 ownership structure shape stock price movements in response to the COVID-19 pandemic during the first quarter of 2020. The
dependent variable is weekly stock return of each firm in a week. The key explanatory variable is COVID19 and its interactions with measures of ownership
structure. COVID19 is the weekly growth rate of the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in an economy. In particular, For economy c in week t, COVID19 =
log(1+#confirmed cases in week t) – log(1+#confirmed cases in week t-1). We measure a firm’s ownership structure based on different types of blockholders,
namely Investment Advisor/Research Firm, hedge fund (Hedge Fund), Bank/Trust/Insurance/Pension Fund, individual investors (Individual), corporation or
holding company (Corporation), government agency (Government), sovereign wealth fund (Sovereign Wealth Fund), and private equity and venture capital
(PE/VC). For each category, we calculate: (1) the sum of ownership of all blockholders, (2) the ownership of the largest blockholder, and (3) the sum of ownership
of the five largest blockholders. Economy traits * COVID19 denotes the interactions of COVID19 and a set of economy characteristics (GDP Per Capita, GDP
Growth, %population(aged above 65), and Legal origin). Firm traits * COVID19 represents the interactions of COVID19 and a set of firm characteristics (i.e.,
Firm Size, Leverage, Cash, and ROA). Appendix Table A1 provides detailed variable definition. We include firm, industry by week, and/or economy by week fixed
effects. Robust standard errors clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                                               Weekly stock return
                                                          Ownership of all                Ownership of the largest                 Ownership of the top5
                                                           blockholders                          blockholders                           blockholders
                                                         (1)           (2)                   (3)                (4)                 (5)               (6)
COVID19                                              -4.476***                          -4.127***                              -4.448***
                                                       (0.744)                            (0.735)                                (0.743)
Investment Advisor/Research firm *                      0.205        -0.018                0.449              0.360               0.277             0.054
COVID19                                                (0.295)       (0.318)              (0.553)            (0.567)             (0.308)           (0.332)
Hedge Fund * COVID19                                 -2.386***     -2.478***             -2.414**           -2.428**           -2.378***         -2.475***
                                                       (0.839)       (0.847)              (1.134)            (1.137)             (0.874)           (0.884)
Bank/Trust/Insurance/Pension Fund *                     1.242         0.207                -0.592             -0.469              1.224             0.119
COVID19                                                (0.837)       (0.828)              (1.106)            (0.989)             (0.839)           (0.826)
Individual * COVID19                                    0.405         0.254                0.388              0.326               0.395             0.242
                                                       (0.253)       (0.256)              (0.302)            (0.307)             (0.256)           (0.260)
Corporation * COVID19                                0.674***      0.651***             0.647***            0.678***           0.673***          0.648***
                                                       (0.143)       (0.147)              (0.156)            (0.158)             (0.143)           (0.148)
Government * COVID19                                  0.810**        -0.025              0.715**              -0.012            0.815**             -0.026
                                                       (0.340)       (0.320)              (0.354)            (0.324)             (0.341)           (0.320)
Sovereign Wealth Fund * COVID19                      2.657***         0.624             2.652***              0.739            2.750***             0.719
                                                       (0.870)       (0.850)              (1.024)            (0.996)             (0.870)           (0.851)
PE/VC * COVID19                                        -0.256        -0.362                0.119              0.107               -0.181            -0.285
                                                       (0.771)       (0.776)              (0.842)            (0.840)             (0.771)           (0.776)
                                                                                                        47


                                                      Weekly stock return
                              Ownership of all    Ownership of the largest     Ownership of the top5
                                blockholders            blockholders                blockholders
                             (1)           (2)      (3)                (4)      (5)              (6)
Economy traits * COVID19      Y              N       Y                  N        Y                N
Firm traits * COVID19         Y              Y       Y                  Y        Y                Y
Firm FE                       Y              Y       Y                  Y        Y                Y
Industry-time FE              Y              Y       Y                  Y        Y                Y
Economy-time FE               N              Y       N                  Y        N                Y
Observations               79,739        79,739   79,739             79,739   79,739           79,739
Adjusted R-squared         0.465          0.526    0.465              0.526   0.465            0.526
# of firms                 6,135          6,135    6,135              6,135   6,135            6,135
                                                                                                                    48


Table 7 Corporate characteristics: Simultaneous analyses
This table reports the horserace tests among a firm’s financial conditions, international supply chain, E&S performance,
corporate governance and ownership structure. The dependent variable is weekly stock return of each firm in a week.
The key explanatory variable is COVID19 and its interactions with one of the firm-level characteristics, namely firm
financial conditions (Firm Size, Leverage, Cash, and ROA), environmental and social performance (CSR score),
COVID-exposure through international supply networks (Suppliers’ Exposure to COVID19 and Customers’ Exposure
to COVID19), corporate governance (Anti-takeover Devices), ownership structure (the ownership of Hedge Fund and
Corporation). COVID19 is the weekly growth rate of the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in an economy. Firm
traits * COVID19 represents the interactions of COVID19 and a set of firm characteristics (i.e., Firm Size, Leverage,
Cash, and ROA). We include firm, industry by week, and economy by week fixed effects in all columns. Table A1
provides detailed variable definition. Robust standard errors clustered at the firm level are reported in parentheses.
***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                         Weekly stock return
                                                                                                   Supply chain
                                                                            Supply chain
                                                     Supply chain                                      + E&S
                                                                               + E&S
                                                       + E&S                                       + Governance
                                                                            + Governance
                                                                                                   + Ownership
                                                           (1)                    (2)                    (3)
Firm size * COVID19                                       0.037                  0.040                  0.037
                                                         (0.033)                (0.033)                (0.033)
Leverage * COVID19                                     -1.313***              -1.306***              -1.244***
                                                         (0.233)                (0.234)                (0.230)
Cash * COVID19                                         1.421***               1.483***               1.571***
                                                         (0.276)                (0.275)                (0.277)
ROA * COVID19                                          2.830***               2.732***               2.649***
                                                         (0.451)                (0.453)                (0.450)
Suppliers’ exposure                                     -0.218**               -0.219**               -0.223**
                                                         (0.094)                (0.094)                (0.093)
Customers’ exposure                                    -0.522***              -0.527***              -0.518***
                                                         (0.123)                (0.123)                (0.123)
CSR score * COVID19                                     0.589**                0.607**                0.581**
                                                         (0.239)                (0.239)                (0.237)
Antitakeover Devices * COVID19                                                 -0.052**               -0.052**
                                                                                (0.024)                (0.023)
Hedge Fund * COVID19                                                                                 -2.803***
                                                                                                       (1.064)
Corporation * COVID19                                                                                0.876***
                                                                                                       (0.208)
Firm FE                                                    Y                      Y                       Y
Industry-time FE                                           Y                      Y                       Y
Economy-time FE                                            Y                      Y                       Y
Observations                                             50,436                 50,436                 50,436
Adjusted R-squared                                       0.541                  0.541                   0.542
# of firms                                               3,880                  3,880                   3,880
                                                                                                                                         49


Appendix

Table A1. Variable Definition

 Variable                 Definition                                                                        Source
                          The weekly stock return of each firm in a week is calculated by using dividend-   Thomson Reuters Datastream
 Weekly stock return
                          adjusted closing prices on the last trading day of the week.
                          The weekly growth rate of the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in an            Center for Systems Science and
 COVID19                  economy. For economy c in week t, COVID19 = log(1+#confirmed cases in             Engineering at Johns Hopkins
                          week t) – log(1+#confirmed cases in week t-1)                                     University
 Firm characteristics
 Firm size                The natural logarithm of the book value of total assets.                          Thomson Reuters Worldscope
 Leverage                 The ratio of total debt divided by total assets.                                  Thomson Reuters Worldscope
 Cash                     The total amount of cash and short-term investments divided by total assets.      Thomson Reuters Worldscope
 ROA                      The ratio of net income to total assets.                                          Thomson Reuters Worldscope
                          For each firm f in week t, the weighted average of COVID19 among the foreign      FactSet Revere
                          countries in which the firm’s suppliers are situated, where the weights are the
 Suppliers’ exposure
                          proportion of the firm’s pre-pandemic supplies from a country and COVID19
                          varies weekly as defined above.
                          For each firm f in week t, the weighted average of COVID19 among the foreign      FactSet Revere
                          countries in which the firm sells its products, where the weights are the
 Customers’ exposure
                          proportion of the firm’s pre-pandemic revenues in a country and COVID19
                          varies weekly as defined above.
                          The average of the indexes of Environmental, Social, and CSR Strategy,            Thomson Reuters ASSET4
                          measuring a firm’s commitment to (1) the environment, including resource use,
                          emissions, and green innovation, (2) non-shareholder stakeholders and social
 CSR Score
                          themes, including employee welfare, human rights, and the ethical treatment of
                          customers, suppliers, and the communities in which the firm operates, and (3)
                          operationalizing and implementing CSR activities.
                          The Environmental score comprises three components, resource usage, emission      Thomson Reuters ASSET4
                          reduction, and green innovation, reflecting (a) a company’s performance and
                          capacity to reduce the use of materials, energy or water, and to find more eco-
 Environmental
                          efficient solutions by improving supply chain management; commitment and
                          effectiveness towards reducing environmental emission in the production and
                          operational processes, and capacity to reduce the environmental costs and
                                                                                                                                            50


Variable                    Definition                                                                             Source
                            burdens for its customers, thereby creating new market opportunities through
                            new environmental technologies and processes or eco-designed products
                            The Social index aggregates information on the extent to which firms enhance           Thomson Reuters ASSET4
                            employee welfare (Workforce), promote human rights (Human Rights), engage
Social
                            in community development (Community), and fulfill their responsibilities to
                            consumers (Product Responsibility).
                            CSR Strategy index includes information on the degree to which firms organize,         Thomson Reuters ASSET4
                            operationalize, and implement CSR strategies. It covers whether firms (a) have
                            a CSR sustainability committee, (b) publish CSR/Health&Safety/Sustainability
                            reports, and whether those reports are published in accordance with the Global
CSR Strategy
                            Report Initiative Guidelines, (c) have an external audit on CSR related issues,
                            (d) explicitly integrate financial and extra-financial factors in the management
                            discussion and analysis section of the annual reports, and (e) explain how it
                            engages with its stakeholders.
Anti-takeover Devices       Equals the number of anti-takeover devices in place if there are more than two         Thomson Reuters ASSET4
                            anti-takeover devices and zero otherwise. The data cover an array of anti-
                            takeover devices, including poison pills, classified boards, blank checks,
                            supermajority votes, dual-class shares, golden parachutes, limited shareholder
                            rights to call for special meetings, cumulative voting rights, pre-emptive rights,
                            company cross shareholdings, confidential voting policies, limited director
                            liability, shareholder approval of significant transactions, fair price provisions,
                            limitations on removal of directors, advance notice for shareholder proposals,
                            written consent requirements, and expanded constituency provisions
Board Size Policy           Equals one if the firm has a policy regarding the size of its board, zero otherwise.   Thomson Reuters ASSET4
Board Independence Policy   Equals one if the firm has a policy regarding the independence of its board, zero      Thomson Reuters ASSET4
                            otherwise.
CEO-Chairman Duality        Equals one if an individual holds (or has held) both the position of CEO and           Thomson Reuters ASSET4
                            chair of the board of this company, zero otherwise.
Executive Compensation      Equals one if the firm has a performance-based compensation policy for the             Thomson Reuters ASSET4
Performance Policy          higher-level executives and board members, zero otherwise.
Executive Compensation      Equals one if executive and board compensation are partially linked to longer-         Thomson Reuters ASSET4
LT Objectives               term objectives, i.e., objectives that are more than two years in the future, zero
                            otherwise.
                                                                                                                                            51


Variable                     Definition                                                                       Source
                             Total percentage of blockholders’ shareholdings held by mutual funds,            Thomson Reuters Ownership
Investment                   investment and asset management companies, such as Vanguard, Fidelity,
Advisor/Research firm        BlackRock, and the investment bank, asset management, and securities of
                             financial companies.
                             Total percentage of blockholders’ shareholdings held by hedge fund such as       Thomson Reuters Ownership
Hedge Fund
                             Citadel, Two Sigma, and Renaissance Technologies.
                             Total percentage of blockholders’ shareholdings held by traditional financial    Thomson Reuters Ownership
Bank/Trust/Insurance/Pensi
                             institutions, including commercial banks, trust companies, pension funds, and
on Fund
                             insurance companies.
Individual                   Total percentage of blockholders’ shareholdings held by individual investors.    Thomson Reuters Ownership
                             Total percentage of blockholders’ shareholdings held by holding companies and    Thomson Reuters Ownership
Corporation
                             non-financial corporations.
Government                   Total percentage of blockholders’ shareholdings held by government agencies.     Thomson Reuters Ownership
Sovereign Wealth Fund        Total percentage of blockholders’ shareholdings held by sovereign wealth fund.   Thomson Reuters Ownership
                             Total percentage of blockholders’ shareholdings held by private equity and       Thomson Reuters Ownership
PE/VC
                             venture capital.
Economy Traits
GDP per capita               The natural logarithm of GDP per capita in 2018.                                 World Development Indicators
GDP growth                   The growth rate of GDP, measured in 2018.                                        World Development Indicators
%population(aged above       The percentage of population aged above 65 among the total population of an      World Development Indicators
65)                          economy in 2018.
                             A set of dummy variables equal to one if an economy’s legal heritage is          La Porta et al. (2008)
Legal origin
                             Common, French, German, Scandinavian or Socialist law, respectively.
                             The ability of individuals in an economy to choose their governments, express    World Governance Indicators
                             their views freely, associate with whom they choose, association, experience a
Voice and Accountability
                             free press, and hold government officials accountable. Higher values indicate
                             greater individual voice in public affairs and greater press freedom.
                                                                                                                    52


Table A2 Corporate governance and stock returns in response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
robustness

This table shows how pre-2020 corporate governance shapes stock price movements in response to the COVID-19
pandemic. The analysis is similar to Table 5 in the main text except that we include one governance measure in each
regression. The dependent variable is weekly stock return of a firm in a week. The key explanatory variable is
COVID19 and its interactions with measures of corporate governance. COVID19 is the weekly growth rate of the
number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in an economy. Corporate governance measures include Board size policy,
Board independence policy, CEO-Chairman Duality, Executive Compensation Performance Policy and Executive
Compensation LT Objectives. Firm traits * COVID19 represents the interactions of COVID19 and a set of firm
characteristics (i.e., Firm Size, Leverage, Cash, and ROA). Appendix Table A1 provides detailed variable definition.
We include firm, industry by week, and economy by week fixed effects in all columns. Robust standard errors clustered
at the firm level are reported in parentheses. ***, **, * denote significance levels at 1%, 5% and 10% respectively.

                                                                                Weekly stock return
                                                                      (1)       (2)    (3)       (4)          (5)
Board Size Policy * COVID19                                          0.119
                                                                    (0.077)
Board Independence Policy * COVID19                                            0.018
                                                                              (0.064)
CEO-Chairman Duality * COVID19                                                           0.099
                                                                                        (0.065)
Executive Compensation Performance Policy * COVID19                                                -0.061
                                                                                                  (0.083)
Executive Compensation LT Objectives * COVID19                                                  -0.089
                                                                                                (0.111)
Firm traits * COVID19                                                 Y      Y      Y      Y       Y
Firm FE                                                               Y      Y      Y      Y       Y
Industry-time FE                                                      Y      Y      Y      Y       Y
Economy-time FE                                                       Y      Y      Y      Y       Y
Observations                                                        78,517 78,517 78,517 78,517 78,517
Adjusted R-squared                                                  0.526 0.526 0.526 0.526 0.526
# of firms                                                          6,041 6,041 6,041 6,041 6,041
