                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    ECONOMIC ACTIVITY AND THE VALUE OF MEDICAL INNOVATION DURING
                             A PANDEMIC

                                      Casey B. Mulligan

                                     Working Paper 27060
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27060


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    April 2020




I appreciate discussions with Luke Froeb, Kevin Murphy, Eric Posner, Eric Sun, and Joel Zinberg
and financial support from the Program on Foundational Research on Health Care Markets at the
Becker-Friedman Institute and from Citadel LLC. The views expressed herein are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Economic Activity and the Value of Medical Innovation during a Pandemic
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 27060
April 2020
JEL No. E01,I18,O31

                                         ABSTRACT

The “shutdown” economy of April 2020 is compared to a normally functioning economy both in
terms of market and nonmarket activities. Three novel methods and data indicate that the
shutdown puts market production 25-28 percent below normal in the short run. At an annual rate,
the shutdown is costing $7 trillion, or about $15,000 per household per quarter. Employment
already fell 28 million by early April 2020. These costs indicate, among other things, the value
of innovation in both health and general business sectors that can accelerate the time when
normal activity resumes.


Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu
Economic Activity and the Value of Medical Innovation during a Pandemic*
By Casey B. Mulligan
April 16, 2020



Executive Summary

We are currently fighting a war against the COVID-19 virus. The war presents an obvious and
massive tradeoff between “guns” – activities whose primary purpose is war production – and
“butter,” which refers to the normal activities of households and businesses. Without any
improvement in our techniques for fighting the war, the sacrifices by households and businesses
will be staggering and historically unprecedented. This document enumerates and quantifies the
sacrifices, showing why negative 60 percent is an optimistic projection for the annualized growth
rate of U.S. GDP in 2020 Q2 if the nonessential businesses were not allowed to operate during
that quarter. The lost surplus from market activity, while massive, nonetheless understates the
true costs of the sacrifices that households and businesses are making, which I estimate to total
almost $15,000 per household per quarter before counting any health costs or monetizing any
intrinsic costs of forgone civil liberties. This is why better techniques for fighting the war are
incredibly valuable.


Medical innovation can reduce the intensity and duration of the war, yet Federal policy continues
to be a major barrier to that innovation. Valuable treatments may come from drugs in the early
stages of development, drugs that have been proven safe but not yet federally approved, as well
as the repurposing of drugs that were originally invented for different medical conditions. Also
valuable are new equipment and techniques for prevention, such as the manufacture of disease-
testing equipment and tools for tracing contacts of infected patients.


Medical innovation is not limited to the activities of health professionals. Business and civic
organizations can also innovate how they accomplish their traditional missions while mitigating
harms from COVID-19. To name an example, retailers such as Walmart and Whole Foods have


*
 I appreciate discussions with Luke Froeb, Kevin Murphy, Eric Posner, Eric Sun, and Joel Zinberg and financial
support from the Program on Foundational Research on Health Care Markets at the Becker-Friedman Institute and
from Citadel LLC.
implemented special shopping hours for senior citizens, who are more vulnerable to the virus, so
that they do not have to mingle with nonelderly shoppers. But organizations can hardly innovate
when they are prohibited from operating.


Three novel methods and data indicate that the shutdown of “nonessential” businesses puts
market production 25-28 percent below normal in the short run. Those methods include (i)
historical data on the relationship between annual GDP and the number of workdays in a year,
(ii) historical data on the fraction of government labor that has been deemed “essential” during
government shutdowns, and (iii) new data from Bick and Blandin (2020) on the amount and
location of aggregate work hours circa April 1, 2020.


Market production is not synonymous with welfare because factors of production can move into
the nonmarket sector, which itself is economically important even in normal times. However,
there are two reasons why the dollar amount of the reduction in GDP understates the welfare cost
of a shutdown. The first reason is that GDP measures only averages, whereas the direct effects
of shutdown are unequally distributed. The inequality apparently has costs by itself, because
governments attempt to mitigate those costs by implementing relief efforts that will further
reduce GDP both during the shutdown and afterwards. This document estimates a lower bound
from the deadweight costs of taxation – about $2 trillion per year that the shutdown lasts – that
will someday be required to finance the relief efforts. The second reason is that shutting down
non-essential businesses makes the nonmarket sector less productive too because the sector is
starved of market inputs. Human capital accumulation is an important instance, with more than
70 million children and young adults normally enrolled in school and tens of millions more
would be accumulating skills during the early phase of their careers.


I estimate that the shutdown of nonessential businesses reduces market production by almost $6
trillion per year of shutdown. Relief efforts further reduce the current value of future economic
activity by about $2 trillion per year of shutdown. Black markets and additional time in the
nonmarket sector replace about $2 trillion of the $8 trillion of lost market production. I estimate
that the value of nonmarket production falls below what it would be if the normal market inputs
were available by about $1 trillion per year of shutdown. The sum of these puts the welfare costs
at about $7 trillion per year of shutdown.

                                                                                                 2
    I.       Real Costs of “Shutdown”
Government officials around the world have ordered businesses shut and families to stay in their
homes except for essential activities. My purpose here is to enumerate and quantify the real
economic costs of fighting the war in this way. This report estimates the opportunity costs of
shutdown relative to a normally functioning economy. This is the relevant comparison for the
purposes of policy decisions affecting innovation in medicines and disease testing, as well as
policies that facilitate scaling the manufacturing and distribution of protective equipment and
therapies that could end the shutdown earlier.1


To be clear, the cost-enumeration exercise can be consistent with a conclusion that the war is
worth fighting – that depends on quantifying the benefits, which are surely significant given the
value that people place on health and longevity. Although this report does not address the
question of whether a shutdown is better than no policy response, it offers some of the essential
ingredients for such an analysis. No policy response would itself involve economic contraction
during the period of time in which no treatment or vaccine is available, although such a
contraction is expected to cost far less because individuals and business would still be free to
pursue the activities that are most valued to them (Mulligan, Murphy and Topel 2020).


When it comes to projecting the welfare costs of shutting the economy, scholars have the
advantage of almost a century’s worth of collective experience on measuring economic activity
in market economies. We have the system of national accounts, which was developed by
economists based on the principles of welfare economics.2 Gaps in the national accounts are
well known and quantified in many cases.




1
  The comparison to a normally functioning economy is relevant even if a full recovery does not occur immediately
upon the arrival of an innovation, as long as the arrival is the beginning of a time path to full recovery. The
comparison is also relevant to the extent that future innovation permits a second wave of the disease to be mitigated
or prevented.
2
  Simon Kuznets, who won one of the early Nobel Prizes in Economic Science, made some of the early and major
contributions to national accounting.
                                                                                                                    3
The shutdown method of fighting the war on the virus directly affects how people allocate their
time. That includes what they do, where they do it, and with whom. Because normal time
allocation includes elements of saving and capital accumulation, such as learning skills, the
economic effects of the war are felt into the future as stocks of physical and human capital are
reduced. For enumeration purposes, I distinguish market production activities from all other
activities, especially because market production is counted in conventionally-measured GDP
whereas leisure activities are not. Although I refer to the non-market activities as “leisure,” they
include religious gatherings and forms of effort such as student effort in school and effort put
toward housework. Both market production and leisure activities are significantly affected by
shutdown.




I.A. Net Costs Associated with Market Production


Shutdown reduces the amount and effectiveness with which people work. The effects of this can
be measured on either the production side of the national accounts, as the value of goods and
services not produced, or the income side as reductions in total incomes. Either approach yields
the same result, up to measurement error.3 However, the incidence – the distribution of impact
across industries, occupations, and income groups – is different from the production and income
perspectives.


Momentarily putting aside costs associated with leisure activities, the shutdown can be
analogized with a change in the number of holidays and weekends (“nonwork days”). A well-
studied, albeit obscure, element of national income accounting is the adjustment for the fact that
the number of nonwork days normally varies from year to year.4 A normal year has about 251
working days and about 114 nonworking days.5 The national accountants have found that
adding a nonwork day to the year reduces the year’s real GDP by about 0.1 percent and have




3
  Adding the opportunity costs of production to the reductions in incomes would be double counting.
4
  Leap years also create variation in the total number of days.
5
  A year has 52 weeks plus an additional one or two days, for a total of between 104 and 106 weekend days. There
are ten Federal holidays. The second quarter always has exactly thirteen weeks and one Federal holiday.
                                                                                                                   4
been applying this estimate to both the production and real income accounts.6 Adding a nonwork
day to a quarter would therefore reduce the quarter’s unadjusted real GDP by about 0.4 percent.


Extrapolating from this finding, removing all of the working days from a quarter is 62 or 63
times this, or 25 percent. In other words, if seasonally-adjusted GDP 2020-Q2 would have been
$5.5 trillion at a quarterly rate, then changing all of that quarter’s working days to the functional
equivalent of a weekend or holiday would reduce the quarter’s GDP to $4.2 trillion.7 Applying
the same approach to 2020-Q1, with a shutdown occurring for one-eighth of the quarter, 2020-
Q1 real GDP (in 2020-Q2 prices) would be $5.4 trillion. The quarter-over-quarter growth rate of
seasonally-adjusted real GDP would, expressed at annual rates, therefore be -10 percent in Q1
and -63 percent in Q2.8 The Q2 growth rate would be less negative to the extent that a shutdown
was in place for only part of the quarter or for part of the country.


Shutdown is not exactly the functional equivalent of changing workdays to weekends or
holidays. On one hand, a segment of the workforce will engage in telework during shutdown
that they would not perform on a normal weekend or holiday. Other segments or regions will be
exempt from shutdown. This by itself suggests that the $4.2 trillion estimate is too pessimistic.
On the other hand, much of the normal weekend activity such as restaurants, entertainment, and
religious activities is not occurring during shutdown. This by itself suggests that the $4.2 trillion
estimate is too optimistic.9


A second method uses the production side alone and focuses on quantities of capital and labor
engaged in production. Labor is reduced by the number of “non-essential” employees, which has




6
  European Central Bank (2004). Note that 0.1 percent is much less than 1/251; the estimate implies that the average
nonworking day has two-thirds the GDP of a working day.
7
  This is the sum of Table 1’s first row with its addendum row.
8
  This assumes a baseline annual growth rate of 2 percent and applies it one for one. The formula for the annualized
                         !"#.##%∗'(.)    %
growth rate in Q2 is !
                     !"#.##%∗'(.)/+
                                        " ∗ 1.02 − 1 = −63 percent. The normal seasonal adjustment for Q2 reflects,
among other things, that Q2 has one or two more working days than the average quarter. If the national accountants
apply this part of the adjustment to 2020 Q2 (despite the fact that it did not have the extra working days), the
annualized growth rate would be -65 percent.
9
  During the pandemic the Federal government has created and expanded programs that heavily subsidize furloughs
and unemployment. These are policies reducing the Q1-to-Q2 growth rate regardless of whether non-essential
businesses are permitted to operate.
                                                                                                                      5
been about 30 percent during Federal shutdowns.10 In some of the industries, real capital will
continue to be used, albeit by fewer employees. Other industries will not use their capital,
although it may be repurposed, such as a hotel being used as a hospital ward.                                  To be
conservative, I assume that few industries increase their labor-capital ratio.11 The reduction in
capital input is therefore somewhere between 0 and 30 percent; I assume 15 percent. History has
repeatedly shown that labor is more important in the production process than capital, so that by
the second method real GDP is reduced 26 percent.12


A third method takes a similar approach, but measures the labor reduction from a recent survey
conducted by Bick and Blandin (2020). They find that working hours per working age adult
declined 28 percent from February. Moreover, among those working in February 2020, between
59 and 61 percent are now absent from their workplaces either due to not working or working
from home.13 If half of the capital in those workplaces is idle and not replaced by capital located
in home offices, then capital utilization has fallen by 30 percent and GDP by 28 percent. My
estimate of the GDP effect of shutdown, shown in Table 1 and what follows, is the average of
this 28 percent and the aforementioned 25 percent based on holidays.




10
   Katz (2019). The non-essential share has not yet been measured for government-mandated private-sector
shutdowns, which suggests that the holiday-weekend method should receive more weight. On the other hand, the
new data from Bick and Blandin may be closer to the government-shutdown method. Given that I obtain almost the
same result for the two methods, their weighting is not critical to the analysis.
11
   Using their labor is different than keeping the labor on the payroll. An unused worker still on the payroll does not
contribute to current output.
12
   Barro, Ursúa and Weng (2020) estimate that, if the COVID-19 epidemic were a scaled version of the 1918
Spanish Flu, real GDP would fall less than eight percent. The authors note that the current pandemic is unique in
that “countries have been pursuing a policy of lowering real GDP,” which are the lockdowns that are the subject of
this report. Looking at the current pandemic, Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and Trabandt (2020) estimate that aggregate
consumption and GDP (their model has no investment) will fall up to 20 percent.
13
   I obtain this range by assuming that (i) the share of February 2020 employment from home was ten percent,
corresponding to Bick and Blandin’s estimate from the 2017 and 2018 March ATUS, (ii) that those previously
working at home are disproportionately likely to keep their jobs, and (iii) no jobs that were being done at home are
now done outside the home.
                                                                                                                     6
 Table 1. Welfare Effects of Shutting Down "Non-essential" Activities
 April 2020

                                                Millions of            Welfare effect, $ billions
 Value of:                                 persons involved      Per workday Per quarter         Per year
 Market production                                      -48             -23.6      -1,480         -5,918
 Deadweight cost of relief policy                       159              -7.8         -488        -1,951
 Nonmarket labor inputs                                  48               7.1          444         1,775
 Nonmarket productivity
   Black markets                                           NA             2.1          135           539
   School time                                              73           -1.1          -72          -287
   OJT taken out of earnings                               111           -0.4          -27          -107
   Time of adults normally OLF                              95           -2.5         -156          -626
   Time of displaced workers                                48           -1.2          -78          -313
   Leisure time of workers                                 111           -0.7          -46          -183
 Total, $ billions                                                      -28.2       -1,768        -7,071
 Total, $ per household                                                -231.9      -14,555       -58,219

 Addendum: Market production (GDP) absent shutdown
   $ billions                                                            88.3        5,541          22,165

 Notes
 The table shows point estimates of costs that could be netted against point estimates of health benefits
 such as deaths averted by shutdown.
 The impact on market production is taken as -26.7%, which is the average of input and output methods.
 Welfare costs of market production also reflect the opportunity costs of capital out of service.
 Deadweight costs of relief policy are financing costs, without any distribution costs.
 School time is for full-time students only.
 The estimates do not include the entire effect of expanding social insurance, which would be to further
 shift inputs from the market to nonmarket sectors. The additional demand for social insurance itself
 reflects costs of shutdown that are not captured by the averages.



The GDP estimates do not reflect black markets. But, as seen with border patrol and the war on
drugs, any government regulation attempting to block valuable gains from trade will result in
black market activity. Businesses will also work the gray area, lobbying and distorting their
operations to have more activities declared “essential.”


Black-market activity is far less productive than legitimate activity, which is why it does not
come close to replacing the “non-essential” sales that were banned. But it still has value, which
                                                                                                7
is why the best welfare effects of shutdown may be less pessimistic than analysis assuming zero
black market.14 I assume that black markets replace 25 percent of the gains from trade, based on
studies of illegal drugs.15 However, value generated in black markets is typically not measured
as part of GDP. Indeed, black markets compete with legitimate markets for the factors of
production and by this channel would reduce measured real GDP even more than would occur
without black markets (Fleming, Roman and Farrell 2000). Because the black market is entirely
different in terms of measurement (albeit perhaps similar in terms of transactions), Table 1’s
“nonmarket” heading shows the $539 billion annual value of black market transactions that were
formerly in the legitimate economy. Subsection I.C. below discusses other activities, such as
leisure time and the effort of students, that are more intrinsically nonmarket.


Although the national income accounts were designed on the basis of the principles of welfare
economics, GDP growth is not exactly a benefit and GDP reduction is not exactly a welfare cost
because valuable activities and assets such as home production, elements of human capital
accumulation, and environmental quality are not yet recognized in the official national accounts
(Hartwick 1990, Nordhaus and Kokkelenberg 1999, Jorgenson 2010). However, as discussed
further below, the GDP losses cited above prove to reasonably approximate more comprehensive
welfare losses.


I.B. The Incidence of the Net Costs


The massive costs of shutting down “non-essential” activities are not shared equally among
Americans. Some workers are still able to draw a normal salary even while their industry is less
active. Others work in industries such as parts of healthcare that are booming as a result of the
pandemic. Because the aggregate reduction in the value of what is produced must equal the
aggregate reduction in total income, the costs of shutdown will fall disproportionately on the
remainder of the population that are not in these circumstances.



14
   But government regulators can hardly defend their shutdown regulations on the grounds that they will not be
obeyed! Moreover, black markets add another social cost by eroding respect for law and order.
15
   The war on drugs increases the retail price (and unit cost to suppliers) by a roughly a factor of four and reduces
the quantity consumed by a factor of two (Jaffe, et al. 2019, Figure 12-1). Illegal drug sellers have had many years
to accumulate organizational and other capital that lockdown violators did not. On the other side, drug war
enforcers have had many years that lockdown enforcers have not.
                                                                                                                        8
Table 1 shows only averages.             Public programs are being created and expanded with the
intention of helping some of those who are disproportionately bearing the costs. Redistribution
policy may help distribute the aggregate costs more fairly, but in no way can it reduce the
aggregate cost. Even while these policies assist those who are not working because of the
pandemic, they do not replace the work and production that the workers would have been doing.
The fact that the demand for redistribution increases in these situations suggests that the
inequality itself is a cost large enough that people are willing to tolerate further increases in the
average costs (i.e., further decreases in GDP, both during the shutdown and afterwards) in order
to mitigate the costs for those disproportionately affected (Mulligan 2014, Mulligan 2012,
Chapter 10). In other words, the costs of inequality are reduced by replacing them with a
different kind of cost: reductions in GDP during and after the shutdown. To the extent that the
costs of inequality are not fully eliminated, the costs associated with the relief-induced GDP
reductions (estimated in this document) are a lower bound on the cost associated with the
inequality.


The CARES Act and the FFCRA Act are the two largest relief packages passed in the U.S. The
Congressional Budget Office (2020a, 2020b) estimates that combined their financing will require
$1.95 trillion in present value of additional taxes or reduced Federal spending. The collection of
those taxes, or reduction in that spending, involves costs that I approximate as half of the amount
of the tax.16 I further assume that the relief package is adequate for a shutdown of only one half
year; a shutdown lasting a full year would therefore have deadweight financing costs of $1.95
trillion. In addition to the financing costs, the distribution of the funds from the relief packages
will also reduce GDP by reducing incentives to work, reducing the incentives of workers to shift
into industries that need them most, and otherwise distorting the behavior of individuals and
businesses (Mulligan 2012). I have not yet estimated the fund-distribution costs or include them
in Table 1.17




16
   My approximation is based on the “marginal cost of public funds” (Dahlby 2008), as estimated for the U.S.
economy by CEA (March 2019) by considering the various implicit and explicit taxes on income, payroll, and sales.
For this purpose I assume, as Atkinson and Stern (1974) do, that the marginal cost of public funds is the same
regardless of when the financing occurs and whether it occurs from less spending or more taxes. Note that the costs
of relief packages would be much larger if their revenue requirements push the U.S. to the top of its Laffer curve.
17
   Mulligan and Blase (2020) calculate enough to show that distribution of CARES funds will noticeably reduce
aggregate employment.
                                                                                                                  9
I.C. Net Costs Associated with Nonmarket Activities


The nonmarket/home sector is affected by shutdown through two basic channels, as shown in
Table 1. The first channel is discussed above: the nonmarket sector has additional labor that has
been forced out of the market sector. The second channel is that the nonmarket sector becomes
less productive, both for the nonmarket time that normally exists as well as the additional
nonmarket time coming from the market sector, because even in their nonwork activities people
are restricted in terms of where they go and how they associate with others. The percentage
change in the value created in the nonmarket sector combines the two channels and is
approximately the sum of the (positive) percentage change in labor input and the (negative)
percentage change of nonmarket productivity.18


An important example of the second channel is the time allocation of children and young adults
who would normally be enrolled in school and now spend their time at home. Their learning
from normal face-to-face interactions with teachers and fellow students is not fully reflected in
GDP, but is nonetheless valuable. In other cases, as with religious gatherings, entertainment, and
tourism, shutdowns reduce the value of these activities by limiting how people can congregate
and the market inputs that can be used as part of the leisure activity.


Because the national accounts are based on the principles of welfare economics, GDP would
ideally capture value created or destroyed in both the market and nonmarket sectors.
Measurement challenges have so far limited the scope of conventional GDP measures to the
market sector. Conventional GDP measures therefore miss the value of additional nonmarket
time added by the shutdown (the first channel) as well as the reduced productivity of nonmarket
time (the second channel). This section provides estimates of the two, which can be added to the
GDP losses from Section I.A to arrive at a welfare loss of shutdown as compared to normal
economic activity.


To estimate the nonmarket value of added labor, I use the short run of the neoclassical growth
model, which is essentially a labor supply and demand framework. The average nonmarket

18
     The approximation is exact when the changes are measured in logarithms rather than percentages.
                                                                                                       10
value of time is below the after-tax real wage that would normally prevail, but above the
marginal value of time with a shutdown, which I estimate to be 49 percent of the former.19 With
a 48 percent marginal tax rate (inclusive of implicit taxes on labor income), the total nonmarket
value of the extra time is about $7 billion per day (see Table 1), or about 30 percent of the
reduction in real GDP. Simply put, about two-thirds of the $24 billion daily GDP loss is a
welfare loss, even without considering any productivity change in the nonmarket sector or
anything about the incidence of the GDP loss.


Full-time schooling, where there are normally about 73 million children and young adults
enrolled, is the part of the non-market sector’s productivity loss that is easiest to quantify. Their
time and efforts, which are known as “foregone earnings” and not counted in conventional GDP
measures, are combined with direct schooling costs such as the education industry’s payroll and
capital expenses because the students, their parents, or their community value the results of
schooling.        I quantify the nonmarket component of the value of school according to two
methods: one based on inputs and the other based on outputs.


For the input approach, note that the direct costs of schooling (e.g., salaries for teachers and
administrators) were $370 billion in 2018. Various studies, such as Breton (2013), estimate that
foregone earnings are about 102 percent of the direct costs, which would be $377 billion in 2018,
or about $4.3 per hour that the average student was in school.


An important output of schooling is enhanced earnings during adulthood.               If a yearlong
shutdown resulted in today’s students reaching adulthood with an average of one year less of
schooling, that would reduce their earnings by what labor economists call “the rate of return to
schooling” (Becker 1964/1993, Mincer 1974). Taking that return to be 8 percent per year of
schooling and the present value of lifetime earnings to $417,000 (that corresponds to a starting
salary of about $25,000), losing a year of schooling costs $33,000 from the perspective of a
young adult transitioning from school to the labor market. For a student 8 years before that
point, the present value of that loss is about $21,000 or about $17.50 per hour spent in school.
As noted above, about half of that output should be attributed to teachers and administrators,



19
     This assumes a wage elasticity of labor supply of 1/2 (0.49 = 0.72).
                                                                                                  11
thereby putting the value of output generated by the average student’s hour in school at $8.84.
The average estimate from the two approaches is therefore $6.58 per hour of student time.


Some schooling still occurs during shutdown, such as learning remotely. I take the loss of
student output attributable to their time and effort to be half of the $6.58, or about $3.29 per hour
that they would have been in school. As shown in Table 1, the lost value of schooling is $287
billion per year of shutdown, or $73 billion per quarter.20


Learning does not stop at graduation. Post-graduation workers learn on the job, which shifts the
composition of their compensation toward skill acquisition and away from the cash and other
fringe benefits that are part of conventionally measured GDP (Rosen 1972). Although the
market sector may be the physical location of this learning, I count the foregone earnings as
“nonmarket” because it is usually unmeasured. I estimate the value of foregone earnings using
the cross-section age-earnings profile and the average of two estimates of the age-training profile
(Mulligan 1998).         During a shutdown, this learning does not occur for 30 percent of the
workforce, although (as with market production) I assume that about one-third of its value is
replaced with nonmarket activity. The net opportunity cost associated with on-the-job training
(OJT) is therefore about $107 billion at an annual rate, as shown in Table 1.


The normal population has even more adults not in the labor force than full-time students, not to
mention all of the time that workers normally spend outside of work. If a shutdown also reduced
the hourly value of their time by $3.29 for 2000 hours per year for those out of the labor force
and for 500 hours per year for those who work, that would be a loss of $1.5 trillion at an annual
rate.




20
  Note that I estimate private values of schooling. The fact that schooling is compulsory at younger ages and
subsidized at all ages suggests that the social value of schooling might be even greater. If so, the lost social value is
even greater than shown in Table 1.
                                                                                                                      12
   II.      The current costs of barriers to medical innovation and
            economic recovery
Medical innovation can reduce the duration and severity of pandemics. In doing so, innovation
reduces the duration and severity of the direct health costs as well as the costs of economic
shutdowns intended to mitigate the health costs. As long as it remains a major barrier to medical
innovation, regulation will unnecessarily add to the economic and health costs of the current
pandemic.


Innovation is not finished when scientists discover a new medicine, device, or technique and
demonstrate its safety. Medicines and equipment will need to be manufactured and distributed
on a massive scale. Personnel will need to be trained to administer new treatments. These
processes can be slowed by regulatory barriers ranging from Federal inspections of facilities
manufacturing drugs and devices to state occupational licensure and regulation of
telecommunications companies.


Although not new, disease testing and contact tracing are essential techniques that are scalable in
principle, but currently unavailable in the United States in more than small quantities.
Regulatory barriers slow both the manufacturing of these devices and techniques as well as the
development of more scalable methods for distributing them.




II.A. The Value of Medical Innovation


Medical innovation has proven to be enormously valuable. Between 1970 and 1998, the average
year of medical discoveries added more than a trillion dollars to national wealth (Murphy and
Topel 2003). These include discoveries that reduced mortality from premature birth, heart
disease, and cancer. All age groups benefitted from new drugs that reduce mortality, in amounts
that far exceed the research and development costs for those drugs (Lichtenberg 2003). Vaccines
and treatments for viruses are especially active areas of medical research because each year’s
viruses have unique genetics (Council of Economic Advisers September 2019).



                                                                                                13
CEA estimated that the value, in terms of reduced mortality, of a vaccine against a flu pandemic
would be up to $4 trillion if it could be produced and distributed to millions of patients. A
vaccine or treatment for COVID-19 would not only reduce mortality but would also save $28
billion for each working day that normal economic activities could be resumed.21 Unlike the
mortality savings, the value of resuming these activities is higher the further that the pandemic
has progressed.


Twenty-two COVID-19 medicines were in development as of March 2020 (PhRMA 2020). In
addition, physicians, hospitals, and pharmaceutical companies are experimenting with existing
drugs that were approved for other conditions but have some promise to help coronavirus
patients. Employers and workers are devising ways to work that are less conducive to spreading
the virus. At the intersection of the medical and business communities are virus testing and
treatment that would assist in the efforts to have safer workplaces.




II.B. A Pandemic Skews the Calculus of Regulation: The Case of Drug Development


Regulatory barriers reduce both the number of patients who will directly benefit from a vaccine
or treatment and the number of treatments that are available. Those barriers, which cost an
average of $1.5 billion per approved drug, include processing time by a regulatory agency, added
costs for clinical trials, and agency fees (DiMasi, Grabowski and Hansen 2016).


The average U.S.-approved new pharmaceutical and biotech product spends eight years in the
approval process at the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which delays patient benefits and
supplier revenues by that length of time (Jørring, et al. 2017). For each approved product, there
are more than four products that fail the FDA approval process.


FDA new-drug approval consists of several phases. Phase I is a clinical trial to determine the
safety of the drug and lasts an average of 16 months. Phase I expenses, including those for drugs


21
  The savings from ending the shutdown cannot be added to CEA’s mortality savings because the shutdown itself
presumably helped reduce mortality from the pandemic.
                                                                                                            14
that are not approved, are about a fourth of total drug development expenses. Eight of the
twenty-two COVID-19 medicines in development have already reached Phase I or beyond.


U.S. clinical trial costs are about double of what they are in middle-income countries. Clinical
trials must either be conducted in the U.S. or for foreign trials be demonstrated to adhere to FDA
standards.


Only drugs shown to be safe in Phase I proceed to the next phases, which are clinical trials to
demonstrate effectiveness. The later phases add expenses and postpone the date when the drug
can be distributed to patients, but the FDA believes that the efficacy trials provide valuable
public information that many companies would not provide if they were not required for
approval (Food and Drug Administration 2017).                    Even after a drug is approved, each
manufacturer of it must be FDA approved, which in many cases involves the bureaucratic delays
associated with a foreign manufacturing site visit.


FDA new-drug approval is given only for specific indications (disease or medical condition) and
dosage. An approved drug can be prescribed for unapproved (“off-label”) indications and
dosages. Although the FDA does not have jurisdiction over physician practice, the FDA may
create malpractice and third-party payment concerns around off-label prescribing by saying that
the prescribing physician must be well informed about the relevant medical evidence, which does
not yet exist for the COVID-19 indication.22 Off-label prescriptions may be an especially fertile
area for COVID-19 innovation because the drugs have already been shown to be safe and have
proven manufacturing and distribution facilities. The drugs are often available as generics.


Outside the U.S., a large number of COVID-19 patients have received a range of off-label
therapies such as hydroxychloroquine and remdesivir.23 Even if the lack of a safe harbor for off-
label prescriptions delayed the U.S. adoption of off-label COVID-19 prescriptions by a few days,
the delay costs would be in the billions of dollars.




22
   Food and Drug Administration (1998). Malpractice concerns may also incentivize hospitals to stockpile such
drugs in anticipation of the release of medical evidence is that justifies off-label prescribing.
23
   Kalil (2020). Off-label Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine are being used in the U.S. to some extent.
                                                                                                                15
Pandemics have fundamentally different regulatory costs and benefits. A pandemic involves a
contagious disease, which means that a vaccine or treatment that is somewhat unsafe to the
patient may nonetheless confer benefits on the general population by making the patient less
contagious. More important, pandemics are also different in that most of the demand for a
vaccine or treatment occurs in a span of just a few months. As acknowledged by the passage of
the Right to Try Act, patients with short horizons do not benefit from waiting until regulators can
ensure the efficacy of a new treatment.24 Today the entire world has a short horizon when it
comes to COVID-19 medicines. What good is a safe COVID-19 medicine that emerges only
next year when it is finally proven to be effective in trials? To put it another way, the limited
duration of a pandemic is a reason why the entire population should be allowed to enter the later-
phase “trials.”




II.C. Barriers to Disease Testing and Contact Tracing



Although less exotic, some of the most valuable innovation can be the discovery and
implementation of ways to reduce infections in the workplace and the general population. There
is also a need to expand testing capacity, to consider testing in the workplace (which requires
FDA approval), and to implement contact tracing on a large scale (which has other regulatory
barriers). The economic shutdown itself can be a significant barrier to these kinds of progress
because it closes the workplaces where many of the new practices would be administered.


The presence of a disease-causing virus can be detected by gathering biological samples from a
patient and sending them to a laboratory for testing. This requires clinical personnel to gather
and record samples as well as testing equipment in the laboratories. Following a positive test
result, contact tracing reduces disease transmission (as well as delivering treatments earlier in the
disease progression) by identifying contacts and providing those contacts with follow-up
monitoring and information (World Health Organization 2017).


24
  In offering various “Fast Track” and “compassionate use” options for the later phases, especially for drugs filling
an “unmet medical need,” the FDA essentially acknowledges that lengthy approval processes are not necessary in
every situation.
                                                                                                                   16
The FDA has removed some of the barriers to developing and implementing COVID-19 tests,
although it has activated additional barriers such as those associated with a legally-declared
public health emergency (Boburg, et al. 2020).


Countries such as Iceland and South Korea, conducted COVID-19 testing and contact tracing
early and therefore had the luxury of operating on a smaller scale. By now the United States
needs more scalable technologies and protocols. Digital contact tracing has great promise. One
digital proposal is “A mobile phone App can make contact tracing and notification instantaneous
upon case confirmation. By keeping a temporary record of proximity events between individuals,
it can immediately alert recent close contacts of diagnosed cases and prompt them to self-isolate”
(Ferretti, et al. 2020). Other proposals include a centralized database of mobile location data to
allow authorities to better predict location-specific trends. However, the myriad of longstanding
telecommunication regulations can be a barrier to digital tools. Among those are privacy rules
that can require mobile and fixed internet service providers to discard any personal data until
they individually contact and obtain consent from customers. The state of Maine imposed this
requirement in 2019 and other states are considering it.25


As shown in Table 1, if any one of the innovations in medicine, testing, manufacturing, or
workplace mitigation could accelerate the end of a nationwide shutdown by a single workday,
that would be worth almost $30 billion (plus the value of health and longevity). If a combination
of these innovations could accelerate the end of a nationwide shutdown by just a month, they
would be worth $590 billion. Accelerating the end by a quarter is worth almost $2 trillion.




25
   National Conference of State Legislatures (2019). The Federal government imposed the requirement in 2016, but
the rule was overturned in 2017 by President Trump and the 115th Congress, saving consumers more than $10
billion annually (Council of Economic Advisers February 2020).
                                                                                                             17
     III. Conclusions
Shutting down the economy, which is being done as protection against the harms of COVID-19,
has tremendous costs relative to a normally functioning economy.                        The reward to finding
alternative protections that allow more normal economic activity is therefore commensurately
tremendous. Medical innovation may provide such alternatives, but is currently handicapped by
Federal and state regulations, including the shutdowns themselves.


Although this report does not address the question of whether a shutdown is better than no policy
response, it offers some of the essential ingredients for such an analysis.26 No policy response
would itself involve economic contraction, especially because work is so heavily taxed.
Shutdown policy therefore costs less relative to no policy response than it does relative to a
normally functioning economy.             On the other hand, the costs of economic contraction are
convex, which suggests that the amount of contraction without a policy response would be less
than shutdown, especially in the metric of welfare costs.




26
  Note that Table 1 contains point estimates of costs and therefore is not comparable to “worst case” estimates of
health benefits.
                                                                                                                     18
Bibliography
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Nicholas H. Stern. "Pigou, taxation and public goods." The Review of
        economic studies 41 (1974): 119–128.
Barro, Robert J., José F. Ursúa, and Joanna Weng. "The Coronavirus and the Great Influenza
        Pandemic: Lessons from the “Spanish Flu” for the Coronavirus’s Potential Effects on
        Mortality and Economic Activity." NBER working paper, no. 26866 (March 2020).
Becker, Gary S. Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis, with special reference to
        education. University of Chicago Press, 1964/1993.
Bick, Alexander, and Adam Blandin. "Real Time Labor Market Estimates During the 2020
        Coronavirus Outbreak." alexbick.weebly.com. April 15, 2020.
        https://alexbick.weebly.com/uploads/1/0/1/3/101306056/bb_covid.pdf.
Boburg, Shawn, Robert O'Harrow Jr., Neena Satija, and Amy Goldstein. "Inside the coronavirus
        testing failure: Alarm and dismay among the scientists who sought to help." The
        Washington Post, April 3, 2020.
Breton, Theodore R. "Were Mankiw, Romer, and Weil right? A reconciliation of the micro and
        macro effects of schooling on income." Macroeconomic Dynamics 17 (2013): 1023–
        1054.
Christian, Michael S., and others. Human capital accounting in the United States: 1994 to 2006.
        BEA, 2010.
Congressional Budget Office. "Preliminary Estimate of the Effects of H.R. 6201, the Families
        First Coronavirus Response Act." Congressional Budget Office. April 2, 2020a.
        https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56316.
—. "Preliminary Estimate of the Effects of H.R. 748, the CARES Act, Public Law 116-136."
        Congressional Budget Office. April 16, 2020b. https://www.cbo.gov/publication/56334.
Council of Economic Advisers. Economic Report of the President. Executive Office of the
        President, February 2020.
Council of Economic Advisers. Economic Report of the President. Executive Office of the
        President, March 2019.
Council of Economic Advisers. Mitigating the Impact of Pandemic Influenza through Vaccine
        Innovation. Executive Office of the President, September 2019.
Dahlby, Bev. The marginal cost of public funds: Theory and applications. Cambridge, MA: MIT
        press, 2008.
DiMasi, Joseph A., Henry G. Grabowski, and Ronald W. Hansen. "Innovation in the
        pharmaceutical industry: new estimates of R&D costs." Journal of health economics 47
        (2016): 20–33.
Eichenbaum, Martin S., Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt. "The Macroeconomics of
        Epidemics." googlegroups.com. March 23, 2020. https://fb8280a8-a-62cb3a1a-s-
        sites.googlegroups.com/site/mathiastrabandt/home/downloads/EichenbaumRebeloTraban
        dt_EpidemicsMacro.pdf?attachauth=ANoY7coRODwA_z1gJoSLHsTEXF0IQcWOQbF
        P5bfX9cHSypuO2NuwJPyq7T2A4p2wdppOl0jWVgmAzN4-16-
        irT7vZqkwvBs8_8PNb3hs0ZJmZtr.
European Central Bank. "The impact of the number of working days on euro area GDP in 2004."
        Monthly Bulletin, June 2004: 51-63.
Ferretti, Luca, et al. "Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with
        digital contact tracing." Science (American Association for the Advancement of Science),
        2020.
Fleming, Matthew H., John Roman, and Graham Farrell. "The shadow economy." Journal of
        International Affairs, 2000: 387–409.
                                                                                              19
Food and Drug Administration. ""Off-Label" and Investigational Use Of Marketed Drugs,
        Biologics, and Medical Devices." fda.gov. January 1998. https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-
        information/search-fda-guidance-documents/label-and-investigational-use-marketed-
        drugs-biologics-and-medical-devices.
—. "22 Case studies where phase 2 and phase 3 trials had divergent results." fda.gov. 2017.
        https://www.fda.gov/media/102332/download.
Hartwick, John M. "Natural resources, national accounting and economic depreciation." Journal
        of Public Economics 43 (1990): 291–304.
Jaffe, Sonia, Robert Minton, Casey B. Mulligan, and Kevin M. Murphy. Chicago Price Theory.
        Princeton University Press (ChicagoPriceTheory.com), 2019.
Jorgenson, Dale W. "A new architecture for the US national accounts." Review of Income and
        Wealth 55 (2009): 1–42.
Jorgenson, Dale W. "Human capital and the national accounts." Survey of Current Business 90
        (2010): 54–56.
Jørring, Adam, Andrew W. Lo, Tomas J. Philipson, Manita Singh, and Richard T. Thakor.
        "Sharing R&D risk in healthcare via FDA hedges." NBER working paper, no. 23344
        (April 2017).
Kalil, Andre C. "Treating COVID-19—Off-Label Drug Use, Compassionate Use, and
        Randomized Clinical Trials During Pandemics." JAMA, 3 2020.
Katz, Eric. "Agencies Paid Federal Employees $3.7 Billion Not to Work During Recent
        Shutdowns." govexec.com. September 17, 2019. https://www.govexec.com/pay-
        benefits/2019/09/agencies-paid-federal-employees-37-billion-not-work-during-recent-
        shutdowns/159936/.
Lichtenberg, Frank R. "Pharmaceutical Innovation, Mortality Reduction, and Economic
        Growth." In Measuring the Gains From Medical Research: An Economic Approach, by
        Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel, 74-109. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
        2003.
Mincer, Jacob. "Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. Human Behavior & Social Institutions No.
        2." (ERIC) 1974.
Mulligan, Casey B. "Substitution over time: another look at life-cycle labor supply." NBER
        macroeconomics annual 13 (1998): 75–134.
—. The Redistribution Recession. New York: Oxford University Press
        (redistributionrecession.com), 2012.
Mulligan, Casey B. "Uncertainty, Redistribution, and the Labor Market since 2007." IZA Journal
        of Labor Policy 3, no. 8 (2014): 1-16.
Mulligan, Casey B., and Brian Blase. "Congress Can Still Save the Recovery." Wall Street
        Journal, April 8, 2020.
Mulligan, Casey B., Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert H. Topel. "Some Basic Economics of
        COVID-19 Policy." Manuscript, Univ. of Chicago, 2020.
Murphy, Kevin M., and Robert H. Topel. "The Economic Value of Medical Research." In
        Measuring the Gains From Medical Research: An Economic Approach, by Kevin M.
        Murphy and Robert H. Topel, 74-109. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003.
National Conference of State Legislatures. "2019 Privacy Legislation Related to Internet Service
        Providers." ncsl.org. December 31, 2019.
        https://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-information-technology/2019-
        privacy-legislation-related-to-internet-service-providers.aspx.
Nordhaus, William D., and Edward C. Kokkelenberg. Nature’s Numbers. National Academy
        Press Washington, DC, 1999.
                                                                                             20
PhRMA. "The Biopharmaceutical Industry is Leading the Way in Developing New Vaccines and
       Treatments for COVID-19." phrma.org. March 13, 2020. https://phrma.org/-
       /media/Project/PhRMA/PhRMA-Org/PhRMA-Org/PDF/G-
       I/IndustryResponseCOVID19.pdf.
Rosen, Sherwin. "Learning and experience in the labor market." Journal of Human Resources,
       1972: 326–342.
World Health Organization. "Contact Tracing." who.int. May 2017.
       https://www.who.int/features/qa/contact-tracing/en/.




                                                                                       21
