                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              PANDEMIC LOCKDOWN:
                      THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT COMMITMENT

                                       Christian A. Moser
                                         Pierre Yared

                                      Working Paper 27062
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27062


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     April 2020




We thank Andy Atkeson, Andrés Drenik, Émilien Gouin-Bonenfant, Rick Mishkin, Ben Moll,
Trish Mosser, Tommaso Porzio, Jesse Schreger, Steve Zeldes, and seminar participants at
Columbia University and the CEPR/IHEID Webinar for helpful comments. Rachel Williams
provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System,
or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Any errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christian A. Moser and Pierre Yared. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Pandemic Lockdown: The Role of Government Commitment
Christian A. Moser and Pierre Yared
NBER Working Paper No. 27062
April 2020, Revised October 2020
JEL No. E61,H12,I18

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper studies optimal lockdown policies in a dynamic economy without government
commitment. A lockdown imposes a cap on labor supply, which lowers economic output but
improves health prospects. A government would like to commit to limit the extent of future
lockdowns in order to increase investment by supporting a more optimistic economic outlook.
However, such a commitment may not be credible since investment decisions are sunk at the time
when the government decides on lockdowns. Rules that limit a government’s future policy
discretion can improve the efficiency of lockdowns, even in the presence of noncontractible
information.


Christian A. Moser
Columbia Business School
Uris Hall 819
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
c.moser@columbia.edu

Pierre Yared
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 823
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pyared@columbia.edu
1    Introduction

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted a great rise in not only empidemiological but
also policy uncertainty.1 In response to the pandemic, governments across the world implemented
lockdown policies to limit the spread of infections. In numerous cases, these policies were first
scheduled to end in the near future and then extended. For instance, New York Governor An-
drew Cuomo imposed a statewide stay-at-home order on March 22, 2020, with an initial end date
of April 19. This lockdown was later extended, first until April 29 and then until May 15, though
targeted restrictions remain in place until the present day. Similar lockdown extensions were
implemented at the discretion of many other regional and national governments. Such policy dis-
cretion can cause additional—i.e., over and above the pandemic—uncertainty among businesses
that need to make forward-looking decisions subject to sunk costs. Examples of sunk costs include
airlines investing in fleet maintenance, hotels deciding how many employees to retain on payroll,
and restaurants placing ingredient orders ahead of reopening. Through these forward-looking de-
cisions, current economic activity depends on the degree to which businesses expect governments
to revise their plans for reopening the economy in the future.
    In this paper, we study the role of government commitment and time consistency in designing
lockdown policy. We consider a dynamic economy that embeds sequential government policy
decision-making into a general SIR model of pandemics (Kermack and McKendrick, 1927; Fer-
guson et al., 2020). Each period, firms invest, the government chooses a lockdown policy, and
workers supply labor. A lockdown imposes an upper bound on labor supply, limiting both eco-
nomic activity and disease spread. Our framework is general and subsumes key mechanics of
many other macroeconomic SIR models with lockdown or disease-mitigation policies in the liter-
ature.2 A key feature of our model is that investment is determined before a lockdown policy is
chosen. We think of this as capturing the kinds of investments in maintenance, employee reten-
tion, and inventory that businesses make while anticipating the ensuing trajectory of lockdown
    1 Following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, Baker et al. (2020) document a fourfold increase in their Economic

Policy Uncertainty index, reaching its highest value on record. Hassan et al. (2020) track firm-level risks and senti-
ments due to government-related and other factors using text analysis of earnings conference calls. A recent report by
McKinsey & Company, Smit et al. (2020) conclude that “lockdowns also cause uncertainty to remain high, as the extent
of the structural damage to the economy becomes less predictable the longer lockdowns stay in place” and that “this
uncertainty is paralyzing.”
    2 See Acemoglu et al. (2020), Alfaro et al. (2020), Alvarez et al. (2020), Atkeson (2020a,b), Baqaee and Farhi (2020a,b),

Berger et al. (2020), Birinci et al. (2020), Chari et al. (2020), Craig and Hines (2020), Eichenbaum et al. (2020a,b), Fang
et al. (2020), Farboodi et al. (2020), Glover et al. (2020), Gregory et al. (2020), Jones et al. (2020), Kaplan et al. (2020),
Krueger et al. (2020), and Piguillem and Shi (2020), among others.


                                                              2
policies during a pandemic. Through the forward-looking nature of investment, current economic
activity depends on firms’ expectations of lockdown policy.
   Lockdowns induce both output costs and health benefits (Gourinchas, 2020; Hall et al., 2020).
In our model, output decreases with the intensity of the lockdown through two channels. First, it
decreases statically through lower labor supply, which is directly curbed by the lockdown. Sec-
ond, it decreases dynamically through lower investment in expectation of lower future marginal
returns to investment, which is indirectly reduced by the lockdown. Under government commit-
ment, the optimal lockdown policy equates its marginal output costs and health benefits.
   Our main result concerns the effect of a government’s lack of commitment on optimal lock-
down policy. A government would like to commit to the extent of future lockdowns in order to
support more optimistic firm expectations in the present. However, such a commitment is not
generally credible since investment decisions are sunk when the government decides on future
lockdowns. Faced with a sunk investment, a government without commitment wants to impose
a more stringent lockdown relative to the optimal policy under commitment because it does not
fully internalize the associated reduction in returns to investment. Firms rationally anticipate the
government’s lack of commitment, causing them to invest less than they would in anticipation of
the policy under commitment. Through this mechanism, lack of commitment distorts the efficient
levels of investment and output associated with lockdown policy.
   We then study how a government can improve the efficiency of its lockdown policy by using
contingent plans that depend on new information that arrives during a lockdown. Examples of
such information include estimates of disease mortality, the state of the economy, the medical
system’s capacity, or progress on vaccine development. Some of this information may be relevant
for the payoffs and costs of lockdown policy. We show that a rule that imposes state-contingent
limits on future policy discretion can attain the efficient allocation.
   Finally, we extend our model to the case of noncontractible information that affects the effi-
ciency of lockdown policy. In this setting, a rigid rule that constrains the government’s ability to
react to such information may be inefficient because future policy flexibility is valuable. Neverthe-
less, we show that an appropriately designed rule continues to be socially beneficial even when
policy flexibility is valuable in such an environment. The reason is that a rule can be designed
to preclude ex-ante inefficiently severe lockdowns that may be chosen by a future government
without commitment. As such, a marginally binding rule increases social welfare by raising in-


                                                   3
vestment and output while continuing to allow for efficient lockdowns.
    Our theoretical characterization of welfare-improving policy rules is in line with recent exam-
ples of real-world lockdown policies. For example, in his daily briefing on May 4, 2020, New York
Governor Andrew Cuomo committed to a list of four quantifiable core factors that would need to
be met in order for regional economies to reopen for business.3 This qualitatively resembles our
prescription that optimal lockdown rules should be conditioned on future information arrival.
Elsewhere, Florida governor Ron DeSantis announced on September 25, 2020, a lower bound on
restaurant capacity regardless of local restrictions. The stated goal of this lower bound was to
reduce future lockdown policy discretion.4 Again, this qualitatively resembles our finding that an
unconditional limit on future lockdowns can improve the efficiency of lockdown policies.
    Importantly, our analysis does not imply that lockdowns are harmful or necessarily too strict.
In fact, reducing or lifting the lockdown in our model is detrimental if the resulting health costs
exceed the economic gains. The government in our model chooses a current lockdown policy
that is ex-post optimal. Our analysis points to the value of rules that define limits on the extent
of future lockdowns. Such rules are net beneficial if their expected economic gains from stimu-
lating investment toward its efficient level exceed their health costs. Naturally, there are other
reasons why a government may choose inefficiently lax lockdowns. Our model abstracts from
policy biases involving insufficient degrees of lockdowns by assuming that policies are chosen by
a rational and benevolent government that maximizes long-run social welfare.5 The mechanism
we highlight here would act against political economy considerations that lead to departures from
the benevolent-government assumption.


Related literature. This paper relates to the nascent literature on optimal policy in a pandemic,
with recent contributions by Acemoglu et al. (2020), Alfaro et al. (2020), Alvarez et al. (2020),
   3 New   York Governor Andrew Cuomo announced at his daily New York coronavirus press conference on May
4, 2020: “As long as your rate of transmission is manageable and low, then reopen your businesses and reopen the
businesses in phases, so you’re increasing that activity level while you’re watching the rate of transmission. Rate of
transmission goes up, stop the reopening, close the valve, close the valve right away. So reopen businesses, do it in
phases and watch that rate of transmission. If it [the transmission rate Rt ] gets over 1.1 stop everything immediately.”
   4 Florida governor Ron DeSantis announced at a news conference on September 25, 2020: “We’re also cognizant

about the need for business certainty. There have been some local closures and other types of restrictions and so
the order that I’m signing today will guarantee restaurants operate—will not allow closures. They can operate at a
minimum of 50 percent regardless of local rule.”
   5 This assumption may be violated if political economy considerations lead the government to overweigh immediate

economic gains relative to future health costs of relaxing a lockdown, akin to the mechanism in Aguiar and Amador
(2011).




                                                           4
Atkeson (2020a,b), Baqaee and Farhi (2020a,b), Berger et al. (2020), Birinci et al. (2020), Chari et
al. (2020), Craig and Hines (2020), Eichenbaum et al. (2020a,b), Fang et al. (2020), Farboodi et al.
(2020), Glover et al. (2020), Gregory et al. (2020), Jones et al. (2020), Kaplan et al. (2020), Krueger
et al. (2020), and Piguillem and Shi (2020), among others. The analysis contained in this literature
focuses on the optimal design of government policy, including the timing and intensity of lock-
downs, under the assumption that the optimal policy can be enforced at all dates and under all
contingencies. Our work contributes to this literature by highlighting that this analysis omits an
important aspect of lockdown design, namely that the optimal policy may be hard to enforce due
to issues of time-inconsistency. What distinguishes our work is the focus on the value of govern-
ment commitment and the design of rules to improve efficiency absent such commitment in the
context of lockdown policy.
   That prior work on policy responses to a pandemic has ignored issues of time inconsistency
is perhaps surprising given the parallel insights from an older literature that studies government
commitment in the context of capital taxation, including the important contributions by Kydland
and Prescott (1980), Chari and Kehoe (1990), Klein et al. (2008), Aguiar et al. (2009), and Chari et
al. (2019). Like in the previous work on capital taxation, lack of commitment in our model reduces
economic activity by distorting investment. However, our work incorporates two new insights
that are central to the context of pandemics. First, a lockdown distorts investment not directly via
taxation but indirectly by lowering the marginal returns to investment through a cap on labor sup-
ply. Second, investment distortions from lockdown do not directly affect the government budget
but instead affect the future health state of the economy.
   Our study of government commitment in the context of a pandemic also represents a method-
ological advance over previous work in the literature on capital taxation. Since the health state of
our economy follows a general SIR model of pandemic spread, the value of a given health state
cannot be represented by a univariate, concave function as in a typical model of optimal fiscal
policy. This means that the usual methods for comparative statics cannot be applied here. Instead,
we characterize the time-inconsistency of optimal lockdown policy under weak assumptions on
the economic environment and the SIR model of disease dynamics.
   Our analysis of rules for lockdown policy in the presence of noncontractible information relates
to a growing literature on commitment versus flexibility in macroeconomics (Athey et al., 2005;
Amador et al., 2006; Halac and Yared, 2014, 2018; Moser and Olea de Souza e Silva, 2019). Prior


                                                  5
work in this area has focused on rules for either savings or for monetary and fiscal policy. Our
work adds to this literature and a nascent strand of papers on the economics of pandemics with
a theoretical analysis of the optimality of rules for lockdown policy. Our result that rules can
strictly increase social welfare, even if flexibility is valuable, is reminiscent of similar insights in
the context of savings or fiscal and monetary policy. However, our results do not directly follow
from the methods developed in prior work, which rely on stronger assumptions on the utility
function and the information structure than we require in our setting. By extending these insights
and applying them to optimal lockdown design, we highlight a hitherto overlooked aspect of the
policy debate around responses to pandemics.



2     Model

We consider a general infinite-horizon model of an economy during a pandemic. Each period
has four stages. First, firms make an irreversible investment that enhances future productivity,
such as rent, utilities, overhead expenses, software licenses, marketing, recruiting, and personnel
costs. Second, after the investment is undertaken, the government chooses a lockdown policy.
A lockdown imposes a cap on labor supply, which reduces economic output but inhibits disease
spread. Third, production then takes place and all proceeds are paid to firms and workers. Fourth
and finally, the pandemic evolves according to an SIR model of disease spread, which depends on
the lockdown policy. A key feature of our model is that investment is determined before lockdown
policy is chosen. We think of this as capturing the fact that business purchases of irreversible
inputs must be made in advance of production and in anticipation of future policies.


2.1   Economic Environment

Periods are indexed by t = 0, 1, . . .. At every date t, competitive firms make an irreversible in-
vestment xt . The government then chooses a lockdown policy `t ∈ [0, 1] representing a cap on
labor supply. If `t = 1, then there is no lockdown while if `t = 0, there is maximal lockdown. The
economy is initialized with a continuum of mass 1 of workers that supply up to one unit of labor
inelastically subject to the binding upper bound `t .




                                                   6
   Workers consume their wage income


                                                  c t = wt `t ,                                   (1)


where ct is consumption and wt is the market wage. The irreversible investment xt combined with
labor `t generates output yt according to the following production function:


                                             yt = f ( xt , `t , Ωt ) ,


where Ωt is the health state at date t that is described in detail in the next subsection. The depen-
dence of the production function on the health state captures the possibility that the pandemic—in
addition to making people sick and killing people—decreases output by debilitating the work-
force, by changing the share of the labor force working from t the office and from home, and
by inducing protective but productivity-reducing social distancing efforts even absent any lock-
down (Dingel and Neiman, 2020; Mongey et al., 2020). We assume that the function f (·) is con-
tinuously differentiable, increasing, and globally concave in xt and `t , with limxt →0 ∂ f (·) /∂x =
lim`t →0 ∂ f (·) /∂` = ∞ and limxt →∞ ∂ f (·) /∂x = lim`t →∞ ∂ f (·) /∂` = 0. From here on, we make
the following key assumption:

Assumption 1. The production function f ( xt , `t , Ωt ) satisfies

                                                 ∂2 f (·)
                                                          > 0.
                                                 ∂xt ∂`t

   Assumption 1 states that investment xt and labor `t are q-complements in production. It im-
plies that there are higher marginal returns to investment xt when labor `t is greater and vice
versa, which is intuitive under our interpretation of xt being investment that enhances future pro-
ductivity.
   Firm owners maximize profits


                                            π t = y t − x t − wt `t ,


where we have set the price of the irreversible investment xt equal to that of output, which is
normalized to 1. In a competitive equilibrium, the marginal product of investment satisfies the


                                                        7
following firm optimality condition:

                                                     ∂ f ( xt , `t , Ωt )
                                               1=                         .                                      (2)
                                                            ∂x

      Equation (2) implies that in a competitive equilibrium where investment adjusts to the antici-
pated level of labor supply, investment can be written as


                                                 xt = x ∗ (`t , Ωt ) ,                                           (3)


where the function x ∗ (·) satisfies ∂x ∗ (`t , Ωt ) /∂` > 0 by Assumption 1. In other words, firms
invest less in anticipation of a more stringent lockdown as a result of the q-complementarity be-
tween investment and labor in production.
      Labor is competitively supplied so wages equal the marginal product of labor given by

                                                      ∂ f ( xt , `t , Ωt )
                                              wt =                         .                                     (4)
                                                              ∂`

From equation (4), consumption given by (1) satisfies


                                               ct = c∗ ( xt , `t , Ωt ) ,                                        (5)


where the function c∗ (·) is continuously differentiable in xt and `t and strictly increasing in xt by
Assumption 1.6


2.2     Disease Spread, Lockdown Policy, and Welfare

We model disease spread as following an SIR model (Kermack and McKendrick, 1927; Ferguson
et al., 2020), which we allow to depend on a lockdown policy, as in Atkeson (2020a), Eichenbaum
et al. (2020a), and Alvarez et al. (2020). Specifically, we define the health state of the economy in
period t as Ωt = {St , It , Rt , Dt }, where St ∈ [0, 1] is the mass of susceptible individuals, It ∈ [0, 1]
is the mass of infected and contagious individuals, Rt ∈ [0, 1] is the mass of recovered individuals,
   6 We do not require that c∗ (·) be globally increasing in ` , though this is the case for commonly used production
                                                              t
functions, such as those in the Cobb-Douglas family.




                                                           8
and Dt ∈ [0, 1] is the mass of deceased individuals. It follows that


                                                 St + It + Rt + Dt = 1.


    An SIR model defines a mapping Γ (·) that implies a law of motion of the health state,


                                                   Ωt+1 = Γ (`t , Ωt ) ,


which depends on the degree of lockdown at date t.7 The initial health state Ω0 is taken as given.
    Social welfare equals the discounted sum of a utility stream,

                                                      ∞
                                                     ∑ βt u (ct , Ωt ) ,                                         (6)
                                                     t =0


where β ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor, and u (·) is a strictly increasing and strictly concave utility
function of consumption ct and also depends on the health state Ωt .8 Utility depends directly on
the health state, which captures the costs of illness and mortality associated with disease spread.
Moreover, utility also indirectly depends on disease spread through the level of consumption ct ,
since the health state Ωt directly enters the production function f (·).
    We do not impose restrictions on how the health state and lockdown impact output, utility,
and disease dynamics in the economy other than the following assumption, which we maintain
from here on:

Assumption 2. The functions f ( xt , `t , Ωt ), u (ct , Ωt ), and Γ (`t , Ωt ) are continuously differentiable in
all elements of Ωt .

    This technical assumption guarantees that the government’s problem is well-behaved and that
we can rely on first-order conditions (FOCs) in the proofs of our results. Note that these assump-
tions are satisfied in many recent macroeconomic models with SIR modules in which disease dy-
namics respond smoothly to lockdown policies, such as Eichenbaum et al. (2020a) and Alvarez et
al. (2020).
   7 All of our results extend to a setting where the health state is also a function of time,
                                                                                        a feature which would capture
factors such as the evolving constraints on the medical system and the changing likelihood of vaccine discovery.
   8 Our assumption that the government only weighs worker consumption is not necessary to derive our main result

in Proposition 1, namely that the optimal lockdown policy is time-inconsistent. We make this assumption to simplify
the exposition here.



                                                              9
2.3     Timeline

At the beginning of each period, the health state Ωt is taken as given. The intra-period order of
events at each date t is as follows:


    1. Firms choose irreversible investment xt ;

    2. The government chooses lockdown policy `t ;

    3. Production occurs subject to lockdown policy, output yt is produced, and workers and firm-
        owners are paid and consume;

    4. The health state evolves according to the transition function Γ.


      It is worth highlighting that investments are made before the lockdown policy is chosen each
period. This sequencing captures the long-term investments that businesses make in anticipation
of the future trajectory of lockdown policies. Our modeling approach is motivated by recent sur-
vey evidence documenting that businesses that expect a more prolonged crisis—due to the pan-
demic and associated lockdowns—are also more likely to expect to shut down operations (Bartik
et al., 2020). We will explore the implications of this sequencing of investment and lockdown
decision for the optimal policy under commitment compared to that under lack of commitment.



3     Optimal Policy under Commitment

Suppose that the government commits to an optimal lockdown policy sequence {`ct }∞
                                                                                 t=0 at time 0.

This means that the government internalizes the fact that investment optimally adjusts to antic-
ipated labor supply as determined by future lockdown policy. Given firm optimality in (3), this
policy sequence induces an optimal investment sequence { xtc }∞
                                                              t=0 under government commitment.

      After substituting the investment function xt = x ∗ (`t , Ωt ) from (3) and the consumption func-
tion ct = c∗ ( xt , `t , Ωt ) from (5) into the social welfare function (6), the government with commit-




                                                   10
ment solves the following sequence problem:

                                                      ∞
                                                  (                                                      )
                                       max
                                      {`t }∞
                                                      ∑ β u (c
                                                             t   ∗      ∗
                                                                     ( x (`t , Ωt ) , `t , Ωt ) , Ωt )       (7)
                                           t =0       t =0

                             s.t.     `t ∈ [0, 1] ,          ∀t ≥ 0,

                                      Ωt+1 = Γ (`t , Ωt ) ,             ∀t ≥ 0,

                                      Ω0 given.


Importantly, substituting the optimal firm investment response x ∗ (`t , Ωt ) into the welfare func-
tion before deriving the optimal lockdown sequence {`ct }∞
                                                         t=0 that solves the program in (7) means

that the government with commitment takes into account the reaction of investment to its policies
in all periods. The problem of the government with commitment can be written recursively as


                     V c (Ω) = max {u (c∗ ( x ∗ (`, Ω) , `, Ω) , Ω) + βV c (Γ (`, Ω))} ,                     (8)
                                    `∈[0,1]


where V c (Ω) denotes the value of health state Ω to the government with commitment. The
solution to program (8) induces an optimal lockdown policy under commitment as a function
of the prevailing health state Ω, denoted `c (Ω). This lockdown policy in turn yields an op-
timal investment level under commitment that depends only on the health state Ω, denoted
x c (Ω) = x ∗ (`c (Ω), Ω).
    Standard arguments together with Assumption 2 imply that V c (Ω) is continuously differen-
tiable in all of its arguments. This means that the necessary FOC for interior optimal levels of
lockdown under commitment `c ∈ (0, 1) is

                               ∂u (·) ∂c∗ (·) ∂x ∗ (·) ∂c∗ (·)        dV c (·)
                                                              
                                                      +          = −β          .                             (9)
                                ∂c      ∂x      ∂`       ∂`             d`

    In choosing the degree of lockdown, the government weighs two opposing forces, as in Gour-
inchas (2020) and Hall et al. (2020). On the one hand, it considers the economic costs captured by the
left-hand side of (9). The economic costs are twofold. First, conditional on the level of investment,
a lockdown has a direct impact on output and consumption by limiting labor supply. Second, a
lockdown has an indirect impact on output by reducing the marginal product of investment which
reduces investment. The government’s ability to commit gives it the ability to take into account


                                                                 11
both of these factors and anticipate firms’ reaction to the policy.
    On the other hand, the government considers the discounted future health benefits in terms of
reduced mortality from inhibiting the disease spread, as captured by right-hand side of (9). Using
the envelope condition, the marginal health cost of lockdown can be represented recursively as

                   dV c (Ω0 )   du (c∗ ( x c (`0 , Ω0 ) , `0 , Ω0 ) , Ω0 )    dV c (Γ (`0 , Ω0 ))
                              =                                            +β                     ,    (10)
                      d`                           d`                                d`

where Ω0 = Γ (`, Ω) denotes next period’s health state and `0 denotes the level of next period’s
optimal lockdown. By use of the envelope condition, the optimal lockdown policy function
`c (Γ(`, Ω)) was replaced with the level of next period’s optimal lockdown `0 on the right-hand
side of equation (10). This equation illustrates that present lockdown dynamically impacts all fu-
ture health states, which in turn impact welfare both through their direct health costs and through
their indirect effect on consumption.



4   Optimal Policy under Lack of Commitment

Under lack of commitment, investment is treated as sunk at the time when lockdown policy is
chosen. The government at date t chooses an optimal degree of lockdown that depends on in-
vestment xt and the health state Ωt , which we denote `∗ ( xt , Ωt ). Firms in turn anticipate the
government’s policy and decide on the optimal investment level x ∗ (`t , Ωt ) that depends on the
expected lockdown `t and the health state Ωt . We consider a Markov perfect equilibrium (MPE),
in which policies can be expressed as functions of only the health state Ωt , namely x n (Ωt ) and
`n (Ωt ). In any MPE, x n (Ωt ) = x ∗ (`n (Ωt ), Ωt ) and `n (Ωt ) = `∗ ( x n (Ωt ), Ωt ), as the government
and firms take each other’s policy functions as given when choosing their actions under the pre-
vailing health state.
    The problem of the government without commitment in an MPE can be written recursively as


              W n ( x, Ω) = max {u (c∗ ( x, `, Ω) , Ω) + βV n (Γ (`, Ω))} ,                            (11)
                             `∈[0,1]

                V n Ω0 = u c∗ x n Ω0 , `n Ω0 , Ω0 , Ω0 + βV n Γ `n Ω0 , Ω0 ,
                                                                    



where W n ( x, Ω) denotes the value of investment x and health state Ω, while V n (Ω0 ) denotes



                                                         12
the continuation value of next period’s health state Ω0 = Γ (`, Ω) to the government without
commitment. Note that W n ( x, Ω) depends on the current period’s investment and health state,
while V n (Ω0 ) depends only on next period’s health state. This reflects the fact that next period’s
MPE investment policy x n (Ω0 ) is already consistent with the future MPE lockdown policy `n (Ω0 )
by the government without commitment, and vice versa. Importantly, by not substituting the
current period’s optimal investment response when solving its problem, the government without
commitment treats current investment as sunk when deciding on lockdown policy.
   Consider the government’s FOC in a differentiable MPE for interior lockdown `n ∈ (0, 1)
under lack of commitment:

                                         ∂u (·) ∂c∗ (·)      dV n (·)
                                                        = −β          .                                     (12)
                                          ∂c      ∂`           d`

   Assumption 1 implies that, holding all else—including investment and the health state—fixed,
the left-hand side of the optimality condition under lack of commitment in equation (12) is strictly
less than that under commitment in equation (9). This captures the fact that a government with-
out commitment undervalues the economic cost of a lockdown relative to a government with
commitment. Specifically, a government without commitment does not take into account that a
more stringent lockdown changes ex-ante firm expectations in a way that reduces the level of
investment, which in turn reduces future output and consumption.
   Now consider the right-hand side of (12). The envelope condition can be written as

           dV n (Ω0 )   du (c∗ ( x n (`0 , Ω0 ) , `0 , Ω0 ) , Ω0 )    dV n (Γ (`0 , Ω0 ))
                      =                                            +β                                       (13)
              d`                           d`                                d`
                            du (c ( x (` , Ω ) , ` , Ω ) , Ω )
                                  ∗    n     0     0    0     0     0     dV n (Γ (`0 , Ω0 )) d`n (Ω0 )
                                                                                            
                        +                                             + β                               ,
                                               d`0                                d`0            d`

where Ω0 = Γ (`, Ω) denotes next period’s health state as a function of the current lockdown level
and health state, `0 denotes the level of optimal lockdown under lack of commitment next period,
and `n (Ω0 ) is next period’s MPE lockdown policy under lack of commitment as a function of next
period’s health state.
   The first line on the right-hand side of the envelope condition under no commitment in (13)
is analogous to that under commitment in (10). It represents the payoff from changing the future
health state by changing the lockdown today, holding fixed the optimal future lockdown policy.



                                                        13
    The second line on the right-hand side of (13) is unique to the case of lack of commitment.
It corresponds to the strategic effect of a lockdown on future policy, since changing the future
health state also changes future lockdown incentives. Under commitment, the term analogous
to that in brackets in the second line of (13) is zero because the government with commitment
takes into account firms’ reaction to its choice of policy, as captured by the FOC (9). Under lack of
commitment, however, equation (12) and Assumption 1 together imply that the term in brackets
is positive.9
    Note that our general model is rather complex in that the value of a given health state cannot
be represented by a univariate, concave function of the state, as in a typical model of optimal fiscal
policy. Nevertheless, under the weak conditions spelled out above, we obtain the following result:

Proposition 1 (Time Inconsistency). Suppose that the optimal policy under commitment {`ct }∞
                                                                                           t=0 admits

an interior solution in some period t. Then the optimal policy under commitment is not time-consistent.

Proof. See Appendix A.1.

    Proposition 1 states that lack of government commitment may result in an inefficient lockdown
policy. The idea behind the proof is as follows: If the optimal lockdown policy under lack of
commitment mirrored that under commitment, then the no-commitment government’s option to
deviate would have zero value because a deviation would be associated with weakly negative
payoff. But at an interior solution where `t ∈ (0, 1) for some t, the optimality condition (12)
under no commitment calls for a strictly lower value of `t than condition (9) under commitment.
Therefore, the optimal policy is time-inconsistent whenever it is interior.
    The intuition for this result is that, absent commitment, the government takes firm investment
as given and thus undervalues the economic cost of a lockdown, leading to an inefficient choice
of lockdown. By anticipating this behavior, firms invest less than they would under commitment.
For this reason, the optimal policy under lack of commitment differs from that under commit-
ment.10
    Note that Proposition 1 is silent on whether the optimal lockdown policy under commitment
is more or less stringent than that under lack of commitment. This is due to two key differences
    9 While we can sign the term in brackets, we cannot sign the overall strategic effect since the sign of d `n ( Γ (`, Ω )) /d `

is ambiguous due to the nonlinear dynamics of the SIR model. If, for example, a marginal increase in ` causes a large
(small) share of the population to become recovered and immune, then the optimal future `n (Γ (`, Ω)) may increase
(decrease).
   10 In case Assumption 1 is reversed—i.e., if x and ` are q-substitutes in production—then our main result continues

to hold but the intuition is also reversed.


                                                               14
between the optimal policies with and without commitment. The first difference is a static one:
starting from an `t that is interior under commitment and given a health state Ωt , investment
xt , and continuation value V (Ωt+1 ), a government without commitment would choose a strictly
lower `t than a government with commitment. This is due to the fact that the government without
commitment treats investment xt as sunk when it decides on lockdown policy at time t. The
second difference is a dynamic one: given the inefficient policy choice of a government without
commitment, investment and the health state will evolve differently in a dynamic model under
lack of commitment versus under commitment. Since the sign of the second difference is not clear
without further model restrictions, the net effect of lack of commitment on lockdown policies is
theoretically ambiguous. This also means that a full characterization of the MPE lockdown policy
`n (·) is difficult and beyond the scope of the current paper.



5     Value of Rules

We have established that the optimal lockdown policy is not time-consistent. Time-inconsistency
in policy arises due to dynamic government optimization in the space of Markov strategies. De-
viations from the policy under commitment occur because a government without commitment
chooses a lockdown that is ex-post optimal but leads to ex-ante inefficient investment in expec-
tation of the no-commitment outcome. This raises the possibility that constraints on government
policy can prevent ex-ante inefficient policy outcomes.


5.1    Optimality of Limiting Future Policy Discretion

In our environment, a credible lockdown policy plan can be socially optimal. Suppose that rather
than choosing a lockdown policy `t ∈ [0, 1] with discretion, the government is constrained to
choosing a policy `t ∈ Lt (Ωt ) from a subset of the policy space Lt (Ωt ) ⊆ [0, 1] that depends on
the prevailing health state Ωt . As an example of a particularly heavy-handed policy constraint,
consider Lt (Ωt ) = {`ct (Ωt )}. Then the policy decision is constrained to the optimum under com-
mitment, `t (Ωt ) = `ct (Ωt ). Clearly, this policy constraint implements the efficient outcome as it
mimics the time-consistent policy choice.
      Going beyond this extreme example, we can study rules that constrain the extent of a lock-
down. Consider a state-contingent rule Lt (Ωt ) = {`t |`t ≥ `t (Ωt ) so that a government at date


                                                  15
t can choose any policy `t that exceeds `t (Ωt ) with discretion. In other words, the government
commits to limiting the stringency of the lockdown.11 We then have the following result:

                                                                   ∞
Proposition 2 (Value of Rules). Consider a rule {`t (Ωt )}t=0 such that `t (Ωt ) = `ct (Ωt ) for all periods
t and all health states Ωt . Then there exists an MPE subject to this rule in which the government without
commitment chooses the optimal policy under commitment.

Proof. See Appendix A.2.

    Proposition 2 shows that the introduction of rules that impose a limit on the severity of lock-
down can implement the optimal policy and therefore improve the efficiency and welfare in an
economy without government commitment. The idea behind the proof is as follows: A rule that
takes the form of a lower bound only allows for upward deviations in labor supply from `t to
some `˜ t > `t , i.e., to a less strict lockdown. But if a surprise relaxation of lockdown were optimal
to a government without commitment given sunk investment x ∗ (`t , Ωt ) as a function of the antic-
ipated lockdown `t and health state Ωt , then a government with commitment could have imple-
mented the same lockdown relaxation with firms anticipating it, leading to investment x ∗ (`˜ t , Ωt ).
Since an anticipated lockdown relaxation yields higher investment and thus consumption, due to
q-complementarity between investment and labor in production, such a deviation contradicts the
optimality of the original lockdown policy.
    The intuition for this result is that a lower bound on labor supply stops the government with-
out commitment from making short-sighted policy decisions when investment is treated as sunk.
An upper bound on labor supply is not necessary because lack of commitment does not tempt a
government to impose too lax a lockdown. This is because q-complementarity between invest-
ment and labor in production (Assumption 1) implies that one-shot deviations from an equili-
birum under commitment by a government without commitment are profitable only in the direc-
tion of stricter, not less strict, lockdown policy. For this reason, an upper bound on labor supply
cannot improve the efficiency of lockdown policy.
    Note that the rule described in Proposition 2 is less strict than one dictating the exact level of
lockdown every period. At the same time, an upper bound on lockdowns may be overly strict
if good reasons for imposing future lockdowns materialize themselves. While our analysis so far
  11 This lower-bound rule matches Florida governor Ron DeSantis’ announcement in a news conference on September

25, 2020, of a state-wide 50-percent minimum capacity for restaurants.



                                                         16
has abstracted from such reasons by assuming that the ex-post efficiency of future lockdowns can
be guaranteed ex-ante, we now turn to the case when future policy flexibility is valuable.


5.2     Uncertainty and Noncontractible Information

We have shown thus far that in an economy in which full information on the health state is avail-
able, a government without commitment would like to choose a more stringent lockdown than
is optimal, but a rule that limits future lockdown can increase welfare by mitigating this commit-
ment problem. In practice, of course, government policy depends not only on the health state but
also on new information that arrives during a lockdown. Such information may include estimates
of disease mortality, the state of the economy, the likelihood of vaccine discovery, or the medical
system’s capacity. However, information on future realizations of these variables may be hard to
verify or incorporate into a written contract.
      This motivates our study of the design of rules under uncertainty and noncontractible infor-
mation. We show that a modification of our previous result (Proposition 2) extends to an environ-
ment that incorporates such considerations. Specifically, we show that rules that constrain future
government policy either as a function of future information revelation—as seen in the US state
of New York—or unconditionally—as in the US state of Florida—can improve welfare.
      To capture this idea, suppose that a state variable θt is realized in addition to the prevail-
ing health state Ωt before investment xt = x ∗ (`t , Ωt , θt ) is made in anticipation of lockdown
`t = `∗ ( xt , Ωt , θt ) in period t. Let θt be independently and identically distributed with associ-
ated probability density function (pdf) g(θt ) over support θt ∈ [θ, θ ] with θ < θ for all t. After
substituting the modified consumption function ct = c∗ ( xt , `t , Ωt , θt ) based on (5), social welfare
at time t = 0 given a sequence of investment and lockdown policies { xt , `t }∞
                                                                              t=0 is

                                      ∞
                                     ∑ βt E0 [u (c∗ (xt , `t , Ωt , θt ) , Ωt , θt )]               (14)
                                     t =0

                              s.t.   Ωt+1 = Γ (`t , Ωt , θt ) ,     ∀t ≥ 0,

                                     θt ∼ g (θt ) ,    ∀t ≥ 0,

                                     Ω0 given,


where the expectation E0 [·] is taken over the time-0 and future realizations of θt .



                                                      17
    Note that the stochastic state θt enters the problem in multiple places. It indirectly enters the
consumption function c∗ (·) through its effect on production. At the same time, it directly enters
the utility function u(·) and the SIR model Ω(·). Of course, while they are taken as given in
(14), the optimal policy functions for investment x ∗ (`t , Ωt , θt ) and lockdown `∗ ( xt , Ωt , θt ) will also
depend on θt .
    The optimal lockdown policy under commitment depends on the health state Ωt and the re-
alization of θt , denoted `c (Ωt , θt ). This policy function implicitly takes into account the optimal
investment under commitment, x c (Ωt , θt ) = x ∗ (`ct (Ωt , θt ), Ωt , θt ). Analogously, the optimal lock-
down policy in an MPE under lack of commitment depends only on the health state Ωt and the
realization of θt , denoted `n (Ωt , θt ). This policy function implicitly takes into account the MPE
choice of investment under lack of commitment, x n (Ωt , θt ) = x ∗ (`nt (Ωt , θt ), Ωt , θt ).
    Suppose that θt represents contractible information. From this and an argument analogous to
that in Proposition 2, it follows that a rule that imposes a sequence of lower bounds {`t (Ωt , θt )}∞
                                                                                                     t =0

on labor supply, so that `t ≥ `t (Ωt , θt ) for `t (Ωt , θt ) = `c (Ωt , θt ) in all periods t, can increase social
welfare by inducing the government without commitment to choose the policy under commit-
ment.
    In practice, some of the information in θt may not be contractible. In this case, a rigid plan may
be too constraining since policy flexibility in responding to realizations of θt is valuable. We show
that bounded discretion in the form of a rule `t (Ωt ) > 0 that constrains the government to policies
`t ∈ [`t (Ωt ), 1] independent of θt can still improve welfare in this case. To this end, consider the
recursive formulation of the problem faced by a government without commitment:


W n ( x, Ω, θ ) = max u (c∗ ( x, `, Ω, θ ) , Ω, θ ) + βEθ 0 [V n Γ (`, Ω, θ ) , θ 0 ] ,
                                                                                  
                                                                                                                  (15)
                  `∈[0,1]

 V n Ω0 , θ 0 = u c∗ x n Ω0 , θ 0 , `n Ω0 , θ 0 , Ω0 , θ 0 , Ω0 , θ 0 + βEθ 000 [V n Γ `n Ω0 , θ 0 , Ω0 , θ 0 , θ 00 ],
                                                                                                             



where Ω0 = Γ (`, Ω, θ ) and Eθ 0 [·] denotes the expectation over next period’s realization of θ 0 . From
here on, we operate under the following simplyfing assumption:

Assumption 3. The optimal lockdown policy under lack of commitment `n (Ωt , θt ) is strictly decreasing
in θt over interior `n (Ωt , θt ) ∈ (0, 1) and continuous in a neighborhood below θ for all Ωt . Moreover, the
pdf g(·) is strictly positive and continuous in a neighborhood below θ.



                                                         18
    According to Assumption 3, higher values of the noncontractible state are associated with
stricter optimal lockdown policies under lack of commitment. Then we obtain the following result:

Proposition 3 (Value of Rules under Uncertainty). Suppose the optimal lockdown policy under lack of
commitment is interior at time 0, so `n (Ω0 , θ0 ) < 1 for some realization of θ0 with positive probability.
Then there exists a rule that imposes a lower bound `t (Ωt ) on labor supply in some period t that strictly
increases social welfare under lack of commitment.

Proof. See Appendix A.3.

    Proposition 3 shows that the introduction of rules increases social welfare even if there is a fu-
ture policy discretion is valuable. The idea behind the proof is as follows: A government lacking
commitment chooses a more severe lockdown in the future than is socially desirable. As such,
a marginally binding rule increases social welfare by raising investment and output at no effi-
ciency cost to future lockdown policy design. To demonstrate this, a key part of the argument is
that the most extreme possible lockdown policy would never be optimal for a government with
commitment under any realization of new information. This is natural in our setting in which
the production technology satisfies an Inada condition—completely shutting down the economy
yields unbounded marginal gains from opening the economy slightly.               12


    The intuition for this result is that a marginally binding rule does not prevent efficient lock-
downs while successfully limiting the damages of excessive lockdowns in the future. By prevent-
ing only the most extreme variants of future lockdown policies, such a rule can improve firm
expectations and improve the efficiency of lockdown policy.



6    Concluding Remarks

We have analyzed the value of government commitment in choosing a lockdown policy. A gov-
ernment would like to commit to limit the extent of future lockdowns in order to support more
optimistic firm expectations in the present. However, such a commitment is not credible since
investment decisions are sunk when the government makes the lockdown decision. This gives
value to rules limiting future lockdown policy discretion.
  12 For an example of a case in which extreme choices are sometimes optimal even under commitment, see Halac and

Yared (forthcoming) for a discussion of threshold contracts with escape clauses.




                                                       19
   Our analysis leaves several interesting avenues for future research. First, the generality of our
approach suggests that time-consistency considerations could be relevant in the realms of many
lockdown decision problems. For instance, it would be interesting to characterize the optimal pol-
icy response to widespread employee furloughs. Payroll subsidies and cheap access to credit for
businesses have been widely advocated during the global COVID-19 pandemic. However, their
efficiency under lack of government commitment could be drastically different from that under
commitment, which previous work has exclusively focused on. Time-inconsistency is also rele-
vant in other domains, such as school and college decisions to reopen in anticipation of future
shutdowns. Insights similar to our characterization of government policy under lack of commit-
ment may apply in such contexts.
   Second, we have evaluated the effect of rules that limit lockdowns assuming that governments
adhere to such rules. In practice, rules may be broken and the private sector may be uncertain
about the government’s commitment to respecting them. In the context of capital taxation, Phe-
lan (2006) and Dovis and Kirpalani (2019) show that this consideration leads the private sector to
dynamically update its beliefs about a government’s ability to commit. We conjecture that in our
framework, this uncertainty could cause firms to react to lockdown extensions by becoming in-
creasingly pessimistic about the government’s ability to commit to lifting a future lockdown. This
could lead to further declines in investment and economic activity as well as political economy
repercussions in response to lockdown extensions.
   Finally, our analysis ignores the availability of monetary and fiscal policy tools, as in Guerrieri
et al. (2020). In our framework, these tools could not only mitigate the immediate economic costs
of a pandemic, but also boost investment, thus counteracting future economic costs from underin-
vestment due to the government’s lack of commitment. We leave the exploration of how optimal
lockdown policy interacts with monetary and fiscal policy under lack of government commitment
as an interesting subject of further research.




                                                 20
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Victor Chernozhukov, Iván Werning, and Michael D. Whinston, “Flattening
  the Pandemic and Recession Curves,” Working Paper, 2020.
Aguiar, Mark and Manuel Amador, “Growth in the Shadow of Expropriation,” Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 06 2011, 126 (2), 651–697.
  , , and Gita Gopinath, “Investment Cycles and Sovereign Debt Overhang,” The Review of
  Economic Studies, 2009, 76 (1), 1–31.
Alfaro, Laura, Ester Faia, Nora Lamersdorf, and Farzad Saidi, “Aggregate and Firm-Level Stock
  Returns During Pandemics, in Real Time,” NBER Working Paper No. 27134, 2020.
Alvarez, Fernando E., David Argente, and Francesco Lippi, “A Simple Planning Problem for
  COVID-19 Lockdown,” NBER Working Paper No. 26981, 2020.
Amador, Manuel, Iván Werning, and George-Marios Angeletos, “Commitment vs. Flexibility,”
  Econometrica, 2006, 74 (2), 365–396.
Athey, Susan, Andrew Atkeson, and Patrick J. Kehoe, “The Optimal Degree of Discretion in
  Monetary Policy,” Econometrica, 2005, 73 (5), 1431–1475.
Atkeson, Andrew, “Lockdowns and GDP Is There a Tradeoff?,” Working Paper, 2020.
  , “What Will Be the Economic Impact of COVID-19 in the US? Rough Estimates of Disease
  Scenarios,” NBER Working Paper No. 26867, 2020.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, Steven J. Davis, and Stephen J. Terry, “COVID-Induced Eco-
  nomic Uncertainty,” NBER Working Paper No. 26983, 2020.
Baqaee, David Rezza and Emmanuel Farhi, “Nonlinear Production Networks with an Applica-
  tion to the Covid-19 Crisis,” Working Paper, 2020.
   and , “Supply and Demand in Disaggregated Keynesian Economies with an Application to
  the Covid-19 Crisis,” Working Paper, 2020.
Bartik, Alexander W., Marianne Bertrand, Zoe B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, and
  Christopher T. Stanton, “How Are Small Businesses Adjusting to COVID-19? Early Evidence
  from a Survey,” NBER Working Paper No. 26989, 2020.
Berger, David W., Kyle F. Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey, “An SEIR Infectious Disease Model
  with Testing and Conditional Quarantine,” NBER Working Paper No. 26901, 2020.
Birinci, Serdar, Fatih Karahan, Yusuf Mercan, and Kurt See, “Labor Market Policies during an
  Epidemic,” Working Paper, 2020.
Chari, V. V., Rishabh Kirpalani, and Christopher Phelan, “The Hammer and the Scalpel: On
  the Economics of Indiscriminate versus Targeted Isolation Policies during Pandemics,” Working
  Paper, 2020.
Chari, Varadarajan V. and Patrick J. Kehoe, “Sustainable Plans,” Journal of Political Economy, 1990,
  98 (4), 783–802.
Chari, V.V., Juan Pablo Nicolini, and Pedro Teles, “Optimal Capital Taxation Revisited,” Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 2019.
Craig, Ashley C. and James R., Jr. Hines, “Taxes as Pandemic Controls,” Working Paper, 2020.
Dingel, Jonathan and Brent Neiman, “How Many Jobs Can Be Done At Home?,” Working Paper,
  2020.
Dovis, Alessandro and Rishabh Kirpalani, “Rules without Commitment: Reputation and Incen-
  tives,” NBER Working Paper No. 26451, 2019.
Eichenbaum, Martin S., Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt, “The Macroeconomics of Epi-
  demics,” NBER Working Paper No. 26882, 2020.
  , , and , “TThe Macroeconomics of Testing and Quarantining,” Working Paper, 2020.
Fang, Lei, Jun Nie, and Zoe Xie, “Unemployment Insurance during a Pandemic,” Working Paper,
  2020.
Farboodi, Maryam, Gregor Jarosch, and Robert Shimer, “Internal and External Effects of Social
  Distancing in a Pandemic,” Working Paper, 2020.
Ferguson, Neil M., Daniel Laydon, Gemma Nedjati-Gilani, Natsuko Imai, Kylie Ainslie,


                                                21
  Marc Baguelin, Sangeeta Bhatia, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, Zulma Cucunubá, Gina Cuomo-
  Dannenburg, Amy Dighe, Ilaria Dorigatti, Han Fu, Katy Gaythorpe, Will Green, Arran Ham-
  let, Wes Hinsley, Lucy C. Okell, Sabine van Elsland, Hayley Thompson, Robert Verity, Erik
  Volz, Haowei Wang, Yuanrong Wang, Patrick G. T. Walker, Caroline Walters, Peter Winskill,
  Charles Whittaker, Christl A. Donnelly, Steven Riley, and Azra C. Ghani, “Impact of Non-
  Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs) to Reduce COVID19 Mortality and Healthcare Demand,”
  Working Paper, 2020.
Glover, Andrew, Jonathan Heathcote, Dirk Krueger, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull, “Health versus
  Wealth: On the Distributional Effects of Controlling a Pandemic,” Working Paper, 2020.
Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, “Flattening the Pandemic and Recession Curves,” Working Paper,
  2020.
Gregory, Victoria, Guido Menzio, and David Wiczer, “Pandemic Recession: L- or V-Shaped?,”
  Quarterly Review, 2020.
Guerrieri, Veronica, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and Iván Werning, “Macroeconomic Im-
  plications of COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages?,” NBER Work-
  ing Paper No. 26918, 2020.
Halac, Marina and Pierre Yared, “Fiscal Rules and Discretion Under Persistent Shocks,” Econo-
  metrica, 2014, 82 (5), 1557–1614.
   and , “Fiscal Rules and Discretion in a World Economy,” American Economic Review, 2018, 108
  (8), 2305–34.
   and , “Commitment vs. Flexibility with Costly Verification,” Journal of Political Economy, forth-
  coming.
Hall, Robert E., Charles I. Jones, and Peter J. Klenow, “Trading Off Consumption and COVID-19
  Deaths,” Working Paper, 2020.
Hassan, Tarek A., Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, Markus Schwedeler, and Ahmed
  Tahoun, “Firm-level Exposure to Epidemic Diseases: Covid-19, SARS, and H1N1,” NBER Work-
  ing Paper No. 26971, 2020.
Jones, Callum J., Thomas Philippon, and Venky Venkateswaran, “Optimal Mitigation Policies
  in a Pandemic: Social Distancing and Working from Home,” NBER Working Paper No. 26984,
  2020.
Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Gianluca Violante, “The Great Lockdown and the Big Stim-
  ulus: Tracing the Pandemic Possibility Frontier for the U.S.,” Working Paper, 2020.
Kermack, William O. and Anderson G. McKendrick, “A Contribution to the Mathematical The-
  ory of Epidemics,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers of a Math-
  ematical and Physical Character, 1927, 115 (772), 700–721.
Klein, Paul, Per Krusell, and José-Víctor Ríos-Rull, “Time-Consistent Public Policy,” The Review
  of Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (3), 789–808.
Krueger, Dirk, Harald Uhlig, and Taojun Xie, “Macroeconomic Dynamics and Reallocation in an
  Epidemic,” Working Paper, 2020.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott, “Dynamic Optimal Taxation, Rational Expectations
  and Optimal Control,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 1980, 2, 79–91.
Mongey, Simon, Laura Pilossoph, and Alex Weinberg, “Which workers bear the burden of social
  distancing policy?,” Working Paper, 2020.
Moser, Christian and Pedro Olea de Souza e Silva, “Optimal Paternalistic Savings Policies,”
  Working Paper, 2019.
Phelan, Christopher, “Public Trust and Government Betrayal,” Journal of Economic Theory, 2006,
  130 (1), 27–43.
Piguillem, Facundo and Liyan Shi, “Optimal COVID-19 Quarantine and Testing Policies,” Work-
  ing Paper, 2020.
Smit, Sven, Martin Hirt, Penny Dash, Audrey Lucas, Tom Latkovic, Matt Wilson, Ezra Green-
  berg, Kevin Buehler, and Klemens Hjartar, “Crushing Coronavirus Uncertainty: The Big ‘Un-
  lock’ for our Economies,” Report, McKinsey & Company, 2020.


                                                  22
Appendix

A     Proofs

A.1   Proof of Proposition 1

Proof. To prove that the optimal lockdown policy is not time-consistent, we want to show that
`ct 6= `nt for some t. Let t be a period in which `ct ∈ (0, 1), which exists by assumption.
    Suppose, by way of contradiction, that there exists an MPE under no commitment that co-
incides with the optimal policy under commitment in all possible states and all periods. For a
government choosing lockdown `t given health state Ωt , this would mean that the (continuation)
value function would be the same with and without commitment. Therefore,

                                          dV c (·)   dV n (·)
                                                   =          ,                                  (16)
                                           d`t         d`t

so the derivative of the continuation value with respect to current lockdown is the same with
and without commitment. However, if (16) holds, then the two optimality conditions (9) and (12)
cannot simultaneously hold because their left-hand sides are not equal by Assumption 1:

              dV c (·)   ∂u (·) ∂c∗ (·) ∂x c (·) ∂c∗ (·)     ∂u (·) ∂c∗ (·)      dV n (·)
                                                        
           −β          =                        +          >                = −β
               d`t        ∂ct    ∂xt     ∂`t      ∂`t         ∂ct    ∂`t           d`t

This poses a contradiction with the equality in (16), proving the claim that the policy under lack
of commitment does not coincide with that under commitment. Therefore, the optimal lockdown
policy is not time-consistent.




A.2   Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. To prove that a rule consisting of a lower bound `t (Ωt ) = `ct (Ωt ) on `t supports an MPE
that attains the efficient allocation, we want to show that there exists no profitable deviation from
this allocation by a government without commitment adhering to this rule.
    Consider a government today choosing the optimal policy under the state-contingent rule and
expecting all future governments to choose lockdown equal to the state-contingent rule. Therefore,
the government’s state-contingent policy is given by {`t (Ωt )}∞
                                                               t=0 such that `t ( Ωt ) = `t ( Ωt ) =


                                                   23
`ct (Ωt ) in all states and all periods, which induces a sequence of investments { xtc }∞
                                                                                        t=0 such that

xt = xtc in all states and all periods. Now consider in any period t the problem of the government
without commitment, which anticipates all future governments to follow the optimal policy under
commitment and also for investment to match that under the commitment policy. Under this
construction, comparing the FOC of the government under lack of commitment (12) with that
under commitment (9), the unconstrained government without commitment would like to choose
a value of `t that is strictly lower than `t (Ωt ). Clearly, this is not possible given the rule, which
constrains the government to choose `t ≥ `t (Ωt ). Thus, there are two possibilities: either `t =
`t (Ωt ) = `ct (Ωt ) < 1 and there exists a profitable upward deviation from `t to some `˜ t ∈ (`t , 1] in
period t, or else the current allocation constitutes an MPE.
   Suppose by way of contradiction there exists such a profitable upward deviation from `t < 1
to `˜ t > `t in period t given sunk investment xt and health state Ωt . For this to be the case, we must
have


     u(c∗ ( x ∗ (`t , Ωt ), `˜ t , Ωt )) + βV c (Γ(`˜ t , Ωt )) > u(c∗ ( x ∗ (`t , Ωt ), `t , Ωt )) + βV c (Γ(`t , Ωt )).   (17)


Note that because this deviation is unanticipated, investment x ∗ (`t , Ωt ) remains at its level in
ex-ante expectation of lockdown `t under any ex-post investment `˜ t . We now show that if the
inequality in (17) were to hold, then the government under commitment could profitably deviate
from its investment strategy, thus contradicting the optimality of the original MPE.
   Consider the same deviation from `t < 1 to `˜ t > `t by a government with commitment. Since
firms anticipate the lockdown policy in period t under commitment, Assumption 1 implies that
due to q-complementarity between xt and `t in production, the optimal investment would also
adjust upward from xt = x ∗ (`t , Ωt ) to x̃t = x ∗ (`˜ t , Ωt ) > xt . Since consumption in (5) is strictly
increasing in xt , this deviation yields a strictly greater benefit to the government with commitment
compared to that under commitment.
   We conclude that equation (17) characterizing the deviation by the government without com-
mitment can hold only if there exists a profitable deviation by the government with commitment.
This contradicts the optimality of the original MPE, thus invalidating the existence of a profitable
upward deviation by the government without commitment. Therefore, the allocation under com-
mitment together with a rule consisting of a lower bound `t (Ωt ) = `ct (Ωt ) on `t in all states and



                                                                24
all periods also constitutes an MPE under lack of commitment.


A.3           Proof of Proposition 3

Proof. First, note that lockdown under full commitment and under lack of commitment is never
maximal due to the Inada conition on the production function f (·) with respect to labor input `.
     Since the statement of the proposition concerns the existence of a rule in some period t, we will
consider period t = 0. Now contemplate a rule that imposes a lower bound `0 (Ω0 ) = ` (Ω0 ; ε) =
`n Ω0 , θ − ε , for some ε > 0, on labor supply `0 at time 0. We will establish that such a rule strictly
             

increases social welfare for small enough ε > 0. For the remainder of the proof, we consider
a perturbation only at time t = 0, which we treat as the current period, and will drop all time
subscripts.
     For a given state (Ω, θ ), let x n ≡ x n (Ω, θ ) and `n (Ω, θ ) denote the MPE investment policy
and lockdown policy under no commitment in the absence of a rule, and let xr ≡ xr (Ω, θ; ε) and
`r (Ω, θ; ε) denote the MPE investment policy under no commitment subject to the rule ` (Ω; ε),
all from a period-0 perspective. Now let us look at the welfare in an economy subject to such a
rule relative to that in an economy without rules. By Assumption 3, `n (Ω, θ ) is weakly decreasing
in θ, so the difference in social welfare conditional on θ < θ − ε is zero since the policy under
                                                                                             
no commitment is unchanged. The difference in social welfare from realizations θ ∈ θ − ε, θ is
nonzero and equals

  ˆ
                                                                                                              
          θ    [u (c∗ ( xr , `r (Ω, θ; ε), Ω, θ ) , Ω, θ ) + βE 0 [V n (Γ (`r (Ω, θ; ε), Ω, θ ) , θ 0 )]] 
                                                                   θ
                                                                                                                 g(θ )dθ,   (18)
      θ =θ −ε  − [ u ( c∗ ( x n , `n ( Ω, θ ), Ω, θ ) , Ω, θ ) + βE 0 [V n ( Γ (`n ( Ω, θ ), Ω, θ ) , θ 0 )]] 
                                                                    θ


where Eθ 0 [·] denotes the current period’s expectation over next period’s realization of θ 0 . We first
establish that (18) is bounded from below by

 ˆ
                                                                                                          
      θ       u c∗ x n , `n (Ω, θ − ε), Ω, θ  , Ω, θ  + βE 0 [V n Γ `n (Ω, θ − ε), Ω, θ  , θ 0 ] 
                                                                 θ
                                                                                                              g(θ )dθ,
     θ =θ −ε    − [u (c∗ ( x n , `n (Ω, θ ), Ω, θ ) , Ω, θ ) + βEθ 0 [V n (Γ (`n (Ω, θ ), Ω, θ ) , θ 0 )]] 

                                                                                                                            (19)


where we replaced the θ-dependent terms `r (Ω, θ; ε) in the first line of (18) with `n (Ω, θ − ε) for
all θ in (19). Take an arbitrary θ ∈ θ − ε, θ . Note that `r (Ω, θ; ε) ≥ `n (Ω, θ − ε) by design of the
                                            



                                                               25
rule. Then there are two cases to consider.
   Case 1: If `r (Ω, θ; ε) = `n (Ω, θ − ε), then the pointwise variant of the lower bound in (19) is
trivially satisfied with equality at at any point that falls under Case 1.
    Case 2: If `r (Ω, θ; ε) > `n Ω, θ − ε , then for this to be an MPE, the government without
                                            

commitment must weakly prefer choosing `r (Ω, θ; ε) over `n Ω, θ − ε < `r (Ω, θ; ε):
                                                                           



              u (c∗ ( xr , `r (Ω, θ; ε), Ω, θ ) , Ω, θ ) + βEθ 0 [V n Γ (`r (Ω, θ; ε), Ω, θ ) , θ 0 ]
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                          (20)

             ≥u c∗ xr , `n (Ω, θ − ε), Ω, θ , Ω, θ + βEθ 0 [V n Γ `n (Ω, θ − ε), Ω, θ , θ 0 ]
                                                                                                   



Furthermore, since x and ` are q-complements in production by Assumption 1, `n Ω, θ − ε <
                                                                                       

`r (Ω, θ; ε) implies that x n < xr and thus


            u c∗ xr , `n Ω, θ − ε , Ω, θ , Ω, θ + βEθ 0 [V n Γ `n Ω, θ − ε , Ω, θ , θ 0 ]
                                                                               
                                                                                                          (21)

           >u c∗ x n , `n Ω, θ − ε , Ω, θ , Ω, θ + βEθ 0 [V n Γ `n Ω, θ − ε , Ω, θ , θ 0 ].
                                                                               



Combining equations (20) and (21), we see that


            u (c∗ ( xr , `r (Ω, θ; ε), Ω, θ ) , Ω, θ ) + βEθ 0 [V n Γ (`r (Ω, θ; ε), Ω, θ ) , θ 0 ]
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                          (22)

           >u c∗ x n , `n Ω, θ − ε , Ω, θ , Ω, θ + βEθ 0 [V n Γ `n Ω, θ − ε , Ω, θ , θ 0 ].
                                                                                                 



From the inequality in (22) it follows that the pointwise variant of the lower bound in (19) is
satisfied with strict inequality at any point that falls under Case 2.
   Combining Cases 1 and 2, we conclude that (19) indeed represents a lower bound on (18). All
that remains to be shown is that the value of (19) is strictly positive for small enough ε > 0. To
see that this is the case under the stated assumption of interior lockdown `n (Ω, θ ) < 1, recall that
the optimal lockdown is strictly more severe under lack of commitment than under commitment
                                                                                               
for interior levels of lockdown. This implies that, for small enough ε > 0, for all θ ∈ θ − ε, θ we
have that welfare strictly increases when we replace `n (Ω, θ ) by `n (Ω, θ − ε) > `n (Ω, θ ), where the
strict inequality follows from Assumption 3, which states that `n (·) is strictly decreasing. Since the
density g(·) is strictly positive and continuous in a neighborhood below θ by Assumption 3, the
                
interval θ − ε, θ defines a strictly positive probability mass. Combining the last two insights, the
expression in (19) is strictly positive for small enough ε > 0.

                                                        26
This concludes the proof that the imposition of such a rule strictly increases welfare.




                                             27
