NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INDUSTRIALIZATION AND THE BIG PUSH

Kevin M. Murphy

Andrei

Shleifer

Robert Vishny

Working Paper No. 2708

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1988

This research is part of NBER's research program in Economic Fluctuations.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2708
September 1988

INDUSTRIALIZATION AND THE SIC PUSH

ABSTRACT

This paper explores Rosenstein-Rodman's (1943) idea that simultaneous

industrialization

of many sectors of the economy can be profitable for all

of them, even when no sector can break even industrializing alone. We
analyze this ides in the context of an imperfectly competitive economy with
aggregate demand spillovers, and interpret the big push into industrial-

ization as a move from a bad to a good equilibrium. We show that for two
equilibria to exist, it must be the case that an industrializing firm raises
the demand for products of other sectors through channels other than the

contribution of its own profits to demand. For example, a firm paying high
factory wages raises demand in other manufacturing sectors even if it loses

money. In a similar vein, a firm investing today in order to produce at low
cost tomorrow shifts income and hence demand for other goods into the future
and so makes it more attractive for other firms also to invest today.

Finally, an investing firm can benefit firms in other sectors if it uses a
railroad or other shared infrastructure, and hence helps to defray the fixed

cost of building the railroad. All these transmission mechanisms that help
generate the big push seem to be of some relevance for less developed
countries.

Kevin M. Murphy
Craduate School of Business
University of Chicago

Andrei Shleifer
Craduate School of Business
University of Chicago

Chicago, IL 60637

Chicago, IL 60637

Robert Vishny
Craduate School of Business
University of Chicago

Chicago,IL 60637

1. Introduction
Virtually every country that experienced rapid growth of productivity and living

standards over the last 200 years has done so by industrializing. Countries that have
successfully industrialized-- turned to production of manufactures taking advantage of scale

economies--are the ones that grew rich, be they 18th-century Britain or 20th-century Korea
and Japan. Yet despite the evident gains from industrialization, and the success of many
countries in achieving it, numerous other countries remain unindustrialized and poor. What
is it that allows some but not other countries to industrialize? And can government
intervention accelerate the process?

Of the many causes of lack of growth of underdeveloped countries, a particularly
important and frequently discussed constraint on industrialization is the small size of the
domestic market. When domestic markets are small, and world trade is not free and
costless, firms may not be able to generate enough sales to make adoption of increasing

returns technologies profitable, and hence industrialization is stalled. In this paper, we
present some models of economies with small domestic markets, and discuss how these

markets can expand so that a country can get out of the no-industrialization trap. In
particular, we focus on the contribution of industrialization of one sector to enlarging the

size of the market in other sectors. Such spillovers give rise to the possibility that
coordination of investments across sectors—-which the government can promote-—is essential

for industrialization. This idea of coordinated investment is the basis of the concept of the
"big push," introduced by Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) and discussed by many others.
According to Rosenstein-Rodan (1943), if various sectors of the economy adopted
increasing returns technologies simultaneously, they could each create income that becomes a

source of demand for goods in other sectors, and so enlarge their markets and make
industrialization profitable. In fact, simultaneous industrialization of many sectors can be
self-sustaining even if ,to sector could break even industrializing alone. This insight has

2

been developed by Nurkse (1953), Scitovsky (1954), and Fleming (1955) into a doctrine
balanced

of

growth or the big push, with two important elements. First, the same economy

must be capable of both the backward pre-industrial and the modern industrialized state.
No exogenous improvement in endowments or technological opportunities is needed to move
to industrialization, only the simultaneous investment by all the sectors using the available

technology. Second, industrialization is associated with a better state of affairs. The
population of a country benefits from its leap into the industrial state.
In this paper, we attempt to understand the importance of demand spillovers
between sectors by looking at simple stylized models of a less developed economy where

these spillovers are strong enough to generate a big push. In doing so, we chiefly associate

the big push with multiple equilibria of the economy, and interpret it as a switch from the
cottage production equilibrium to industrial equilibrium. The main question we address is,

What does it take for such multiple equilibria to exist? In addition, ask when the
equilibrium in which various Sectors of the economy 'industrialize' is Pareto preferred to

the equilibrium in which they do not. We thus make precise the sense in which
industrialization benefits an economy with fixed preferences, endowments, and technological
opportunities.

-

In all the models described in this paper, the source of multiplicity of equilibria is

pecuniary externalities generated by imperfect competition with large fixed costs.1 Yet such
multiplicity is not automatic: in section 3 we show that even where pecuniary externalities

are important, equilibrium can be unique. The idea behind the uniqueness result is that if a
firm contributes to the demand for other firms' goods only by distributing its profits and
1The pecuniary externalities analyzed in this paper should be contrasted with
technological externalities that can also give rise to interesting growth paths (Romer
(1986a), Lucas (1988)). Romer and Lucas also look at increasing returns, except in their
models increasing returns are external to the firm. Earlier attempts outside the development
literature to model pecuniary externalities in the growth context include important work of
Young (1928) and Kaldor (1966), and recent work of Shleifer (1986) and Romer (1986b). Also
related is some work in macroeconomics, e.g., Weitzman (1982) and Hart (1982).

3

raising aggregate income, then unprofitable investments must reduce income and therefore

the size of other firms' markets. Starting from the equilibrium in which no firm wants to
adopt increasing returns, each investing firm would then lose money and therefore make it

even less attractive for other firms to invest. As a result, the second equilibrium with a
higher level of industrialization cannot exist. When profits are the only channel of
spillovers, the industrialized equilibrium cannot coexist with the unindustrialized one.

In contrast, multiple equilibria arise naturally if an industrializing firm raises the

size of other firms' markets even when it itself loses money. This occurs when firms raise

the profit of other industrial firms through channels other than their own profits. In the
models we present, industrialization, in one sectot can increase spending in other

manufacturing sectors by altering the composition of demand. In the model of section 4,
industrialization raises the demand for manufactures because workers are paid higher wages

to entice them to work in industrial plants. Hence, even a firm losing money can benefit
firms in other sectors because it raises labor income and hence demand for their products.
The model of section 5 focuses on the intertemporal aspect of industrialization. In
that model, industrialization has the effect of giving up current income for future income
because the benefits of current investment in cost reduction are realized over a long period

of time. The more sectors industrialize, the higher is the level of future spending. But
this means that the profitability of investment depends on having enough other sectors
industrialize so that high future spending justifies putting down a large scale plant today.

Since an investing firm generates a positive cash flow in the future, it raises the demand
for the output in other sectors even if its own investment has a negative net present value.
In the models of both sections 4 and 5, coordinated investment across sectors leads to the
expansion of markets for all industrial goods, and can thus be self-sustaining even when no
firm can break even investing alone.

4

The effect of a firm's investment on the size of the markets for output in other
sectors is not the only relevant pecuniary externality. An important component of industrialization for which pecuniary externalities can be crucial is investment in jointly used

intermediate goods, e.g., infrastructure such as railroads and training facilities. To the extent that the cost of an infrastructure is largely fixed, each industrializing firm that uses it
helps defray this fixed cost and so brings the building of the infrastructure closer to profitability. In this way, each user indirectly helps other users, and hence makes their
industrialization more likely. As a result, infrastructure develops only when many sectors
industrialize and become its users. In section 5 we associate the big push with the economy
making large investments in a shared infrastructure.

This approach has the advantage of

being important even in a completely open economy.
The emphasis of this paper on the efficiency of industrialization warrants some

explanation. All the deviations from the first best are ultimately driven by imperfect
competition and the resulting divergence of the price of output from marginal costs. But
inefficiency manifests itself in two distinct ways. First, at any positive level of
industrialization, there is a static monopoly-pricing inefficiency in that industrial goods are
overpriced relative to cottage produced goods. Second, taking monopoly-pricing in industrial
sectors as given, the level of industrialization can be too low from a second best welfare

point of view. In particular, welfare is lower in the nonindustrialized equilibrium than in
the fully industrialized equilibrium. In our discussion of government policy, we take
monopoly pricing in industrial sectors as given and always focus on second-best policies that

bring about a Pareto-preferred, higher level of industrialization. We stress, however, that
because all our models are highly stylized and capture what we can only hope to be one
aspect of reality, policies suggested by these models should be interpreted with caution.

5

2. The Importance of Domestic Markets

Except for the example of infrastructure (section 6), our analysis relies crucially on
the importance of domestic markets for industrialization. Such analysis runs into an obvious

objection. If world trade is free and costless, then an industry faces a world market, the
size of which cannot plausibly constrain adoption of increasing returns technologies. Yet
despite this theoretical objection, there is now considerable empirical evidence pointing to
the importance of the domestic market as an outlet for sales of domestic industry.
The best evidence comes from the work of Chenery and Syrquin (1975) and Chenery,

Robinson, and Syrquin (CRS) (1986). Using a sample of rapidly growing economies over the

period from the early l950s to the early 1970s, CRS look at a change in domestic industrial
output over that period in each country, and divide it between a change in domestic demand
and a change in exports. Because some outputs are also used as intermediate goods and the

structure of production as measured by the input-output matrix is changing, CRS correct

their results for changes in technology. By far the most important sources of growth in
output, however, are growth in domestic demand and growth in exports.

The findings of CRS point to a dominant share of domestic demand in growth of

domestic industrial output. In countries with population over 20 million, expansion of
domestic demand accounts for 72-74% of increase in domestic industrial output (CRS, p.
156).2 In such countries, when per capita income is between 200 and 800 1964 U.S. dollars,

the share of industry in GNP is 5 to 6 percentage points higher than in countries with pop-

ulation under 20 million, with the difference concentrated in industries with important
economies of scale, such as basic metals, paper, chemicals, and rubber products (Chenery

and Syrquin, 1975, p. 78). In small primary oriented countries with population under 20
million, a rise in domestic sales accounts for 70-72% of increase in the domestic industrial

output (CRS, p. 156). Even in small manufacturing-oriented countries with populations under
2Our own calculations based on table 6.3 in Chenery, Robinson, and Syrquin (1986).

6

20 million, expansion of domestic demand accounts for about 50-60% of industrial output

expansion (CRS, p. 156). In Korea--the paragon of an open, export-oriented economy-domestic demand expansion accounted for 53% of growth of industrial output between 1955

and 1973 (Chenery, Robinson and Syrquin, p. 158), and a much larger fraction if one

abstracts from export-intensive sectors such as textiles. Moreover, the intensive export of
manufactures began only after the industry became established in the domestic market
(Chenery and Syrquin, p. 101). Whether the causes of limited trade are natural, such as
transport costs or taste differences across countries, or man—made, such as tariffs, the
bottom line is the overwhelming importance of domestic demand for most of domestic
industry.

3. A Simple Aggregate Demand Spillpvers Model With a Unique Equilibrium

The existence of multiple, Pareto-ranked equilibria of the type envisioned in the big
push literature requires that the economy be capable of sustaining two alternative levels of
industrialization. This means that industrialization must be individually unprofitable at a low
aggregate level of industrialization, but individually profitable as long as a sufficient number

of other sectors industrialize. Put another way, even individually unprofitable
industrialization must have spillover effects on other sectors that make industrialization in
other sectors more profitable.
In this section, we discuss a simple model in which profit spillovers across sectors

are present, but they are still not sufficient to generate the conditions for the big push.
The firm in this model has a positive spillover on the demands (profits) of other sectors if

and only if it makes a positive profit itself. Hence, even though the firm does not
internalize the effect of its dividends on the profits in other sectors, it still makes a
(second-best) efficient investment decision and has a positive spillover on other firms onty

to the extent that its own industrialization decision is individually profitable. We start with

7

this model in order to illustrate the fact that the conditions for individually unprofitable
investments to raise the profitability of investment in other sectors are more stringent than

those loosely expressed in much of the big push literature of the 40s and 50s (see, for
example, Rosenstein- Rodan, 1943).

Consider a one-period economy with a representative consumer, with Cobb-Douglas

utility function f £nx(q)dq defined over a unit interval of goods indexed by q.3 All goods
have the same expenditure shares. Thus, when his income is y, the consumer can be
thought of as spending y on every good x(q). The consumer is endowed with L units of
labor, which he supplies inelastically, and he owns all the profits of this economy. Taking
his wage as numéraire, his budget constraint is given by:

y=

11

+

L,

where 11 is aggregate profits.

Each good is produced in its own sector, and each sector consists of two types of

firms. First, each sector has a competitive fringe of firms which convert one unit of labor
input into one Unit of output with a constant returns to scale (cottage production)
technology. In addition, each sector has a Unique firm with access to an increasing returns
(mass production) technology. This firm is alone in having access to that technology in its

sector, and hence will be referred to as a monopolist (even though, as we specify below, it
does not always operate). Industrialization requires the input of F Units of labor and allows

each additional unit of labor to produce > I units of output.
The monopolist in each sector decides whether to industrialize or to abstain from
production altogether. We assume that the monopolist maximizes his profit taking the

3The discussion that follows partly draws on Shleifer and Vishny (1988).

8

demand curve as given.4 He industrializes (invests) only if he can earn a profit at the
price he charges. That price equals 1. since the monopolist loses all his sales to the fringe
if he charges more, and he would not want to charge less when facing a unit elastic demand

curve. When income is y, the profit of a monopolist who spends F to industrialize is:

tr=_a_L_yFayF.
When

(2)

a fraction n of the sectors in the economy industrialize, aggregate profits are:

11(n)

n(ay - F) .

(3)

Substituting (3) into (I) yields aggregate income as a function of the fraction of sectors
industrializing:

L - iF

1-na

(4)

The numerator of (4) is the amount of labor used in the economy for actual production
of output, after investment outlays. One over the denominator is the multiplier showing
that an increase in effective labor raises income by more than one for one, since expansion

of low cost sectors also raises profits. To see this more explicitly, note that:

dn

an)

I-an'

4The assumption that each monopolist maximizes profits rather than the welfare of his
shareholders is what allows pecuniary externalities to matter. Shleifer (1986) justifies this
assumption in some detail.

9
where r(n)

is

the profit of the last firm to invest. When the last firm earns this profit, it

distributes it to shareholders, who in turn spend it on all goods and thus raise profits in all

industrial firms in the economy. The effect of this firm's profit is therefore enhanced by
the increases in profits of all industrial firms resulting from increased spending. Since

there are a fraction n of such firms, the multiplier is increasing in the number of firms
that benefit from the spillover of the marginal firm. The more firms invest, the greater is
the cumulative increase in profits and therefore income resulting from a positive NPV
investment by the last firm.

For an alternative interpretation of (5), notice that since the price of labor is

unity, the profit of the last firm, ir(n), is exactly equal to the net labor saved from its
investment in cost reduction. The numerator of (5) is therefore the increase in labor
available to the economy as a result of the investment by the last firm.

In equilibrium,

this freed up labor moves into all sectors. However, its marginal product is higher in
industrialized sectors than in nonindustrialized sectors. The more sectors industrialize (i.e.,

the higher is n), the greater is the increase in total output resulting from the inflow of

freed up labor into these sectors. In fact, the denominator of (5) is just the average of
marginal labor costs across sectors, which is clearly a decreasing function of n. This

interpretation connects (5) to (4), which explicitly states that income is a multiple of

productive labor, and that the multiplier is increasing in ii.
Despite

the fact that the firm ignores the profit spillover from its investment, it is

easy to see that there is a unique Nash equilibrium, in which either all firms industrialize or

none of them do (i.e., there is no big push). In order to have a no-industrialization
equilibrium it must be the case that when aggregate income is equal to L, a single firm
loses money from industrializing. But if no firm can break even from investing when

income is L, then there cannot be an equilibrium in which any firms invest. For suppose a
single firm decides to invest Since it loses money it only reduces aggregate income

10

making the profit from industrialization in any other sectors even lower. Hence if it is
unprofitable for a single firm to invest, it is even less profitable for more firms to do so,
making the existence of the second equilibrium impossible. As is clear from (5), a firm's
spillover is positive if and only if its own profits are positive. The multiplier only changes
the magnitude of the effect of a firm's investment on income, and not the sign.
The remainder of the paper presents three modifications of this model in which a
firm engaging in unprofitable investment can still benefit other sectors and make it more

likely that they find it profitable to invest. By doing so, we get away from the uniqueness
result of this section, and generatc a big push.

4. A Model with a Factory Wage Premium

The first model of the big push we present comes closest in its spirit to
Rosenstein-Rodan's (1943) paper. According to this theory, to bring farm labor to work in a
factory, a firm has to pay them a wage premium. But unless the firm can generate enough
sales to people other than its own workers, it will not be able to afford to pay higher

wages. If this firm is the only one to start production, its sales might be too low for it to
break even. In contrast, if firms producing different products all invest and expand

-

production together, they can all sell their output to each other's workers, and so can

afford to pay a wage premium and still break even. In this section, we construct a model
along these lines.5

We assume that higher wages are paid in the factory to compensate workers for

disutility of such work. Accordingly, we take utility to be exp(f £nx(q)dq) if a person is
employed in cottage production, and exp(f enx(q)dq) - v if he is employed in a factory
using increasing returns. Although factory workers earn higher wages, they have the same
5Factory employment is usually associated with working in a city. Lewis (1967) and
many others confirm the empirical validity of the assumption that higher real wages are paid
in cities.

'I
unit elastic demand curves for manufactures as cottage production workers, and so we can

calculate demands based on the aggregate income, y.6 Specifically, when the total profit
and labor income is y, we can think of it as expenditure y on each good. Workers engage
in either constant returns (CRS), cottage production of manufactures, or in factory work
where increasing returns (IRS) technologies are used.7 Cottage production wage is set to 1

as numéraire, and total labor supply is fixed at L.
As before, the cottage technology for each good yields 1 Unit of output for each

Unit of labor input. Cottage producers who use this technology are competitive. In
contrast, the increasing returns technology requires a fixed cost of F units of labor to set

up a factory, but then yields a > I units of output for 1 Unit of labor input. We assume
that access to the IRS technology is restricted to a separate monopolist in each sector.
The monopolist will choose to operate his technology only if he expects to make a

profit taking the demand curve as given. If he does operate, he could not raise his price
above 1 without losing the business to the fringe. But he also would not want to cut the
price, since demand is Unit elastic.

Since all prices are always kept at unity, it is easy to calculate the competitive

factory wage, w. Each monopolist must pay a wage that makes a worker indifferent
between factory and cottage production employment:

wl+v>l.

(6)

In this pure compensating differentials models, factory employees get the minimum wage

6All the models we study assume unit elastic demand. Historically, however, incomeelastic demand for manufactures has played an important role in growth of industry (Deane,
1965). Income-elastic demand leads to price Cuts by a monopolist, and the increase in
consumer surplus, which is an additional reason for a big push.
7For simplicity, there is no agricultural sector, although one could be added (see
Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1987).

12

necessary to get them Out of cottage productson, and hence get no surplus from
industrialization except as profit owners.

—

When aggregate income is y, the monopolist's profit is given by

_Y( -'-i-)

-F(l+v)

(7)

where I is the price he gets and (l+v)/o is his unit variable cost. The monopolist will incur
F(l+v) only if he expects income to be high enough for this investment to make money.

As is clear from (7), for this model to be at all interesting, it must be the case
that the productivity gain from using the increasing returns technology exceeds the
compensating differential that must be paid to a worker, i.e.,

cz-l>v.

(8)

If this condition does not hold, the factory will not be able to afford any labor even if it
surrenders to it all of the efficiency gain over the cottage technology. As a result, the
factory could not possibly break even, whatever the level of income.
Under the conditions discussed below, this model can have two equilibria, one with

and one without industrialization. In the first equilibrium, no firm incurs the fixed cost for
fear of not being able to break even, and the population stays in cottage production.

Income is equal to L, the wage bill of the cottage labor, since no profits are earned. For
this to be an equilibrium, it must be the case that in no sector would a monopolist want to

set up a factory if he has to pay the required factory wage. That is, for no
industrialization to take place, we must have:
( l+vl
Ll--—)

-F(i+v)<O.

(9)

In a second equilibrium, all sectors industrialize. By symmetry, the quantity of

output produced in each sector is c(L - F), which at unit prices is also the value of output.

13

Since the only input is labor, total factor payments are wages, which equal to L(l+v). For
this to be an equilibrium, profits must be positive:

r.a(L-F)-L(l+v)>0.

(10)

When (10) holds, all firms expect a high level of income and sales resulting from
simultaneous labor-saving industrialization of many sectors, and are consequently happy to

incur the fixed cost F(l+v) to set up a factory. This of course makes the expectation of
industrialization self—fulfilling.

An examination of (9) and (tO) suggests that there always exist some values of F

for which both equilibria exist (provided (8) holds). For these values of F, the economy is
capable of a big push, whereby it moves from the unindustrialized equilibrium to one with
industrialization when all its sectors coordinate investments. The reason for the multiplicity

of equilibria is that a link between a firm's profit and its contribution to demand for
products of other sectors is now broken. Because a firm that sets up a factory pays a wage
premium, it increases the size of the market for producers of other manufactures, even if
its investment loses money. Consequently, the firm's profit in this model is not an adequate
measure of its contribution to the aggregate demand for manufactures, since a second

component of this contribution--the extra wages it pays--is not captured by the profits.
In this model, the Pareto superiority of the equilibrium with industrialization is

apparent. Since prices do not change, workers are equally well off as wage earners in the
second equilibrium, but they also get some profits. They have higher income at the same
prices, and hence must be better off. Firms making investment decisions in the no
industrialization equilibrium ignore the fact that, even when they lose money, the higher
factory wages they pay generate profits in other industrializing sectors by increasing the

demand for manufactures. As a result, these firms underinvest in the no industrialization

14

equilibrium, and an inefficiency results. As is commonly supposed in the discussion of
industrialization, it indeed creates wealth and represents a better outcome.

The big push resulting from higher factory wages could also be obtained using a
different but related model of industrialization. Instead of focusing on a compensating
differential, we could assume that cottage production is located on the farm and factories
are located in the cities, and that city dwellers' demand is more concentrated on

manufactures. For example, living in a city might require consumption of processed food if
fresh food is expensive to transport from the farm. Urbanization also leads to increased
consumption of other manufactures, such as textiles, leather goods, and furniture (Reynolds,

1983). If these changes in demand are important, then urbanization in the process of
industrialization leads to an increase in the demand for manufactures. In this way
industrialization can be self—sustaining even if there is no compensating wage differential

for factory work, but only a shift in the consumption bundle toward manufactures.

5. A Dynamic Model of Investment
This section presents a second example in which an investment that loses money

nonetheless raises aggregate income. A firm that uses resources to invest at one point in
time, but generates the labor savings from this investment at a later point, decreases
aggregate demand today and raises it tomorrow. This shift in the composition of demand
away from today's goods and toward tomorrow's goods can also give rise to multiple
equilibria and inefficient underinvestment, unless the government coordinates investment or
entrepreneurs are spontaneously "bullish."
One historical account (Sawyer, 1954; quoted in Cole, 1959) motivates this model in

the context of nineteenth-century American economic growth. According to Sawyer, even
when a cold economic calculation dictated otherwise, irrationally bullish and over-optimistic

American entrepreneurs insisted on investing. But with enough people making this mistake,

15

optimistic projections became self-fulfilling (cf. Keynes's (1936) account of entrepreneurial
optimism):

To the extent that it worked in an economic sense--that an over-anticipation of
prospects in fact paid off in either a private or social balance sheet, we find ourselves

on the perilous edge of an "economics of euphoria"--a dizzy world in which if enough
people make parallel errors of over—estimation, and their resulting investment decisions
fall in reasonable approximation to the course of growth, they may collectively
generate the conditions of realizing their original vision. It suggests, historically, a
sort of self-fulfilling prophecy, in which the generalized belief in growth operated to
shift the marginal efficiency of capital schedule to the right, and in which the multiple
centers of initiative, acting in terms of exaggerated prospects of growth, pulled capital
and labor from home and from the available reservoirs abroad, and so acted as to
create the conditions on which their initial decisions were predicated. (Sawyer, 1954)
Our model shows that Sawyer's ideas about self-fulfilling expectations of growth do not
really rely on assuming entrepreneurial irrationality.
A two—period model suffices to illustrate the big push in a dynamic context.
Consider a representative consumer with preferences defined over the same unit interval of

goods in both the first and the second period. Denoting by x1(q) and x2(q), with q between

O and I, his consumption of good q in periods I and 2 respectively, the consumer's utility is
given by

[f x(q)dq] eh + $[fo x(q)dq] "

(11)

In this expression 1/(1 — 9) is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, and 1/(1 — 1) is

the elasticity of substitution between different goods within a period. For example, in the

special case where 'y 0 and 9

I, to which we return below, the consumer has Unit elas-

tic demand for each good q, and is indifferent as to when to consume his income. The representative consumer is endowed with L Units of labor each period that he supplies

ine!astically, and he owns all the profits. Without loss of generality, each period's wage is

set equal to I.
Each good q in the first period must be produced using a constant returns to scale

(CRS) technology converting 1 unit of labor into I unit of output. The same technology is

16

also available in the second period. The CRS technology is used by a competitive fringe of
firms. In addition to this CRS technology, each sector q has a potential monopolist who

can invest F units of labor in the first period, and then produce a > I units of output per

unit of labor in the second period. Each monopolist in this model thus has an intertemporal
investment decision, since the benefits of the increasing returns to scale (IRS) technology

obtain only with a lag. His decision whether or not to invest depends both on the
equilibrium interest rate and on income in period 2.
To analyze the decision of a monopolist in a representative sector, denote his

profits by ir, equilibrium discount factor by ,8 and period 1 and 2 aggregate incomes by v5
and y2 respectively. As before, the price the monopolist can charge in the second period if
he invests is bounded above by I, the price of the competitive fringe. We assume that

0<1-,

(12)

the demand curve in each sector is sufficiently inelastic that the monopolist does not want

to Cut the price below I. Denoting by a = (1

- I/a) the marginal profit rate of the

monopolist per dollar of sales, his profits can now be written as

= fi'ay2-F.

(13)

The monopolist will incur the fixed cost F in the first period whenever the net present
value of his profits given by (13) is positive.

For some parameter values, this model has two equilibria. In the first equilibrium,

no sector incurs the fixed cost F in period I, and no industrialization takes place. Income
each period is equal to wage income:

y1=y2=L.
81f r is the equilibrium interest rate, then fl

(14)

l/(l+r).

17

Furthermore, the equilibrium discount factor at which the consumers are willing to accept

the constant expenditure L on consumption in both periods is equal to $. For this to be an

equilibrium, it must not pay a monopolist in a representative sector to incur F in the first
period if he expects income in the second period to be L and if the discount factor is $.
using (13), the monopolist will not invest if

r=$aL-F<O.

(15)

When this condition holds, the demand that firms expect to obtain in the second period is

too low for them to break even on their investments. Since they do not invest, the
realized level of income is indeed low, and the no industrialization equilibrium is sustained.

An important feature of this model is that, whereas what matters for a firm is the
present value of its profits, what matters for its contribution to aggregate demand in the
second period is its second period cash flow. Thus, even if an investing firm loses money,
it still raises second period income. Put differently, even an unprofitable investment
transfers income from the first to the second period and thereby makes investment for

other firms, which only sell in the second period, more attractive ceteris paribus. Of
course, this shift of income across periods resulting from investment is in part offset by an
increase in the interest rate. Nonetheless, the income effect is in many cases more
important than the interest rate effect, and, as a result, simultaneous investment by many
firms can become profitable even when each loses money investing in isolation. This gives

rise to a second equilibrium, in which the economy makes the big push.'
In this equilibrium with industrialization, each sector incurs the fixed cost F in the
first period, and as a result the first period income is:

L - F.
The second period income is higher because of higher profits:

18

y2L÷iL+ay2=aL.
One

(17)

way to think about these equations for income is thatln the first period, there are no

markups charged, and hence the multiplier is 1, while in the second period the multiplier is
a because each sector marks up the price over cost.

For the consumer to accept a higher level of consumption in period 2 than in
period 1, the discount factor in this equilibrium must be

=s(° )

(18)

The interest rate rises in equilibrium to prevent the consumer from wanting to smooth his
consumption. The higher is 8, the less averse the consumer is to intertemporal substitution.

and hence the lower is the interest rate needed to equilibrate the loan market at 0. In the
limiting case where 8 =

1

and the consumer is perfectly happy to substitute consumption

across time, the equilibrium discount rate is simply his rate of time preference $.
For the proposed allocation to be an equilibrium, it must pay the firm expecting

income Y2 from (17) and faced with a discount rate from (18) to invest in the first period.

This will be the case provided
I czL l—i
(aaL)$iLFJ
-F>0.

(19)

When condition (19) holds, the interest rate does not rise too much when consmpcion is

growing. As a result, there exists an equilibrium in which firms expect other firms to
invest and income to rise, and all firms in fact invest in anticipation of profiting from the
higher income. Our interpretation of the possibility of the big push is the coexistence of

both equilibria for the same parameter values. In that case, firms invest if they expect
other firms to do the same and income to grow, and do not invest if they expect the
economy to remain stationary.

19

The key to the coexistence of the two equilibria is the fact that a firm's profits
are not an adequate measure of its contribution to demand for manufactures. An investing
firm, even if it loses money, reduces period I income and raises period 2 income. Aside
from the effect of this investment on the rate of interest, the main consequence of this
action by the firm is to reduce the demand for manufactures in the first period- - which

is

irrelevant for investment- -and to raise the demand for manufactures of other firms in the

second period--which is key to their investment decisions. As a result, the investment by a

firm makes investment by other firms more attractive. All that is needed for this to be the
case is that the second period cash flow of the firm be positive. In that case, the whole
cash flow contributes to the second period demand for manufactures, and raises the

profitability of investment of all other firms in the economy (as long as the interest rate

does not rise too much). The result of the investment, then, is to shift the composition of
demand across periods in a way that makes the investment by other firms more attractive.

This shift of income makes the big push possible, even if the net present value of a firm
investing alone in the economy is negative. As before, the possibility of the big push turns
on the divergence between the firm's profits and its contribution to the demand for
manufactures of other investing firms.
In this model, the equilibrium with industrialization is Pareto preferred to that

without industrialization. This can be most easily seen from the fact that spot prices of
manufacturing goods are the same in the two equilibria in both periods, but that the present
value of income is higher in the second equilibrium even though the interest rate has risen.

The reason for the Pareto ranking has to do with the difference in multipliers across the

two periods. An investing firm uses up labor in the first period, when the contribution of
labor to income is exactly equal to its wage. The same firm saves labor in the second
period, which goes on to generate both

wages

and profits in other sectors. Hence the firm

undervalues the labor it saves in the second period when making its investment decision.

20

This is equivalent to saying that a dollar of a firm's positive cash flow in the second period
generates more than a dollar in income, since the dividends the firm pays become a source

of demand and hence of profits in other sectors. In contrast, a dollar of negative cash
flow in the first period reduces income by only a dollar. Both the labor market version of
the story and the demand generation version explain why a dollar of the firm's profit in the
second period raises income by Sa, i.e., has a multiplier associated with it. Because the firm
ignores this multiplier in making its investment decision, it will in general underinvest in
the no industrialization equilibrium. The variation of multipliers across periods thus explains

the Pareto ranking of the two equilibria.
We stress that the reasons for multiplicity of equilibria and for their Pareto ranking

are not the same. To see this, suppose that the first-period technologies are also used by
monopolists in the various sectors, who mark up the price over cost, but get imitated by the

competitive fringe in the second period. As before, monopolists can also further reduce
costs and stay ahead of competition in the second period, if they invest F in the first

period. If the markup in the first period is larger, the multiplier in the first period will be
larger than the multiplier in the second period, even if monopolists invest to cut secondperiod costs below the competitive price. In this case, we might still have two equilibria.

In the first, firms do not invest because they expect too few others to invest and raise
second period income. In the second equilibrium, firms invest and shift income from period
1 to period 2, and thus create high enough period 2 cash flows for other firms to justify
their investments. In this case, however, the high investment equilibrium might be less

efficient, since firms are using up labor to build plants in the first period, when markups
elsewhere in the economy are high, and saving labor in the second period, when the wage is

closer to its contribution to income.9 The point is that multiplicity is affected by gross

9An example demonstrating this possibility is available -from the authors.

21

cash flows in the two periods, whereas the relative efficiency of equilibria is determined by

the difference in the multipliers.
At least at the initial stages of industrialization, it is plausible to think of the
economy as moving from the use of competitive constant returns backstop technologies to

the use of less competitive increasing returns technologies. In this case, our model yields

both a positive and a normative result concerning the big push. First, the big push indeed
might take the form of simultaneous industrialization of many sectors, each generating

future income that helps the profitability of other sectors. The mutual reinforcement of
sectors is thus a key property of this big push. Second, the big push, or simultaneous
industrialization, is good in this economy, because it uses up labor when it is least

productive--i.e., when it is stuck in backstop--and frees up labor when it is most productive
-—i.e., when industrialization has occurred.

The inefficiency of unindustrialized equilibrium raises the possibility for a
government role in either encouraging agents to invest, or alternatively in discouraging
current consumption. In our model, persuasion and encouragement of investment alone might
be an effective enough tool, since these steps might coordinate agents' plans on a better

equilibrium. Alternatively, the government can use investment subsidies as long as they are
widely enough spread to bring about a critical mass of investment needed to sustain a big
push. 10

6. A Model of Investment in Infrastructure
For a large infrastructure project, such as a railroad, the size of the market can be

particularly important, since most of the costs are fixed. As a result, the building of a
'°Policies coordinating private investment across sectors appear in Rosenstein-Rodan's
(1943) proposal for the East European Investment Trust. According to that proposal, foreign
lenders and donors should insist that the money they lend to the economy be spent on
investment and not on consumption. This is entirely Consistent with their concern for the
welfare of aid recipients as well as with a concern for getting their money back.

22

railroad often depends on the demand from potential users. These users, in turn, can access
much larger markets if they can cheaply transport their goods using a railroad. It is not
surprising in this context that infrastructure in general, and railroads in particular, have
been commonly credited with being an important component of the big push (RosensteinRodan, 1961; Rostow, 1960), although there is some debate on whether they have been
absolutely pivotal (Fishlow, 1965; Fogel, 1964).

In our context, building a railroad is especially important because it interacts so

closely with industrialization. In particular, since many sectors share in paying for the
railroad, and the railroad brings down effective production costs, an industrializing sector
essentially has the effect of reducing the total production Costs of the other sectors. These

external effects of an investment are not captured by the firm making it, and hence we
again have room for multiple equilibria. The railroad might not get built and
industrialization might not take place unless there are enough potential industrial customers.

There are two separate reasons why a railroad might not get built even when it is

socially efficient to build it. First, if a railroad is unable to price discriminate between its
users, it can extract only part of the social surplus that it generates. This reflects just the
usual reason why a monopolist underinvests in a new technology. If the railroad could

extract from each firm all the profits obtained through the use of its services, this

inefficiency would not result. In addition, a railroad might not get built if, once it is built,
there still remains extrinsic uncertainty as to whether the economy industrializes, If, as in
the model of the previous section, it only pays a sector to build a factory when other
Sectors do the same even after the railroad is built, then there is always a chance of the
bad equilibrium with no industrialization. If the railroad builder is sufficiently averse to
this outcome, in which he gets no customers, the railroad will not be built.
We illustrate these results using a modified version of the intertemporal investment

model from the previous section. First, we use the same utility function (11) as before, but

23

since we do not care about the interest rate effects, we assume that 9 • 1 and 'y • 0. The
representative consumer is indifferent as to when he consumes his income, and spends equa

shares of his income in each period on alt goods. We also assume that the consumers' time

discount factor fi is equal to 1, so that the equilibrium interest rate is always 0.
It is natural to suppose that the constant returns cottage technologies can be set

up in all locations, and hence do not require the use of a railroad. In contrast, increasing
returns technologies are operated in only one location, and hence each Unit of output produced with these technologies must be transported to get sold. We assume that industrialization Cannot take place in the absence of the railroad We also assume for simplicity that

the transportation input is the same for all units manufactured using increasing returns.
In addition, we assume that there are now two types of increasing returns

technologies. A fraction n of sectors (1—firms) requires the fixed cost F1 to be incurred in
the first period to build a factory, whereas the fraction I — n (2—firms) requires the fixed

cost F >

F1. In the second period, all fixed cost firms have labor productivity . We

introduce the two types of sectors in order to address the case where the railroad fails to

extract all the surplus it generates. We also assume that it takes a fixed cost of R units

of

labor in the first period to build the railroad, and that the marginal cost of using it is 0.
The latter assumption is used only for simplicity.
To address the question of surplus extraction by the railroad, we note that if the

railroad does not observe the fixed cost of each firm, all firms look the same in the first
period. As a result, the railroad cannot price discriminate between them. A further issue
is that to the extent that costs F1 are sunk in the first period, a railroad that extracts all

the period 2 cash flows from the investing firms will make all their investments moneylosing. Accordingly, we assume that the railroad can commit itself to a price it will charge
in the second period before the potential industrial firms make their investments.

24

Throughout this section we also assume that there is no way that low fixed cost
firms, even if they could profitably industrialize alone, would generate enough surplus to pay

for the railroad; both types must industrialize to pay for it. This assumption amounts to:
(20)

1-an

which is essentially an upper bound on the profits I-firms can generate. Note that (20) is
also an efficiency condition for 1-firms industrializing alone, since we are assuming that the
railroad extracts all the surplus.
Under our assumptions, the price the railroad charges enables it to extract all the

profits from high but not low fixed cost firms. This seems to us to be the easiest way to
model the realistic notion that the railroad owners do not capture all the social benefits of
the investment.

A necessary and sufficient condition for there to exist an equilibrium in which a
railroad is built and all sectors industrialize is:

aczL-F3>R.

(21)

Condition (21) implies that the railroad can cover its costs when it charges each firm the

amount equal to the profit of a 2-firm. Since the railroad cannot price discriminate, each
high fixed cost firm will then earn a zero profit, and each low fixed cost firm will earn a

profit of Fa - F1. Condition (21) also implies that the high fixed cost firms can break even
since period 2 income is aL. It is easy to see, then, that (21) guarantees both that all
firms are prepared to invest when the railroad is built and other firms invest, and that the
railroad can be paid for by tariffs charged to investing firms.
In some circumstances, building of the railroad and industrialization of all sectors

will not take place even if this outcome is efficient. Building the railroad is efficient
whenever the surplus from industrialization is positive, which is the case if

25

aoL - rF1 - (I

- n)F2 > R

(22)

Since (22) is less stringent than (2!), the railroad sometimes is not built even when it is

efficient. This happens precisely because the railroad can only charge each firm the amount

equal to the profits of 2-firms, which are smaller than the profits of I-firms. At the same
time, it would be efficient to build the railroad if it can break even extracting both the
surplus of 1-firms and that of 2-firms. The impossibility of price discrimination gives rise
to the outcome in which the railroad is not built and industrialization does not take place
even when efficiency dictates otherwise.

This is a very simple reason for a failure of an efficient industrialization. When
(21) holds but (22) fails, the market for railroad services is too small in the sense that some

users do not end up paying as much as the services are worth to them, even if all firms
would industrialize with a railroad. If the railroad could price discriminate better, the
efficient outcome would be achieved, and there would be a large increase in income due to

the large amount of producer and consumer surplus created by the railroad. As it is, there
is a unique equilibrium when the railroad is not built because it is privately unprofitable,
even if it is socially very desirable.
The discussion thus far leaves open the question of whether (21) suffices for the

railroad to be built. In other words, will the railroad be built for sure if once it is built
industrialization is a feasible equilibrium? The answer of course is no, since
industrialization need not be the only equilibrium that can occur once the railroad is built.
What would keep the railroad from being built is the extrinsic uncertainty over whether or
not the potential users of the railroad do in fact make their fixed cost investments and thus
become actual users. This uncertainty thus concerns the selection of equilibrium between

sectors. If the railroad must be built without a prior knowledge of the actions of
manufacturing sectors, its organizers might refuse to accept the uncertainty about the future
demand, in which case the railroad is not built and industrialization does not occur.

26

For both equilibria to exist after the railroad is built, it suffices to look at
parameter values for which (21) holds, and it also does not pay a 1-firm to invest when
expected income is L, i.e.,

aL-F1<O.

(23)

For these parameter values, the railroad will make money on its first-period investment if
the economy industrializes, but will incur a large loss if no industrialization takes place and

there are no customers of its services. The investment R might then not be made because
the proprietors of the railroad are averse to the possibility that the bad equilibrium obtains.

We then have a standoff in which the railroad is not built for fear that an insufficient
number of Sectors will industrialize and this in turn ensures that firms do not make the
large-scale investments needed to industrialize.

This discussion reveals two ways in which investment by a sector benefits other sec-

tors in a way that is not captured by profits. First, just as in the previous section, an
investing firm raises the demand in the second period, and hence helps other firms make

money. But also, by using railroad services, an investing firm helps pay for the fixed cost of

the railroad. The railroad, in turn, reduces the production costs of other sectors Indirectly,
then, an investing firm contributes to the reduction of total costs of the other industrializing

sectors. These effects give rise to the possibility that a firm actually benefits other firms
even if it loses money, and so to big push type effects. Furthermore, for reasons identical to
those in the previous section, the equilibrium with industrialization is Pareto preferred.

The failures of an efficient railroad to be built suggest some clear functions for the
government in this model. Subsidizing the railroad might be helpful but not sufficient.
What is also needed is a coordination of investments by enough private users of the railroad

to get to the equilibrium with industrialization. Without industrialization by such users, the
railroad can become a classic "white elephant" project that is not needed when it is built.

27

This problem can of course be ameliorated if railroad users are sufficiently optimistic that
they are eager to invest: this might be the description of America's nineteenth—century

experience. The problem can also be solved if one large sector of the economy demands
enough railroad services to cover the fixed cost: Colombia's coffee boom in the 1880s is the

case in point. Absent such favorable circumstances, however, government intervention in
support of the railroad might be essential.

The railroad is one of a number of examples of infrastructure projects that require
substantial demand by industry (or by other customers) to break even, and that might need
public subsidies if built ahead of demand. Other examples include power stations, roads,
airports, and perhaps most importantly training facilities (Rosenstein-Rodan, 1961). One
reason for underinvestment in such facilities is the inability of firms to prevent workers

they train from moving to other firms and so appropriating the returns from training. A
second important reason why a country with little industry will have too few training
facilities concerns the ignorance of untrained workers about what they are good at. Some
training is necessary to discover one's comparative advantage. A worker will only invest in

such training if a broad range of different industries offer employment, so that he can take
advantage of his skills. In a poorly diversified economy, such investment in training does

not pay, even if it is socially efficient, and in this case warrants public support.
In the context of market size models, infrastructure can be a particularly appealing
area for state intervention. First, coordination issues are especially important since the
infrastructure serves many sectors simultaneously. Second, the projects tend to be large
and time-consuming, so that capital market constraints and substantial uncertainty can deter

private participation. Third, projects are fairly standard, and hence "local knowledge"
(Hayek, 1945), which is perhaps the main advantage of private entrepreneurs over

government, is not as essential as in other activities. It is not surprising then that most

28

governments support infrastructure, and the most successful ones- -such as Korea- coordinate that support with general industrial development.

7. Conclusion

The analysis of this paper has established some, though by no means all, conditions

under which a backward economy can make a big push into industrialization by coordinating
investments across sectors. The principal idea is that the big push is possible in economies

where industrialized firms capture in their profits only a fraction of the total contribution

of their investment to the profits of other industrializing firms. In our examples, a firm
adopting increasing returns must be shifting demand toward manufactured goods, or

redistributing demand toward the periods when other firms sell, or paying part of the cost

of the essential infrastructure, such as a railroad. In these cases, the firm can help foster
a mutually profitable big push even when it would lose money industrializing alone. All our
models have the common feature that complementarities between industrializing sectors work

through market size effects. In the first two models, industrialization of one sector raises
the demand for other manufactures directly and so makes large-scale production in other
sectors more attractive. In the railroad model, industrialization in one sector increases the
size of the market for railroad services used by other sectors and so renders the provision
of these services more viable.
The analysis may also have some implications for the role of government in the

development process. First, a program that encourages industrialization in many sectors
simultaneously can substantially boost income and welfare even when investment in any one

sector appears unprofitable. This is especially true for a country whose access to foreign
markets is limited by high transportation costs or trade restrictions. The net payoff from a
program of simultaneous industrialization can also be high when all markets are open, but a

shared infrastructure--such as a railroad or a stock of managers- - is necessary to profitably

29

operate in any given sector. In the latter case, simultaneous development of many export
sectors may be necessary to sustain any one of them.
Our analysis also suggests that countries like South Korea that have implemented a
coordinated investment program can achieve industrialization of each sector at a lower

explicit cost in terms of temporary tariffs and subsidies than a country that industrializes
piecemeal. This is so because of potentially large implicit subsidies flowing across sectors

under a program of simultaneous industrialization. Any cost-benefit analysis of subsidies oi

of temporary protection should reflect both the lower direct costs and the higher net
benefit of a program that is coordinated across sectors.

30

REFERENCES

Chenery, Hollis B., Robinson, S., and Syrquin, M. Industrialization and Growth: A
Comparative Study. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.

Chenery, Hollis B., and Syrquin, M. Patterns of Development. 1950-1970. London: Oxford
University Press, 1975.

Cole, Arthur M. Business Enterprise

in Its Social Setting, Cambridge:

Harvard University

Press, 1959.

Deane, Phyllis. The First Industrial Revolution. 2d ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1965.

Fishlow, Albert. American Railroads and the Transformation of the Ante-Bellum Economy.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1965.

Fleming, J. Marcus. External Economies and the Doctrine of Balanced Growth," Economic

Journal 65

1955), 241-256.

(June

Fogel, Robert W. Railroads and American Economic Growth.

Baltimore:

Johns Hopkins

Press, 1964.

Hart, Oliver D. "A Model of Imperfect Competition with Keynesian Features," Quarter/v

Journal of
Hayek,

Economics 97 (February 1982), 109-138.

Friedrich von. "The Use of Knowledge in Society," American

Economic Review 35

(September 1945), 5 19—530.

Kaldor, Nicholas. Causes of the Slow Rate of Economic Growth in the United Kingdom.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1966.

Keynes, John M. The General Theory of Employment. Interest, and Money. London:
Macmillan, 1936.

Lewis, W. Arthur. "Unemployment in Developing Countries" (Stephenson Memorial Lecture),
World Today 23

(1967), 13-22.

31

Lucas, Robert E., Jr.

'The

Mechanics

of Economic Development,' forthcoming, Journal of

Monetary Economics, 1988.

Murphy, Kevin M.; Shleifer, Andrei; and Vishny, Robert W. 'Income Distribution, Market
Size, and Industrialization," forthcoming, Quarterly

Journal of Economics, 1989.

Nurkse, Ragnar. Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Countries. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1953.

Reynolds, Lloyd G. "The Spread of Economic Growth to the Third World," Journal of

Economic Literature 21 (September 1983), 941-980.
Romer, Paul M. "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth,' Journal of Political Economy 9.

(October 1986a), 1002-1037.
_________ "Increasing Returns, Specialization, and External Economies: Growth as Described

by Allyn Young." Mimeographed, 1986b.
Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul N. "Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and South-Eastern
Europe," Economic Journal 53 (June-September 1943), 202-211.

_________ "Notes on the Theory of the 'Big Push'," in Economic Development for Latin

America, ed. H. S. Ellis and H. C. Wallich. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1961.
Rostow, Walt W. The Stages of Economic Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1960.

Sawyer, John E. "Entrepreneurship in Periods of Rapid Growth: The United States in the
19th Century," paper presented at a conference on Entrepreneurship and Economic

Growth in Cambridge, Mass., November 12 and 13, Part C, p. 3 (1954).

Scitovsky, Tibor. 'Two Concepts of External Economics,' Journal of Political Economy 62
(April 1954), 143-151.

Shleifer, Andrei. 'Implementation Cycles.' Journal
1986), 1163-1190.

of

Political

Economy 94 (December

32

Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert W. The Efficiency of investment in the Presence of
Aggregate Demand Spiliovers," Journal of Political Economy 96 (December 1988).

Smith, Adam. The Wealth of Nations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1976.
Weitzman, Martin L. "Increasing Returns and Foundations of Unemployment Theory,"
Economic Journal 92 (December 1982), 787-804.

Young, Allyn. 9ncreasing Returns and Economic Progress, Economic Journal 38 (December
1928), 528—539.

