                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     WHICH WORKERS BEAR THE BURDEN OF SOCIAL DISTANCING POLICIES?

                                       Simon Mongey
                                       Laura Pilossoph
                                       Alex Weinberg

                                      Working Paper 27085
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27085


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




Thanks to SafeGraph for making their data available to us, as well as other researchers studying
the consequences of the Coronavirus epidemic. Thanks to Gianluca Violante and Greg Kaplan for
making available their codes. Our measures at the three digit occupation level are available on
our websites. The views expressed in this study are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Replication code is available on the authors' websites.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Simon Mongey, Laura Pilossoph, and Alex Weinberg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Which Workers Bear the Burden of Social Distancing Policies?
Simon Mongey, Laura Pilossoph, and Alex Weinberg
NBER Working Paper No. 27085
May 2020
JEL No. E24,J01,J22

                                         ABSTRACT

What are the characteristics of workers in jobs likely to be initially affected by broad social
distancing and later by narrower policy tailored to jobs with low risk of disease transmission? We
use O NET to construct a measure of the likelihood that jobs can be conducted from home (a
variant of Dingel and Neiman, 2020) and a measure of low physical proximity to others at work.
We validate the measures by showing how they relate to similar measures constructed using time
use data from ATUS. Our main finding is that workers in low-work-from-home or high-physical-
proximity jobs are more economically vulnerable across various measures constructed from the
CPS and PSID: they are less educated, of lower income, have fewer liquid assets relative to
income, and are more likely renters. We further substantiate the measures with behavior during
the epidemic. First, we show that MSAs with less pre-virus employment in work-from-home jobs
experienced smaller declines in the incidence of `staying-at-home', as measured using SafeGraph
cell phone data. Second, we show that both occupations and types of workers predicted to be
employed in low work-from-home jobs experienced greater declines in employment according to
the March 2020 CPS. For example, non-college educated workers experienced a 4ppt larger
decline in employment relative to those with a college degree.

Simon Mongey                                                   Alex Weinberg
Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics                     University of Chicago
University of Chicago                                          1126 E 59th St
1126 E. 59th Street                                            Chicago, IL 60637
Chicago, IL 60637                                              weinberga@uchicago.edu
and NBER
mongey@uchicago.edu

Laura Pilossoph
Macroeconomics and Monetary Studies Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
pilossoph@gmail.com
1       Introduction

The key public policy implemented during the Coronavirus pandemic is ‘social distancing’. This
has the economic consequence that many workers will be forced to work from home if feasible.
Moreover, returning to work will likely occur more slowly for jobs that require a large degree of
physical proximity to others.1 To the extent that workers vary systematically across these jobs,
social distancing policies will have systematically different effects across individuals. Understanding
how individuals vary across these occupations is therefore important for policy makers interested
in formulating targeted worker assistance programs.
    In this paper, we combine multiple data sources to study how individuals vary across occupa-
tions which differ in their exposure to social distancing policies. We merge individual-level data from
the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Current Population Survey (CPS) and the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID) with a version of the Dingel and Neiman (2020) classification of an occupations’
capacity to work from home as well as a measure of physical proximity in the workplace.2 We
construct these two measures using occupation-level data from the Department of Labor’s Occu-
pational Information Network (O∗ NET) data.3 We show that despite being negatively correlated,
some outlier occupations such as those related to education are both high work-from-home and high
physical-proximity, hence relatively more affected when social distancing policies become targeted.
    We validate the measures of work-from-home and physical-proximity using data from the Amer-
ican Time Use Survey (ATUS) that are meant to capture similar types of job characteristics. The
O∗ NET work-from-home measure does not explicitly account for working at home, since it is de-
signed to capture whether a job could feasibly be done from home, and instead is based on the types
of activities conducted at work (e.g. heavy lifting, working outdoors etc). Nonetheless, the measure
is highly correlated with the share of time working that is spent at home in ATUS. Moreover, the
O∗ NET physical-proximity measure is correlated with the reported fraction of time spent working
alone. We hope that this validation is useful for other researchers.
    With validated occupation-level measures in hand, we proceed in two steps. First, we study how
individual characteristics of workers vary across these types of occupations. Our main result is that
workers in occupations that are more likely to be affected by social distancing policies are workers
we would consider more economically vulnerable. Workers in these occupations are less likely to
have a college degree and are less likely to have health insurance provided by their employer. They
are less likely to be white, less likely to work at a large firm, and less likely to be born in the USA.
Workers in low work-from-home occupations also have disproportionately low levels of liquid assets,

    1
      For example, Governor Andrew Cuomo’s policy for NY State consists of a Phase I reopening with Construction
and Manufacturing jobs, which the state views as low risk and highly essential.
    2
      See https://bfi.uchicago.edu/wp-content/uploads/BFI White-Paper Dingel Neiman 3.2020.pdf
    3
      In these occupation-level data, occupational classifications are finer than those available in the individual-level
data. To make the data conformable we develop a cross-walk that allows us to use the Bureau of Labor Statistics’
Occupation Employment Statistics (OES) to employment weight O∗ NET measures within the coarser occupations
defined in the CPS. Code is available on request.


                                                           1
which is especially important for policies that provide liquidity to households. Finally, we show
that these effects are monotonic in that occupations that score relatively lower (higher) in terms of
the work-from-home (personal-proximity) measure, are even more economically vulnerable.4
    These relationships are in general stronger when we split occupations by the work-from-home
measure rather than the physical-proximity measure. Relative to occupations that score low in terms
of the work-from-home measure, there is greater economic diversity among occupations associated
with high levels of physical proximity. For example, salon workers, sales assistants and dentists
all work in high personal-proximity environments. This suggests that the economic costs of social
distancing policies may be more tightly related to pre-epidemic economic status, while the economic
costs of a slow return to work that starts with low physical-proximity occupations may be more
broadly distributed.
    Second, using the limited data available since the start of the epidemic, we show how different
occupations and workers have been effected. To begin, we construct a pre-epidemic MSA-level work-
from-home measure and show that it is (i) uncorrelated with pre-epidemic mobility as measured
using cellphone data from SafeGraph, but (ii) strongly correlated with the change in mobility
during the epidemic. We then turn to employment changes across the February and March 2020
CPS surveys. Occupations that rank low in the work-from-home measure and high in the physical-
proximity measure experienced larger employment declines relative to pre-epidemic February-March
changes. Finally, workers that our main results suggested would be more vulnerable did indeed
experience larger declines in employment. For example, non-college educated workers experienced
a 4ppt larger decline in employment relative to those with a college degree.
    Our results have clear implications for public economic policy. First, they provide guidance as to
how income replacement and liquidity injection policies may be targeted. Second, since low work-
from-home and high physical-proximity workers tend to have lower incomes and lower liquidity, the
marginal social cost of income support is low, while the marginal private benefits are high. Third,
the correlation between low work-from-home and high physical-proximity jobs creates a double-
edged sword. It induces a correlation between economic risks under tight social distancing and
health risks under relaxed social distancing. Already more economically vulnerable workers are
disproportionately exposed to unemployment now, and infection in the future, suggesting the need
for on-going policy interventions.


Literature.      Our two contributions are to look at the characteristics of workers in occupations that
differ by the aforementioned measures, and study the experience of these workers in the epidemic,
using carefully validated occupation-level measures. Dingel and Neiman (2020) use the OES to
ask the important question of what fraction of employment and income is accounted for by jobs
   4
     When we compare the top quartile of occupations by the work-from-home measure, to the bottom quartile of
occupations by the work-from-home measure, we find that the estimated treatment effects are larger. When we
compare the third quartile of occupations by this measure, to the second quartile of occupations by this measure, we
find that the estimated treatment effects are smaller but still statistically significant in all cases.


                                                         2
that can be done from home. Leibovici et al. (2020) conduct a similar analysis, instead considering
low physical-proximity occupations rather than high work-from-home occupations.5 Both use the
O∗ NET to classify occupations, and then employment and income data from the OES to study
the geographic distribution of employment and income accounted for by types of jobs. Our focus
here is on understanding the characteristics of the underlying workers that comprise employment
in these jobs, validating the measures by showing they are consistent with measures from other
datasets, and verifying that they are indeed correlated with post-outbreak outcomes. This requires
a careful merging of the O∗ NET data by occupational code with other datasets containing worker
characteristics, such as the CPS, the PSID, and the ATUS.


Overview.      Section 2 describes how we construct our measures of work-from-home and physical-
proximity using the O∗ NET and OES data. We compare the two measures across occupations, and
validate each against comparable measures constructed from the ATUS. Section 3 integrates the
CPS and PSID data and gives our main results, which are summarized in Figure 3. Section 4 shows
how occupations characterized by their work-from-home and physical-proximity measures behaved
over the implementation of social-distancing. Section 5 concludes.


2     Low work-from-home and high physical-proximity jobs

Here we describe how we construct our measures of work-from-home and personal-proximity, how
the two measures compare across occupations, and then validate the two measures against ATUS
data.

2.1     Characteristics of jobs

To construct occupation-level measures that can be merged into worker-level data from ATUS, CPS
and PSID, we combine two data sets:

        O∗ NET - Occupation-level data on work activities by occupation, where occupations are
        defined at the fine SOC level. SOC codes are finer than the Census OCC codes used to define
        occupations in ATUS, CPS, and PSID.

        OES - Occupation-level data on employment and income at the SOC level. This data is used
        to employment-weight when aggregating skills across SOC level occupations, within OCC level
        occupations.

Rather than pooling data over time we take the most recent snapshot of the US economy available
to us concurrently from these data, which is 2018. We use O∗ NET Database 24, OES data from


    5
      St. Louis Federal Reserve, On the Economy blog:
https://www.stlouisfed.org/on-the-economy/2020/march/social-distancing-contact-intensive-occupations


                                                       3
2018, and the 2019 March CPS which asks questions regarding occupation and income in the prior
year. In Section 4 we add the 2020 March CPS.
    Using the O∗ NET and OES data we construct two measures for each occupation. We sign these
in terms of expected negative economic impacts of the crisis: (i) low work-from-home (LW F H),
and (ii) high physical-proximity (HP P ). For our main results, we split occupations into groups
based on these measures, and then use the CPS and PSID to compare the attributes of workers in
occupations in each group.
    We first detail how we construct LW F H and then describe the construction of HP P which
follows many of the same steps. Let j ∈ {1, . . . , J} denote a 3-digit OCC-code occupation, which
is the measure available in worker-level data. Let l ∈ {1, . . . , L} denote the fine SOC-code catego-
rization of occupations in O∗ NET and OES. We differ from Dingel and Neiman (2020) in how we
aggregate skills, but use their set of O∗ NET job characteristics.

   1. We take the following 17 measures of SOC-level occupation attributes in the O∗ NET data
       from Dingel and Neiman (2020). We index them by k = 1, . . . , K. In the publicly available
       data, each takes on a value mlk ∈ [1, 5], representing the average response of workers to an
       underlying survey in which the options are {1, . . . , 5}:

          - Work Activities module: Performing General Physical Activities; Handling and Moving Objects;
            Controlling Machines and Processes; Operating Vehicles, Mechanized Devices, or Equipment; Performing

            for or Working Directly with the Public; Inspecting Equipment, Structures, or Material; Repairing and

            Maintaining Electronic Equipment; Repairing and Maintaining Mechanical Equipment.

          - Work Contexts module: Electronic Mail Use;6 Outdoors, Exposed to Weather; Outdoors, Under
            Cover; Deal With Physically Aggressive People; Wear Specialized Protective or Safety Equipment such

            as Breathing Apparatus, Safety Harness, Full Protection Suits, or Radiation Protection; Wear Common

            Protective or Safety Equipment such as Breathing Apparatus Safety Harness, Full Protection Suits, or

            Radiation Protection; Spend Time Walking and Running; Exposed to Minor Burns, Cuts, Bites, or

            Stings; Exposed to Disease or Infections.

       Within each 3-digit OCC occupation j, we take the employment-weighted average of mlk
       across SOC occupations l ∈ j. This gives a measure for each occupation-attribute pair:
              P                          P
       mjk = l∈j ωl mlk , where ωl = nl / l0 ∈j nl0 . To map SOC code occupations into OCC code
       occupations we start with a cross-walk obtained from US Census, which we then substantially
       edit and verify.7

   2. We convert these into binary variables m∗jk ∈ {0, 1} based on whether mjk ≥ 3.5. Since we
       employment-weighted when computing mjk then m∗jk = 1 if “The average respondent to the
   6
       In the case of Electronic Mail Use, we reverse the values such that a high value implies that the occupation is
less suited to working from home.
     7
       The    basic    cross-walk   from    Census    is   available   here:      https://www2.census.gov/programs-
surveys/demo/guidance/industry-occupation/2010-occ-codes-with-crosswalk-from-2002-2011.xls


                                                          4
        question in the underlying O∗ NET survey answered at least 4.”

   3. We then construct a single measure for each occupation LW F H j by taking the unweighted
      mean of m∗jk : LW F H j = K −1 K       ∗
                                     P
                                       k=1 mjk . In words, this gives the fraction of the K low
        work-from-home measures mjk for which occupation j has a high score. We rescale this to
        [0, 1] by subtracting the minimum value and dividing by the maximum minus the minimum
        values.

   4. We then assign the binary variable LW F H ∗j = 1 (low work-from-home) if occupation j is
        above the employment-weighted median value of LW F H j .

This procedure delivers a continuous variable LW F H j and a binary variable LW F H ∗j that can be
mapped into the occupational codes contained in the CPS, ATUS, and PSID.
    The procedure to construct HP P j and HP P ∗j is similar to the above. We start with a measure
ml from O∗ NET at the SOC level that reflects physical-proximity at work and takes on a value
ml ∈ [1, 5]. We use the OES to compute an employment-weighted mean mj for all SOC occupations
                                                                                                
l ∈ j. We then re-scale to the interval [0, 1] by subtracting mM
                                                               j
                                                                 in and dividing by mM ax − mM in ,
                                                                                     j       j
which gives our measure HP P j . We then assign the dummy HP Pj∗ = 1 (high physical-proximity)
if the occupation is above the employment-weighted median of this variable. For context, before
this scaling, the median value of mj is 3.6. Therefore, in the underlying survey, the average worker
in jobs we have classified as high physical proximity reports working at or within arm’s length of
others.8
    To recap, by construction HP P ∗j and LW F H ∗j are binary variables that equal 1 for the occupa-
tions that are most likely to be effected by the epidemic and ensuing policies. Half of employment
is in HP P ∗j = 1 jobs and half of employment is in LW F H ∗j = 1 jobs.

2.2     Which jobs are low work-from-home and high physical-proximity?

Figure 1 shows how occupations vary across these two metrics, and where our cut-offs lie for the
binary measures.9 Unsurprisingly, there is a strong positive correlation between low work-from-
home and high physical-proximity occupations. Typical ‘office jobs’ in financial service provision or
the legal profession deliver m
                             e jk = 0 for almost all of the K features of work used to construct the
low work-from-home measure. There is also little work done within arm’s length in these jobs. On


    8
      Workers that respond to the survey administered by O*NET choose one of: 1 = ‘I don’t work near other people
(beyond 100ft)’, 2 = ‘I work with others but not closely (e.g. private office)’, 3 = ‘Slightly close (e.g. shared office)’,
4 = ‘Moderately close (at arm’s length)’, 5 = ‘Very close (near touching)’. Publicly available O∗ NET data consists
of an average of these responses. Since the cut-off value of mj is 3.6, then HP Pj∗ = 1 for occupations in which the
average response to the survey question is at least 4. Our high physical-proximity occupations therefore represent
occupations for which the average respondent said they worked at arm’s length or less away from others. For additional
information regarding this question, see https://www.onetonline.org/find/descriptor/result/4.C.2.a.3.
    9
      For readability of this figure, we employment-weight using the OES to aggregate LW F H j and HP P j to the 2 digit
                                                                                                  M in      M ax     M in
level. We then linearly transform each measure X j using its minimum and maximum: (X j − X j )/(X j              − X j ).


                                                            5
                               (i) Professional, management, technology; (ii) Services                                                                    (iii) Clerical, sales; (iv) Production, operators
                        1.0         Professional, management, technology                                                                  1.0         Clerical, sales                            Install/Maintenance/Repair
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Construct./Extract.
                                    Services                                                                                                          Production, operators
Low work−from−home >>




                                                                                                                  Low work−from−home >>
                        0.8                                                                Healthcare supp.                               0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                      Production
                                                                                                                                                                                           Material moving
                                                          Building/maintenance        Protection services
                                                                                                                                                                          Transportation
                        0.6                                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                            Food prep.
                                                                                         Healthcare tech.                                              Farm/Fish/Forest

                        0.4                                                          Personal care                                        0.4


                        0.2                                                                                                               0.2                                                      Sales
                                         Science                            Community/Social
                                                                Entertainment/Media                                                                                              Office/Admin.
                                     Management      Architecture/Engineering
                               Busn./Finan.           Computer/Math
                        0.0     Legal                                                 Education                                           0.0
                              0.0     0.1      0.2    0.3     0.4     0.5   0.6    0.7      0.8    0.9      1.0                                 0.0     0.1       0.2     0.3   0.4        0.5      0.6      0.7     0.8     0.9     1.0
                                                     High physical−proximity >>                                                                                         High physical−proximity >>

                                    Figure 1: Occupations by Work-from-home and Physical-proximity (2 digit, Census OCC)
                         Notes This figure compares groups of 2 digit OCC code occupations. To construct this figure, we employment-weight
                         using the OES to aggregate LW F H j and HP P j to the 2 digit level. The gray line gives fitted values are from
                         an employment-weighted linear regression across 2 digit occupations. Occupations above the red-dashed line have
                         LW F Hj∗ = 1, and account for half of employment. Occupations to the right of the blue-dashed line have HP Pj∗ = 1,
                         and account for half of employment.


                         the other hand, construction, material moving, and healthcare jobs are low work-from-home and
                         high physical proximity.
                                    A number of occupations stand out as deviations from this pattern. Education jobs require
                         close physical-proximity, but little of the features that would prevent the job being conducted at
                         home. Under broad public policies of social-distancing, workers in these jobs can successfully stay
                         employed while operating from home, which has occurred through virtual teaching. More targeted
                         social-distancing policies in the recovery phase could be expected to feature education jobs late
                         to reintegrate. Agricultural jobs (Farm/Fish/Forest), meanwhile, may pose lower contagion risk
                         due to low physical-proximity, but are difficult to be done from home. Such jobs may be punished
                         somewhat unduly by indiscriminate social-distancing policies.

                         2.3            Comparison to measures constructed from ATUS

                         We construct ATUS-based measures of a job’s ability to be done from home as well as the degree
                         of physical-proximity to others involved. From the 2018 microdata files we use information on the
                         share of work time spent in certain places and with certain people. As a work-from-home measure,
                         we compute the aggregate share of work hours that are spent at home. As a physical-proximity
                         measure, we compute the aggregate share of work hours spent alone.10

                               10
                              We use the question in the ATUS “who” file which asks - for each activity the respondent recorded - “Who was
                         in the room with you/Who accompanied you?” for the measure of hours working spent alone. We use the question
                         from the interview file which asks “where were you during this activity?” for the measure of hours spend working at
                         home.


                                                                                                                                6
                                                     A. Share of working time spent working at home                                                              B. Share of working time spent working alone
    Share of work hours at home (ATUS)   0.5                           Professional, management, technology                                          0.5




                                                                                                                  Share of work hours alone (ATUS)
                                                                       Services
                                         0.4                           Clerical, sales
                                                                       Production, operators                                                         0.4

                                         0.3
                                                                                                                                                     0.3
                                         0.2
                                                                                                                                                     0.2
                                         0.1

                                                                                                                                                     0.1
                                         0.0


                                                                                                                                                     0.0
                                               0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1.0                                             0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8   0.9   1.0
                                                           Low work−from−home >> (O*NET)                                                                               High physical−proximity >> (O*NET)

                                                 Figure 2: Comparing work-from-home and physical-proximity measures to ATUS
Notes This figure compares the fraction of individuals reporting that they can work from home in the ATUS against
the O∗ NET WFH measure (Panel A). Panel B compares the physical proximity measures constructed from the
two datasets. The share of adjusted work hours accounts for the fact that respondents can answer that they are
with multiple individuals while performing a particular activity. Fitted values are from employment-weighted linear
regressions, and display 95 percent confidence intervals for the conditional expectation of the dependent variable.


                                  Figure 2A plots the ATUS measure of share of hours worked from home against the O∗ NET
LW F H ∗j measure for 2 digit occupations (Panel A). Figure 2B compares physical proximity mea-
sures. Both sets of measures are negatively correlated, which we view as validation of the O∗ NET
measures. In particular, the work-from-home measures have a correlation of -0.83 . The physical
proximity measure is less tightly linked, with a correlation of -0.44 , but this is to be expected given
that the ATUS measure uses information on whether people are around you when you work, while
the O∗ NET measure uses information on how close by those individuals are.
                                  Figure 2 provides preliminary evidence on the distributional effects of social distancing public
policies. Workers in professional services jobs (blue markers) already spend a significant fraction
of time working from home and more time working alone. These types of workers—usually higher
income and college educated—will be less likely impacted by social distancing policies. We now
study this in detail using individual-level data.


3                                        Characteristics of workers by jobs

With LW F Hj and HP Pj measured for occupations that are consistent with the CPS and PSID,
we can compare the characteristics of workers in occupations for which these measures are high and
for which these measures are low. Throughout we use the sample selection criteria of Heathcote et
al. (2010) as well as their construction of wages.11
            11
      We follow their sample selection criteria for their Sample C which is as follows. We construct wages by taking
total wage and salary income plus two-third of self-employment income, and dividing this by total hours worked which
we compute as the product of weeks worked last year and usual weekly hours. We keep individuals that have: age


                                                                                                              7
    Our approach is simple. Let yij be a characteristic of a worker i that reports that they mostly
worked in occupation j last year.12 For simplicity, we only consider binary variables in the CPS; for
example we construct a variable yij = 1 if the continuous variable ‘wage’ is above the median. We
then estimate the following regression for each of our observables, using LW F H ∗j as an example:

                                          yij = αy + βy LW F H ∗j + εij .                                         (1)

We then plot the values for βby . This sample moment gives

                           βby = E yij LW F H ∗j = 1 − E yij LW F H ∗j = 0
                                                                       
                                                                                         ,

where E is the sample mean. Given that yij is binary, βby simply gives the fraction of workers for
which yij = 1 in low work-from-home occupations, relative to the fraction of workers for which
yij = 1 in high work-from-home occupations. Clearly βby ∈ [−1, 1] and takes the maximum value of
1 when yij = 1 for all individuals for which LW F H ∗j = 1, and yij = 0 for all individuals for which
LW F H ∗ = 0. Comparing estimates across measures y and y 0 , a higher value of βby > βby0 can be
         j
interpreted as

      “Workers in occupations for which LW F Hj∗ = 1 are relatively more different from workers in
      occupations for which LW F Hj∗ = 0 along dimension y than along dimension y 0 ”.

    We estimate (1) for a number of individual characteristics. In each case we assign yij = 1 to
the individuals with the characteristic most related to being in a low work-from-home occupation.
This gives βby ∈ [0, 1]. With this approach, we have the following characteristics of workers, all of
which take on a value yij = 1:
    - Demographics. (i) Non-white, (ii) No college degree, (iii) Age below 50, (iv) Male, (v) Single, (vi)
      Born outside USA, (vii) Non-US citizen, (viii) Rent their home

    - Work. (i) No healthcare provided by employer,13 (ii) Employed at a small firm (< 500 employees),
      (iii) Part-time employed

    - Income. (i) Below median wage,14 (ii) Experienced a spell of unemployment in the last year.

Work and income characteristics are associated with the job at which the worker was employed for
the longest period of time in 2018.
    In Figure 3A, in blue, we plot the estimates for each of these characteristics for the low work-
from-home regression, ordering these attributes from the highest to the lowest point estimate. Figure
3B repeats the exercise for the high personal-proximity regression. We discuss low work-from-home
first, and defer our discussion to the PSID measures in red.
25-65, wages that are greater than half of the Federal minimum wage, and total hours worked more than one working
month of 8 hour days (176hrs).
   12
      We use the IPUMS coding of the March CPS in which this is OCCLY.
   13
      We set the indicator for employer provided healthcare to 1 if the employer pays for any part of the individual’s
health insurance premiums.
   14
      See footnote 10 for computation of wage.


                                                          8
                                  A. Low work−from−home jobs                                          B. High physical−proximity jobs

        No college degree                                                   Below median wage
      Below median wage                                                       No college degree
                      Male                                              No employer healthcare
  No employer healthcare                                                    Part−time employed
              Rents home                                                                  Single
          Born outside US                                                           Rents home
                    Single                                                              Age <50
           Non−US citizen                                                             Non−white
   Small firm (<500 emp.)                                                       Born outside US
                Non−white                                                        Non−US citizen
      Part−time employed                                              Unemployed at all last year
Unemployed at all last year                                              Small firm (<500 emp.)
                  Age <50                                                                   Male
    Hand to mouth (PSID)                                                  Hand to mouth (PSID)
Poor hand to mouth (PSID)                                             Poor hand to mouth (PSID)
                           0.00     0.10      0.20   0.30   0.40                                    −0.10      0.00      0.10       0.20
                                           More likely >>                                              << Less likely , More likely >>

           Figure 3: Characteristics of workers in Low Work-from-home and High physical-proximity jobs
         Notes This figure plots estimates of βby for 10 characteristics y from regressions in which LW F H ∗j ∈ {0, 1} is the
         independent variable (Panel A), and in which HP P j ∈ {0, 1} is the independent variable (Panel B). If x% of workers
         in high work-from-home occupations have, for example, no college degree, then Panel A shows that (x+38)% of workers
         in low work-from-home occupations have no college degree. A high value of βby therefore means that workers in low
         work-from-home occupations are more likely than workers in high work-from-home occupations to be in the category
         listed on the vertical axis. Point estimates are given by the circle markers, and 95 percent confidence intervals are
         given by the lines through each marker. All blue results are derived from the CPS, red results are derived from the
         PSID.


         Economic and demographic.                      Our main result is that occupations that score low in terms of the
         work-from-home measure feature workers that by all measures are economically more vulnerable.
         Workers in these occupations are less likely to be white or to have a college degree, which relate
         to the fact that they are 25 ppt more likely to be below median income. They are more likely to
         work in smaller firms, which are on average less financially robust and so less likely to suffer from
         the financial effects of the crisis (Chodorow-Reich, 2014). They are more likely to rent rather than
         own their homes and so will not be in positions to take advantage of interest rate cuts, and have
         fewer collateralizable assets to borrow against to compensate for earnings losses.
             Workers in these jobs are also less likely to have access to informal insurance channels that may
         help them weather the crisis. They are less likely to be married, which diversifies household income
         against individual income risk. They are less likely to be US citizens or born in the US, which may
         lead to less family support, as well as restricted access to emergency government programs. Finally,
         workers in low work-from-home occupations are more likely to have unstable employment. They
         are less likely to be employed full-time and more likely to have recently experienced unemployment.


         Healthcare.          Availability of healthcare is obviously a key insurance mechanism in a health crisis.
         Workers in low work from home occupations are less likely to have any employer-provided healthcare.



                                                                      9
Meanwhile those in jobs that are more readily able to be performed from home are more likely to
have employer provided healthcare.


Age.      The mortality rate for those with COVID-19 is significantly higher for older individuals.15
However, we find that the age of workers across these high- and low- work-from-home occupations
does not systematically differ. Workers in low work-from-home jobs have the same fundamental
health risks, but to the extent that these are also high physical-proximity jobs, higher occupation
related health risks.


High physical-proximity.             For most of the individual characteristics the results for high work-
from-home occupations and low physical-proximity occupations are the same in terms of their
sign. For example, workers in both high physical-proximity occupations and low work-from-home
occupations are less likely to have a college degree than workers in low physical-proximity and high
work-from-home occupations, respectively. The results, however, are less stark, as evidenced by
the magnitudes of the coefficients. Differences in workers across high and low personal-proximity
occupations are less pronounced than the differences between workers in low and high work-from-
home occupations. If we consider high personal proximity occupations to be slower to be brought
back as social distancing policies unwind, this suggests that the slow recovery may be more broadly
experienced than the concentrated effects of unconditional social distancing.
   Nonetheless, the correlation between low work-from-home and high physical-proximity jobs cre-
ates a double-edged sword. It induces a correlation in economic risks due to policy and health risks
due to transmission of Coronavirus. More vulnerable workers are therefore relatively more exposed
to both.


Sex.      The results differ across these two measures most sharply for sex. Individuals in occupations
that score highly in terms of work-from-home are more likely to be women, but this is also true
for occupations that have high physical-proximity. This relates to the earlier example of Education
jobs from Figure 1, which are female-dominated. Taking these results at face value, female workers
may be relatively less affected by the universal social distancing measures currently in place, but
could be relatively more affected in the future as these restrictions are targeted toward occupations
with higher personal-proximity.


Liquidity.       We expect that low access to liquid savings will compound the economic consequences
of job loss or reduction in hours. To understand whether workers in low work-from-home jobs
have disproportionately lower levels of liquid savings we add data from the PSID and construct
measures of hand-to-mouth-ness of households following Kaplan and Violante (2014).16 Hand-to-

  15
       See https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/vsrr/covid19/index.htm.
  16
       We use the code made publicly available from Kaplan et al. (2014).


                                                         10
mouth households are households with liquid assets that are less than half of one month’s income.
    Results are shown in red in Figure 3. We find that households in which the highest earner is
employed in a low work-from-home or high physical-proximity job are disproportionately hand-to-
mouth. Conditional on being hand-to-mouth, households may be poor-hand-to-mouth or wealthy-
hand-to-mouth depending on whether they have positive or negative net-assets, respectively. Con-
ditional on being hand-to-mouth, workers in jobs most likely affected by social distancing policy
are disproportionately poor-hand-to-mouth.
    The magnitudes of the point estimates are economically significant. Hand-to-mouth low work-
from-home households are 10 percent more likely to be poor hand-to-mouth than hand-to-mouth high
work-from-home households. To put this in perspective we could compare this to how, as households
age, the composition of hand-to-mouth households shifts from poor- to wealthy-. Starting at age
30, one would need to move all the way up to age 50—a period of high income growth—in order
to obtain a 10 percent decline in the fraction of hand-to-mouth households that are poor hand-to-
mouth (Kaplan et al., 2014, Figure 6). Despite not being significantly younger, low work-from-home
households have finances as if they are twenty years further back in their lifecycle.


Comparing extremes.         A policy maker might not be interested in policies targeted below and
above the median of the indexes we create since they rule in too many individuals. We therefore
verify that if we make more extreme comparisons using the tails of our measures, then we get
more extreme results in terms of the economic situation of households. Figure A1 in Appendix A
compares the lower quartile to the upper quartile (dropping the middle quartile, in red), and the
second quartile to the third quartile (dropping the upper and lower quartile, in green). When we
compare workers in very low work-from-home occupations to workers in very high work-from-home
occupations (in red), the coefficients are uniformly larger in magnitude. For example, workers in the
lowest quantile of work-from-home occupations are nearly 50 ppt more likely to not have a college
degree. Targeting policies into the lower tail of the distribution is both cheaper (lower incomes to
replace) and more effective (lower resources initially available).


4    Employment during the epidemic

We now use the limited data available since the start of the epidemic for three purposes. First, we
validate our measures by checking that MSAs with more employment in low work-from-home jobs—
which we classified in Section 2 using pre-virus data—saw smaller increases in the rates at which
individuals stayed at home. Second, we show that occupations with low work-from-home scores
experienced larger employment losses. Third, we return to the characteristics of workers associated
with low work-from-home jobs in Figure 3 and show that these workers experienced larger declines
in employment.




                                                  11
                                                         A. Work from home                                                                                B. Physical proximity
                                    0.5                                                                                              0.5
Fraction of phones always at home




                                                                                                 Fraction of phones always at home
                                    0.4                                                                                              0.4




                                    0.3                                                                                              0.3




                                    0.2                                                                                              0.2

                                                         March 8−14   April 5−11                                                                          March 8−14   April 5−11

                                           1     2   3    4      5    6      7     8   9   10                                              1    2     3    4      5    6      7     8   9   10
                                      << High work from home | Low work from home >> (deciles)                                       << Low physical proximity | High physical proximity >> (deciles)

                                    Figure 4: High work-from-home and Low physical-proximity MSAs had higher stay-at-home rates
                                    Notes This figure compares the fraction of phones staying-at-home across MSAs. MSAs are grouped into population-
                                    weighted deciles of the work-from-home measure (Panel A), and physical-proximity measure (Panel B). Two weeks
                                    of data are plotted. The MSA level work-from-home measure is the employment-weighted average of occupation-
                                    level work-from-home measures. The MSA level phones-always-at-home measure time-aggregates over the week and
                                    geographically-aggregates over Census tracts, all phone-days in which a phone remains in a 153m×153m space, and
                                    divides by total phone-days. For example, in MSAs that are in the lowest (highest) decile of employment in work-
                                    from-home jobs, the fraction of phones at home increased by 24 ppt = 46%-22% (0.16 ppt = 37% - 21%).


                                    4.1        Cell-phone behavior by work-from-home at the MSA level

                                    Does the work-from-home measure formulated using pre-virus features of occupations actually relate
                                    to outcomes measured after the outbreak began? One way to assess this is to compute a work-from-
                                    home measure at the level of a geographic unit, and then study changes in stay-at-home behavior
                                    across these units. To do this we study MSAs and use SafeGraph cellphone data. SafeGraph
                                    provides daily data on the total number of cellphones that end the day in a Census block group.
                                    They also provide the number of these cellphones that stay-at-home, as measured by cellphones
                                    that do not leave a small area.17 We do not have occupation employment data at the Census block
                                    group level, but the OES provides employment at the MSA level. We therefore aggregate phone-
                                    days and phone-days-at-home within each MSA to construct a weekly measure of the fraction of
                                    phones always at home. We construct a work-from-home measure at the MSA level by using OES
                                    data on MSA-occupation employment to take the employment-weighted average of LW F H j at the
                                    MSA level.
                                          Figure 4 is supportive of the measures being relevant for understanding changes in employment
                                    in the epidemic. We bin MSAs into deciles based on this measure, and then compute the average
                                    fraction of phones always-at-home. In the second week of March there is no correlation across MSAs
                                    between phone behavior and the work-from-home measure. Between the second week in March and

                                      17
                                         The variable we use is completely home device count, which gives the number of devices that do not leave an
                                    approximately 153m×153m block.


                                                                                                             12
the second week in April, the average fraction of phones that are always at home jumps by around
15 ppt. However, low work-from-home and high physical-proximity MSAs see smaller increases
in phones that stay-at-home, as workers are less easily able to relocate from their usual place of
employment to their usual place of residence.

4.2    Employment losses by occupation

Excess employment losses from February to March of 2020 show a clear pattern: occupations with
low WFH scores had relatively larger declines in employment than occupations with high WFH
scores. Jobs that are more easily done at home are more likely to remain intact through the
economic shutdown. We show that this is the case using CPS (2-digit) occupational employment
data covering January 2010 to March 2020, the latest available CPS data. To account for seasonal
factors in occupation employment changes, we construct excess employment losses by taking the
log change in employment from February to March 2020 and subtracting the average February to
March change in employment. Figure 5A compares the relationship between this excess decline
in employment against LW F H j , showing that low work-from-home jobs experienced larger excess
employment losses.
    An important exception to this relationship, as expected, are those jobs deemed essential by
public policy.18 These are unlikely to have employment losses that correlate with whether the job
can be done from home or not. For example, front line medical workers have low WFH measures
(healthcare supplemental workers have a WFH index of around 0.2), but because they have been
declared essential they can continue to work. We do not have information on which occupations
are deemed essential, so instead we use industry data created by Tomer and Kane (2020), who
categorize certain 4-digit NAICS industries as “essential”.19 For each 2 digit occupation we use the
2018 OES to calculate the share of employment in essential industries, and categorize an occupation
as essential if more than 75 percent of employment is in an essential industry. Occupations that
meet this criterion are depicted in red in Figure 5. Among these occupations there is no significant
relationship between the WFH measure and employment growth.20

4.3    Employment losses by worker characteristics

As a final exercise, we study how excess employment losses vary across the worker characteristics
considered in Section 3. For each group of workers we compute the total employment change over

  18
      See https://www.cisa.gov/publication/guidance-essential-critical-infrastructure-workforce
  19
      Tomer and Kane (2020) use job descriptions from the government statement which announced guidelines for
categorizing essential jobs. The text for this document can be found at https://www.cisa.gov/publication/guidance-
essential-critical-infrastructure-workforce.
   20
      The metric we use to categorize occupations as essential is able to pick up certain obvious 2-digit occupations
such as healthcare technicians and healthcare support. However, some occupations seem to be left out despite having
numerous mentions in the aforementioned government text. For example, the word construction is mentioned thirty
three times; the word legal is mentioned only once. In other work we intend to incorporate a more direct mapping
between the government text and the SOC occupation codes.


                                                         13
                                                  A. Change in emp. by occupation                                                         B. Change in emp. by worker
                                     0.05           Entertainment/Media
                                                                                                                     Born outside US
Relative change in log employment



                                                                                                                       Non US citizen
                                                                                                                               Single
                                     0.00           Office/Admin.
                                                   Manage.
                                              Computer/Math
                                              Legal
                                                  Architecture/Engineering                                          No college degree
                                               Busn./Finan.
                                              Educ.                     Health Construct./Extract.
                                                                                tech.
                                                                                 Transport.
                                                                                        Health supp.
                                                       Sales       Personal care Building/maintenance
                                                    Community/Social   Install/Maintenance/Repair                          Non−white
                                                                        Farm/Fish/Forest
                                    −0.05                                                                                     Female
                                                                                        Protection
                                                                                                                            Age < 50
                                                        Science                             Production
                                                                               Food prep.                       Part time employed*
                                    −0.10                                                   Material moving    Below median wage*
                                                               Non−essential       Essential                                                             Yes       No

                                            0.0   0.1   0.2   0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8             0.9    1.0                            −.06          −.04          −.02          0
                                                              Low work−from−home >>                                                            Feb−Mar log change in employment

         Figure 5: Employment declines by occupations and worker characteristics (February-March 2020)
Notes Both figures use employment data from the CPS. Panel A. This figure plots employment changes by 2-
digit OCC occupation against LW F H j . Employment change is the Feb-Mar log change in employment in 2020
of each occupation, relative to the average Feb-Mar log change in employment over 2010-2019 for the occupation.
Occupations marked with red diamonds are defined as “essential” using the grouping from Tomer and Kane (2020).
Fitted values are from an employment-weighted linear regression estimated on non-essential occupations, and gives
95 percent confidence intervals for the conditional expectation of the dependent variable. Panel B. This figure plots
employment changes by type of worker. The variables on the y-axes are used to split workers into two groups: those
in the group given by the label (‘Yes’, marked with a green circle), and those outside that group (‘No’, marked with
a red cross). We plot the log change in employment across February and March in 2020, adjusted by subtracting the
average February-March change in employment for that group over 2010 to 2019. For the whole sample, we obtain a
total decline in employment of −2.3 log points (black dashed line). (∗) For the last two cases the sample is restricted
to those reporting hours—in the case of Part time employed —and hours+earnings—in the case of Below median wage.
In these subsamples, the average employment change is not −2.3 log points.


February-March 2020, and subtract off the mean total employment change for February-March for
2010-2019. We focus on employment rather than unemployment due to issues associated with the
labeling of workers as unemployed versus out of the labor force. Figure 5 shows the results.21
                                      Once again, a clear pattern emerges: those groups of individuals who have a higher employment
share in low WFH occupations (as identified using the methodology of Section 2) experienced, on
average, more severe employment outcomes in March 2020 relative to those in occupations with
high work-from-home capability. The characteristics with the largest differential in employment
outcomes between groups are citizenship, nativity, marital status, education, and age. Interestingly,
while gender was an important margin which predicted the likelihood of being in low work-from-
home jobs, the employment changes for February-March 2020 are not as extreme as other observable
groups, which may be related to the issue of “essential” jobs discussed earlier.



                                    21
     We check that the total employment losses that we construct using survey weights lines up with total employment
losses reported by the BLS. We obtain a value of -1.82 percent. The official value from the BLS is -1.90 percent, which
we compute as log(158, 759/155, 772) from Table 6 of the following: BLS ‘Employment Situation’ report - March,
2020.


                                                                                                               14
5    Conclusion

We show that workers systematically differ across the types of occupations that were most likely to
be hit by the public policies around social distancing required to stop the spread of the Coronavirus.
Workers in occupations that are most likely to be affected—those with a low score in the work-from-
home measure, or a high score in the O∗ NET measure of personal-proximity—are predominantly
characterized by traits associated with the more economically vulnerable in the US economy. These
workers are disproportionately less educated, have limited healthcare, are toward the bottom of the
income distribution, and have low levels of liquid assets. We showed that this was a useful way of
understanding job losses following the start of the outbreak in 2020.
    Given the occupation-level indicators we have constructed and made available with this paper,
our measures can be used to capture geographic or group level exposure to social distancing policies.
Moreover, our simple approach can be extended to individual economic indicators in any microdata
that records occupation. An obvious example would be individual level data on wealth and asset
portfolios beyond what is available in the PSID, such as the microdata underlying the Survey of
Consumer Finance (SCF) which is available to researchers at the Federal Reserve Board.




                                                 15
References

Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, “The Employment Effects of Credit Market Disruptions: Firm-level
  Evidence from the 2008-9 Financial Crisis,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129 (1),
  1–59.

Dingel, Jonathan and Brent Neiman, “How Many Jobs Can Be Done At Home?,” BFI White
  Paper, Becker Friedman Institute 2020.

Heathcote, Jonathan, Fabrizio Perri, and Giovanni L. Violante, “Unequal We Stand: An
  Empirical Analysis of Economic Inequality in the United States: 1967-2006,” Review of Economic
  Dynamics, January 2010, 13 (1), 15–51.

Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante, “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
  Stimulus Payments,” Econometrica, July 2014, 82 (4), 1199–1239.

  ,   , and Justin Weidner, “The Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth,” Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity, 2014, 45 (1 (Spring), 77–153.

Leibovici, Fernando, Ana Maria Santacrue, and Matthew Famiglietti, “Social Distancing
  and Contact-Intensive Occupations,” Technical Report, St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank - On the
  Economy Blog March 2020.

Tomer, Adie and Joseph W. Kane, “How to protect essential workers during COVID-19,”
  Brookings Report, Brookings Institute March 2020.




                                              16
                                                    Appendix

     A       Additional figures and tables

       No college degree
     Below median wage
                      Male
  No employer healthcare
              Rents home
         Born outside US
                    Single
           Non−US citizen
   Small firm (<500 emp.)
                Non−white
     Part−time employed                                                                                Q2 vs Q3
Unemployed at all last year                                                                            Q1+Q2 vs Q3+Q4
                                                                                                       Q1 vs Q4
                  Age <50
                              0.00        0.10            0.20            0.30             0.40

            Figure A1: Comparing different groups of occupations on the Work-from-home measure
     Notes This figure extends Figure 3. The blue markers replicate Figure 3. In constructing the estimates plotted in
     green, we set LW F Hj = 0 for the second quartile of our continuous measure z j , and LW F Hj = 1 for the third
     quartile of z j . In constructing the estimates plotted in red, we set LW F Hj = 0 for the first quartile of z j , and
     LW F Hj = 1 for the fourth quartile of z j .




                                                                 17
