                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               GLOBAL BEHAVIORS AND PERCEPTIONS AT THE ONSET
                         OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

                                      Thiemo R. Fetzer
                                         Marc Witte
                                        Lukas Hensel
                                      Jon Jachimowicz
                                     Johannes Haushofer
                                      Andriy Ivchenko
                                        Stefano Caria
                                       Elena Reutskaja
                                     Christopher P. Roth
                                        Stefano Fiorin
                                      Margarita Gómez
                                     Gordon Kraft-Todd
                                      Friedrich M. Götz
                                          Erez Yoeli

                                     Working Paper 27082
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27082


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020


We thank our many volunteer translators, whose names are listed in the Appendix. We also thank
Prolific for sponsoring the participants for the survey experiment and Aristeo Marras for data
advice. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Thiemo R. Fetzer, Marc Witte, Lukas Hensel, Jon Jachimowicz, Johannes Haushofer,
Andriy Ivchenko, Stefano Caria, Elena Reutskaja, Christopher P. Roth, Stefano
Fiorin, Margarita Gómez, Gordon Kraft-Todd, Friedrich M. Götz, and Erez Yoeli. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Behaviors and Perceptions at the Onset of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Thiemo R. Fetzer, Marc Witte, Lukas Hensel, Jon Jachimowicz, Johannes Haushofer, Andriy
Ivchenko, Stefano Caria, Elena Reutskaja, Christopher P. Roth, Stefano Fiorin, Margarita
Gómez, Gordon Kraft-Todd, Friedrich M. Götz, and Erez Yoeli
NBER Working Paper No. 27082
May 2020
JEL No. I12,I31,I38

                                         ABSTRACT

We conducted a large-scale survey covering 58 countries and over 100,000 respondents between
late March and early April 2020 to study beliefs and attitudes towards citizens’ and governments’
responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. Most respondents reacted strongly to the crisis: they
report engaging in social distancing and hygiene behaviors, and believe that strong policy
measures, such as shop closures and curfews, are necessary. They also believe that their
government and their country’s citizens are not doing enough and underestimate the degree to
which others in their country support strong behavioral and policy responses to the pandemic.
The perception of a weak government and public response is associated with higher levels of
worries and depression. Using both cross-country panel data and an event-study, we additionally
show that strong government reactions correct misperceptions, and reduce worries and
depression. Our findings highlight that policy-makers not only need to consider how their
decisions affect the spread of COVID-19, but also how such choices influence the mental health
of their population.

Thiemo R. Fetzer                                Jon Jachimowicz
University of Warwick                           Harvard Business School
Department of Economics                         312 Morgan Hall Soldiers Field Road
Gibbet Hill Road                                Boston, MA 02163
Coventry CV4 7AL                                jjachimowicz@hbs.edu
thiemo.fetzer@gmail.com
                                                Johannes Haushofer
Marc Witte                                      Woodrow Wilson School
New York University Abu Dhabi                   Princeton University
PO Box 129188                                   427 Peretsman-Scully Hall
Saadiyat Island                                 Princeton, NJ 08540
Abu Dhabi
United Arab Emirates                            Andriy Ivchenko
marcjosefwitte@gmail.com                        Expilab Research S.L.
                                                c. Santa Magdalena Sofia 6, 3-3
Lukas Hensel                                    Barcelona 08034,
Blavatnik School of Government                  Spain
University of Oxford                            a.ivchenko@expilab.com
Woodstock Road
Oxford OX2 6GG                                  Stefano Caria
United Kingdom                                  Department of Economics
lukas.hensel@bsg.ox.ac.uk                       University of Bristol
                                                12A Priory Road
                                                BS8 1TU
                                                Bristol
                                                United Kingdom
                                                stefano.caria@bristol.ac.uk
Elena Reutskaja                      Gordon Kraft-Todd
IESE Business School                 Morality Lab
Ave. Pearson 21,                     Boston College
Barcelona 08034, Spain               gordon.kraft-todd@bc.edu
ereutskaja@iese.edu
                                     Friedrich M. Götz
Christopher P. Roth                  Department of Psychology
Department of Economics              University of Cambridge
University of Warwick                fmg33@cam.ac.uk
Coventry CV4 7AL
United Kingdom                       Erez Yoeli
Christopher.Roth@warwick.ac.uk       Massachusetts Institute of Technology
                                     eyoeli@mit.edu
Stefano Fiorin
University of California San Diego
Rady School of Management
Wells Fargo Hall, Room 4W122 9500
Gilman Drive, MC 0553
La Jolla, CA 92093-0553
sfiorin@ucsd.edu

Margarita Gómez
People in Government Lab
Blavatnik School of Government
Oxford University
Woodstock Road, Oxford OX2 6GG,
United Kingdom
margarita.gomez@bsg.ox.ac.uk
Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic caused by the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has substantially
changed public and private life in most countries around the world. To contain the spread of the

disease, governments first called on individuals to change their hygiene and social behaviors
(e.g., avoiding handshakes, washing hands more frequently, and avoiding social gatherings),
and subsequently imposed more stringent and costly protection measures, such as school and

store closures, and stay-at-home orders (1, 2). While some of the less invasive measures have

received sustained public support during past epidemics (3), adherence to and support of mea-

sures that are perceived as costliest, such as quarantines, has been mixed (4). Several questions

thus emerge with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic: Do people adhere to recommendations

by the government? How do people perceive the response of their fellow citizens and their

governments? And in light of rising concerns as a result of the COVID-19 crisis (5–7), how is

people’s mental health affected by government measures to contain the pandemic?

   To shed light on these questions, we conducted a global online survey. Volunteers recruited

through social media translated a short questionnaire into 69 languages. Survey participants

were recruited globally through online snowball sampling (the survey instrument is provided in

SI-B). Between March 20 and April 5, 2020, more than 110,000 individuals from 175 countries
participated. At the launch of the survey, on March 20th, there had been 240,000 confirmed

COVID-19 cases and 9,900 people deaths attributed to COVID-19 (8). Among the 32 countries
with more than 1,000 confirmed cases, 47 percent had required workplace closures and 39
percent had imposed some form of restriction to internal mobility. Two weeks later, on April

5th, confirmed cases and deaths had increased four and five-fold, respectively. By then, over
85 percent of the countries with more than 1,000 confirmed cases had adopted various forms
of workplace closure and restrictions to internal movement (9). Our data thus capture global



                                               2
public attitudes in the early and accelerating phases of the pandemic, both before and after
many governments faced challenging yet consequential policy decisions. In this article, we

report results from the 58 countries in which at least 200 people participated, corresponding to
a sample of 107,565 individuals. As of April 5th 2020, these countries accounted for 92% of
all known COVID-19 cases globally, and 93% of deaths. In the analyses presented below, we

re-weight observations to make them representative at the country level, based on respondent’s
gender, age, income, and education. Depending on the focus of the analysis, we also weight

according to country population, or give all countries equal weight.


Broad adherence to COVID-19 protective behaviors and support for containment mea-

sures      We document broad adherence to COVID-19 protective behaviors in Figure 1, Panel A.

Globally, 91% of respondents reported that they did not attend any social gatherings in the past

week; 89% washed their hands more frequently than a month earlier; 93% say that they would

have immediately informed people around them if they had experienced COVID-19 symptoms;

69% reported keeping a distance of at least 2 meters to other people; and 78% said that they

stayed home in the past week (SI Figure 4 presents the country-level averages). People also

plan to maintain these behaviors in the future; for example, while 42% of respondents report

that they will leave their home in the next 5 days to buy food, only 19% say that they will go to

work, and 45% of respondents say that they will not leave their home for any reason in the next
5 days. Thus, respondents report closely adhering to protective behaviors.1

       In line with their own behavior, a large majority of respondents believe that it is important

for others to engage in protective behaviors (Figure 1, Panel B, dark gray bars): 97% believe
that people in their country should cancel their participation in social gatherings because of
   1
     Broad adherence to COVID-19 protective measures has been noted for Italy (10). Our study complements
work studying heterogeneity in responses to the COVID-19 outbreak using survey and cell phone data, with a
particular focus on partisan ideology (11–13).



                                                    3
COVID-19; 92% say people should not shake each other’s hands; 77% think that all shops
other than particularly important ones, such as supermarkets, pharmacies, post offices, and gas

stations, should be closed; and 81% support a general curfew that only excepts grocery shop-
ping, necessary family trips, and the commute to work. Moreover, 90% of respondents believe
that social distancing measures are “effective” or “very effective” and 70% of respondents think

that risky behaviors should be financially punished.
       In contrast, however, respondents do not believe that their fellow citizens hold similar beliefs

(Figure 1, Panel B, light gray bars). Specifically, while 97% of respondents themselves believe

that social gatherings should be cancelled, on average, they estimate that only 67% of their

fellow citizens think the same—a 30 percentage point gap. Similarly, on average, respondents

believe that 74% of people in their country support avoiding handshakes (18 percentage point

gap); that 63% of people believe stores should be closed (14 percentage point gap); and that

55% are in favor of curfews (26 percentage point gap). Thus, respondents themselves hold

strong normative beliefs about the importance of avoidance behaviors, but vastly underestimate

the extent to which these beliefs are shared by their fellow citizens. This is important because

both respondents’ own beliefs and their perceived beliefs of others predict their tendency to

engage in protective behaviors (for both: p < 0.001, see SI-Table 7).2

       Globally, fewer than 9% of respondents believe that the response of their country’s gov-
ernment has been too extreme (see Panel C in Figure 1). This pattern holds robustly across
different social groups: when splitting the sample based on country, gender, median income,

and median age, there is not a single socio-economic strata in which a majority of individuals
think that the government reaction has been “somewhat extreme” or “too extreme” (see SI-G.1
for more details). Rather, many respondents believe that their government is not reacting suffi-
   2
     This finding is consistent with evidence on pluralistic ignorance (14). Misperceived social norms have been
shown to be an important causal driver of high-stakes behaviors across domains, such as female labor force partic-
ipation (15) and energy conservation (16).



                                                        4
ciently, with 45% of respondents across the 58 countries holding such beliefs. Similarly, 58%
of respondents perceive that the reaction of their country’s public to the COVID-19 outbreak

has been insufficient. Further, 43% of respondents do not trust that their country’s government
is keeping them safe, and 43% of respondents perceive that their country’s government has not
been truthful about the COVID-19 outbreak. Panel D of Figure 1 however suggests that there

is significant cross-country variation in these measures (see SI-Figure 5 for the cross country
averages). We next explore this cross-country variation further.


Perception of insufficient response by government and broader public is related to lower

mental health, which improves after decisive government action            The widespread per-

ceptions of an insufficient response by both governments and the public across countries are

strongly associated with measures of mental health. In Figure 2, Panel A, we show that higher

perceptions of insufficient government reaction to the pandemic are associated with higher wor-

ries about the pandemic (p < 0.001). In Panel B, we extend this analysis to a standard depres-

sion scale (PHQ-9, without the suicide question), and a misperception index, which measures

the difference between own attitudes and perceived attitudes of others along the dimensions

discussed above (description of indices and their construction in more detail in SI-C). We also

consider additional explanatory variables, such as COVID-19 case prevalence across countries.

We find that worries about COVID-19 strongly increase with perceptions of an insufficient re-
action by the broader public (p = 0.008), and that our depression index strongly correlates with

perceptions of an insufficient government (p = 0.103) and public reaction (p < 0.001). Simi-

larly, our misperception index strongly increases as public and government reactions are viewed
as insufficient (both p < 0.001). In turn, higher trust in governments to keep people safe, and

perceptions of the truthfulness of government communication about the COVID-19 outbreak,

are associated with lower levels of worries and reduced misperceptions (both p < 0.001).


                                               5
   Can shifts in government policy affect these perceptions? In Panel C of Figure 2, we doc-
ument that the adoption of more stringent COVID-19 containment policies increases the per-

ceived sufficiency of the government’s and the public’s response. We use daily country-level
data on the extent of different government COVID-19 interventions (9). To justify a causal
interpretation, we exploit time variation in country-level COVID-19 responses, thus comparing

each country to itself over time. We find that as a country imposes more stringent restrictions
on public life, these changes (i) lower respondents’ perception of an insufficient reaction by the

public (p < 0.001) and the government (p < 0.001); (ii) increase trust that governments keep

people safe (p < 0.01); and (iii) lower the depression index (p < 0.001).

   Finally, we provide a more granular view of one such policy change in Panels D, E, and

F of Figure 2. In the evening of March 23, 2020, Prime Minister Boris Johnson announced

a nationwide lockdown in the United Kingdom (UK). This represented a drastic change in

the UK’s approach to COVID-19, both relative to itself and relative to other countries. We

estimate a difference-in-differences model, comparing changes in perceptions in the UK before

versus after the change, to changes in other countries at the same time (Germany, Sweden,

the United States, and Brazil; these five countries make up 50% of the whole sample, and we

have sufficient numbers of respondents on each day to estimate a meaningful difference-in-

differences specification).
   We find that the nationwide lockdown announcement in the UK led to notable effects among
survey participants from the UK compared to participants from other countries. Panel D of Fig-

ure 2 shows that the lockdown increased the perceived appropriateness of the government’s
reaction by 18.2 percentage points (p < 0.001), and that of the public’s reaction by 15.3 per-
centage points (p < 0.001). It also increased trust in the government (10.3 percentage points),

and the government’s perceived truthfulness (5.6 percentage points, p < 0.001). The lockdown
also strongly reduced misperceptions about fellow citizens’ attitudes towards strong behavioral


                                                6
responses to the pandemic (0.52 of a standard deviation, p < 0.001). This suggests that people
don’t think others comply voluntarily, but do when required, and thus that government action

is effective. Finally, the lockdown reduced the worries index by 0.150 of a standard deviation
(p < 0.001), and the depression index by 0.049 of a standard deviation (p < 0.1). Panels
E and F of Figure 2 display the event study for perceived appropriateness of the government

response and the worries index, respectively. There were no noticeable pre-trends before the
announcement of the lockdown on March 23, but we observe a marked change in perceived ap-

propriateness and the worries index on the day following the announcement in the UK relative

to other countries. Thus, timely and decisive government action can reduce misperceptions,

worries, and depression.


Robustness Checks             We conduct several checks to assess the robustness of our findings. First,

the statistics described above used sampling weights to make the samples representative of each

country’s population in terms of age, gender, income, and education (see SI-F B for further

information). When the results are re-estimated without these weights, the changes are minimal

(See SI-Fig 9 and SI-Fig 10).

       To examine robustness of our findings to a more representative sample, we repeated the sur-

vey with 2,000 participants from a representative online panel provided by Prolific in the United

States and the UK.3 The results from the representative online panel are similar to those obtained
in the main sample, suggesting that the snowball sampling approach we used did not bias our

results (see SI- G.1). We also assessed the relevance of a potential social desirability bias by

incorporating a list experiment in these representative surveys: a random half of participants
(the control group) were presented with a list of four protective measures (e.g., handwashing),

and asked how many of them they favored. The other half of participants (the treatment group)
   3
       Prolific is a professional panel provider widely used in social science research (17).



                                                            7
were presented with the same list of four measures, plus one additional item: whether they
think there should be a curfew in their country (details on list experiment is provided in SI-B.6).

Respondents in the control group on average agreed with 2.91 statements, while respondents in
the treatment group agreed with 3.64 items. The average difference in statements agreed with
between the treatment and control group is thus 0.73, which very closely mirrors the share of

respondents who, when asked directly, agree that there should be a curfew in their country (0.74
in the representative online panel; 0.71 in the main cross-country survey). These results suggest

that social desirability bias did not play an important role when respondents indicated broad

support to protective behaviors, consistent with recent evidence (18).


Conclusion     Our results highlight that people across the world are responding strongly to the

COVID-19 pandemic, both in terms of their own behavior, as well as their beliefs about how

their fellow citizens should react to the crisis. Our analyses also reveal that a majority of re-

spondents believes that their governments and fellow citizens are not doing enough, which

heightens their worries and depression levels. However, decisive actions from policy-makers,

we find, have the ability to alter how people perceive their governments and other citizens, and

in turn improve mental health. As governments around the world debate whether to extend or

loosen restrictions, our findings reveal that policy-makers not only need to consider how their

decisions affect the spread of COVID-19, but also how such choices influence the mental health
of their population.


References

 1. T. D. Hollingsworth, D. Klinkenberg, H. Heesterbeek, R. M. Anderson, PLoS Computa-
    tional Biology 7, e1001076 (2011).




                                                8
 2. R. M. Anderson, H. Heesterbeek, D. Klinkenberg, T. D. Hollingsworth, The Lancet 395,
    931 (2020).

 3. G. K. SteelFisher, et al., The Lancet Infectious Diseases 12, 845 (2012).

 4. R. K. Webster, et al., Public Health p. 2020.03.17.20037408 (2020).

 5. S. K. Brooks, et al., The psychological impact of quarantine and how to reduce it: rapid

    review of the evidence (2020).

 6. J. J. Van Bavel, et al., Using social and behavioural science to support covid-19 pandemic

    response (2020).

 7. T. Fetzer, L. Hensel, J. Hermle, C. Roth, arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.03848 (2020).

 8. E. Dong, H. Du, L. Gardner, The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020).

 9. T. Hale, A. Petherick, T. Phillips, S. Webster, Variation in government responses to COVID-

    19 (2020).

10. S. Barari, et al., medRxiv (2020).

11. M. Andersen, Available at SSRN 3569368 (2020).

12. H. Allcott, et al., Working Paper (2020).

13. S. Kushner Gadarian, S. W. Goodman, T. B. Pepinsky, Health Behavior, and Policy Atti-

    tudes in the Early Stages of the COVID-19 Pandemic (March 27, 2020) (2020).

14. F. Allport, D. Katz, New York: Craftsman (1931).

15. L. Bursztyn, A. L. González, D. Yanagizawa-Drott, Misperceived social norms: Female
    labor force participation in saudi arabia, Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research
    (2018).

                                                9
16. J. M. Jachimowicz, O. P. Hauser, J. D. O’Brien, E. Sherman, A. D. Galinsky, Nature Human
    Behaviour 2, 757 (2018).

17. S. Palan, C. Schitter, Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance 17, 22 (2018).

18. M. V. Larsen, M. B. Petersen, J. Nyrup, Do survey estimates of the public’s compliance

    with covid-19 regulations suffer from social desirability bias? (2020).




                                              10
                                                     Figure 1: Global Reactions and Perceptions of Reactions to COVID-19
A High global compliance with protective behaviors                                                                                                    B Large under-estimation of others’ attitudes
                                                                                                                                                               96.81




                                                                                                                                                  90 100
                            I did not attend                                                                                                                               91.71
                          social gatherings                                                                                          91.14
                                                                                                                                                                                               81.04
                                                                                                                                                                                      76.80




                                                                                                                                                  80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     74.01
                             I washed hands
                             more frequently                                                                                        89.42                                                                 66.74




                                                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 62.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          55.37




                                                                                                                                             40 50 60
                                                                                                                                              Percentage
        I would have informed
      people about symptoms                                                                                                          92.77


                                                I kept 2m
                                                 distance                                                              68.91




                                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                    I stayed
                                                       home                                                                  78.05




                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                               Own attitudes about
                                                                                                                                                                               what should be done                    Perceived attitudes




                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                            0                 20     40        60       80          100                       Stop social   Stop      Close    Introduce Stop social   Stop      Close    Introduce
                                                                                                          Percentage                                          gatherings handshakes   stores     curfew  gatherings handshakes   stores     curfew




C Broad cross-country agreement that government D Large cross-country variation in perception of suf-
response is not excessive                       ficiency of government and public response

                                                                                           Morocco
                                                                                        Thailand
                                                                                                                                                                 Public
                                                                 Bulgaria
                                                                 Kenya
                                                                                Chile
                                                                                                                                                               reaction
                                                       Philippines
                                                      Ukraine
                                                                                                                                                            insufficient
                                                   Nigeria
                                                 Qatar
                                             Czechia
                                              Mexico
                                               Israel
                                         China
                                       Peru
                                   Norway
                                 Denmark
                               Venezuela
                                 Finland
                               Hungary
                                                                                                                                                           Government
                               Slovakia
                             Colombia
                               Austria
                                                                                                                                                               reaction
                        Portugal
                     Singapore
                                                                                                                                                            insufficient
                       Poland
                   Germany
                         Italy
                   Ecuador
               South Africa
                    Ireland
                   Greece
                  Sweden
                    Brazil
                Malaysia
                 Russia
                  Japan
                 France                                                                                                                                    Do not trust
               Romania
               Belgium
                Albania
                                                                                                                                                           government
        United States
               Canada
              Australia
                Latvia
                Spain
        South Korea
 Dominican Republic
      New Zealand
      Netherlands
       Switzerland
  United Kingdom
         Vietnam
         Belarus
            India                                                                                                                                          Government
      Indonesia
      Argentina
         Turkey
                                                                                                                                                            not truthful
       Uruguay




                 0                10                 20    30     40      50     60     70     80                              90     100                                  0            20            40         60                80           100
                                                     Government reaction too extreme (percentage)                                                                                                      Percentage

Notes: This figure shows descriptive statistics of personal and perceptions of societal reactions to COVID-19. Panel A presents self-reported
engagement in protective behavior. Panel B contrasts respondents’ attitudes and perceived attitudes of compatriots about protective behaviors
and policies. Panel C shows the share of respondents who think that the government action has been excessive by country. Panel D displays
cross-country variation in perceptions of sufficiency of government and public reactions to COVID-19 and of trust in and perceived
truthfulness of governments. The sample was collected using snowball sampling from March 20th to April 6th 2020 (N = 107, 565).
Respondents from countries with at least 200 responses are included. Responses are weighted to be representative at the country level in terms
of age, gender, income, and education. Panel A and B are further weighted by country population to account for different country sizes. Panel
C and D display weighted country averages.
                                                     Figure 2: Perceptions of Government Policy, Public Reaction, Social Norms, and Mental Health
A Positive association of perceived insuffi-B Associations of perceived govern- C Policy shifts to more restrictions reduce
cient government response and worries       ment/public reaction and mental health worries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Public reaction
                                                                                                                                                          Worries             Depression            Misperception               insufficient
                                                                                                                                                           index                index                   index
             1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Government
                                                                                                                    Public                                                                                                                reaction
                                                                                                                  reaction                                                                                                             insufficient
                                                                                                               insufficient
                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Do not trust
  Worries index (SDs)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       government
                                                                                                            Government
                                                                                                   US           reaction
                                                                                          GB                 insufficient                                                                                                Government not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                truthful
          0




                                                                                                            Government                                                                                                          Misperception
                                                                                                             not truthful                                                                                                               index
                                                            DE
             -.5




                                                DK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Worries index
                                                                                                            Do not trust
                                                                                                            government
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Depression
             -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              index
                           0                .2            .4              .6              .8            1                                            0   .5    1    1.5       0           .5   0    1    2    3     4                                    -.2                    -.1                  0                     .1
                                                 Government reaction insufficient (share)                                                                           Standard deviations                                                                        Effect of stricter policy measures: coefficient estimate


D UK lock down on March 23 reduced wor- E UK lock down immediately improved per-F UK lock down directly reduced worries
ries                                    ception of government response
               Public reaction




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .2
                                                                                                                                   .1

                  insufficient

                          Government
                              reaction
                                                                                                             Government reaction insufficient




                           insufficient
                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                  Coefficient estimate for




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Coefficient estimate for
                          Do not trust




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                          government




                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Worries index
         Government not
                                                                                                                            -.1




                truthful

                   Misperception




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -.2
                           index
                                                                                                              -.2




                    Worries index


                           Depression
                                                                                                                                   -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.4
                                index
                                          -.6                   -.4                   -.2               0                                       20        21        22      23        24       25        26         27                              20   21         22        23         24        25         26          27
                                                        Effect of lockdown: coefficient estimate                                                                           Day in March                                                                                      Day in March

Notes: All indices are defined and described in SI-C regressions are further described in SI-E. Respondents from countries with at least 200 responses are included. Panel A shows the
cross-country relationship between the share of respondents perceiving their government’s response as insufficient and a worries index. Panel B captures pairwise relationship between the
variables indicated in the figure heading and row across countries. The regressions in Panel C are estimated using the country x date weighted average data, controlling for country and
day fixed effects; the independent variable is an index of strictness of government response in a country. The regressions in Panel D are estimated using the individual-level data from the
UK and a set of control group countries. The regressions control for country-by-education-by-gender fixed effects and date fixed effects. The independent variable is an indicator variable
taking the value 1 for respondents participating from the UK after the 23 March 2020. Panels E and F illustrate the impact of the UK lockdown announcement among respondents from
the UK compared to the average time trend among participants from control group countries on perceptions of sufficiency of the government response and the worries index. The
underlying data is the survey data that was collected using snowball sampling from March 20th to April 6th 2020 (N= 107,565).
Acknowledgments

We thank our volunteer translators: Abhradeep Maiti, Abis Getachew, Adam Ostrowksi, Adam
Ťápal, Adaobi Anukwu, Ahsan Shoukat Iqbal, Alex Nekrasov, Anchisa Poonprasartporn, An-

drea Garaiova, Angela Jiang Wang, Anna Holmström, Anna Jos, Anna Mini Jos, Anne Tix-
ier, Annisa Rahmalia, Another Moses, Antalique Tran, Anxhela Bruci, Aparajita Acharya,
Arthur M. Chan, Åsa Karlström, Asad Liaqat, Asiphe Ndingaye, Atif ul Hassan, Aziz Shah-

huseynov, Azra Kujundzic, Baptiste Colin, Barnabas Szaszi, Bernardim Bicos Mendes, Bilal

Amir Azhar Tanveer, Binhanquerem Beer, Cemre Karaarslan, Chagai Weiss, Chai Jun Ho, Chu

May Paing, Claudia Jou, Daniel Balaz, Deoclécio Marinho, Destin Ansito Keller, DongWon Oh,

Edmunds Vanags, Egle Cekanaviciute, Elee Shimsoni, Emmanuel Jos, Emine Deniz, Estelle

Duplooy, Fauziah Mauly, Fedhasaa Tamaam, Frederica Mendonça, Ghinadhia Putri Andiya,

Gloria Kidulile, Gram Lu, Guy Grossman, Haikal Eki Ramadhan, Helena Schweiger, Hongdi

Zhao, Htet Thiha Zaw, Ibon Santiago, Iris Yoeli, Irmasari Hafidz, Jaako Merilainen, Jakub

Krupa, Jalees Urk, Jelka Stojanov, Jelka Stojanov, Jens Bugge, Jerica Radez, Joan Ricard-

Huguet, Johansein Rutaihwa, Johnrev Guilaran, Josefine Björkqvist, Julia Florit-Pons, Kanikah

Mehndiratta, Kashaf Asim, Katalin Nagy, Kateryna Poradiuk, Kaushi Kanankege, Khand-

ker Wahedur Rahman, Lam Nguyen, Lambert Kwizera, Larisa Krupskaya, Lenka Fiala, Liisa
Laine, Lisette Swart, Lola Arowolo, Luana Moraes, Luthfia Ersyana Dianasari, Maia Robakidze,

Majken Christensen, Malick Gai, Margaux Wienk, Marianne Thomas, Marina Psiloutsikou,
Marta Fernandez, Martin Čadek, Mattia Fracchia, Mehmet Akif Elen, Miho Hansen, Milena
Djourelova, Mini Jos, Miroslav Nemčok, Mohammad N. Sibai, Myrthe J. Ottenhoff, Nadia

Daniella, Nagendra Babu, Nana Khetsuriani, Nanthaka Fuseekul, Natalia Baloghova, Nazeefa
Fatima, Nejla Asimovic, Nik Nurul Fatima, Niki Rathod, Nikolina Sarcevic, Niranjan Bharati
R, Ogunware Adedayo, Oksana Iamshanova, Omar Cham, P Jose Jacob, Parmveer Singh, Petya



                                             13
Pavlova, Piibi-Kai Kivik, Pooja N. Babu, Prabesh Gyawali, Prasanna Jain, Radhanjali Shukla,
Raqib Faran, Rayyan Zahid, Reny Agustine, Ricardo da Silva, Said Farooq Shah, Sajit M. Math-

ews, Salar Rad, Samatha Mudigonda, Sarib Baloch, Satishchandra Gore, Sejal Deva, Shabnam
Nadiya, Shambhavi Priyam, Shizhuo Wang, Silje Kristiansen, Simen Grythe, Solomon Michael,
Sonia Deol, Stephane Francioni, Sundar Thapaliya, Susanna Berkouwer, Tamara Kerzhner, Tat-

sunori Ishii, Tea Khoperia, Thaı́s Barcellos, Thembinkosi KM Rushwaya, Toan Huynh Luu
Duc, Tram Nguyen, Trudy Shanewise, Tsegay Gebrekidan Tekleselassie, Umida Djuraeva, Va-

sia Papoutsaki, Vera Vaš, Vinayaka R. Prasad, Wendy Nilsen, Wuraola Oyewusi, Yuval Natif,

Zikmund Bartonı́ček, Zulaikha Nizam. We also thank Prolific for sponsoring the participants

for the survey experiment and Aristeo Marras for data advice.


Supplementary materials

The authors provide the following supplementary information.

   Appendix A: Authors, affiliations and contribution statement



   Materials and Methods Appendices

   • Appendix B: Survey instrument

   • Appendix C: Index construction

   • Appendix D: Online survey reach statistics

   • Appendix E: Statistical methodology

   • Appendix F: Weight construction

   • Appendix G: Robustness of findings


                                             14
Appendices
A     Authors, Affiliations and Contribution Statement

    • Stefano Caria, Associate Professor, Department of Economics, Warwick University, UK.
      Survey design, literature and write-up review, GPDR compliance, and subgroup analysis.

    • Thiemo Fetzer, Associate Professor, Department of Economics, Warwick University, UK.

      Organization, Media outreach, survey design, data preparation, data analysis, research

      design, write-up.

    • Stefano Fiorin, Postdoctoral Research Associate, University of California - San Diego,

      US. Survey design, translation implementation.

    • Friedrich M. Goetz, PhD Student, Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge,

      UK. Survey implementation, translation and maintenance.

    • Margarita Gomez, Executive Director of the People in Government Lab, Blavatnik School

      of Government, University of Oxford, UK. Survey implementation and maintenance,

      communication, translation, outreach.

    • Johannes Haushofer, Assistant Professor, Princeton University, US. Organization, sur-

      vey implementation, translation and maintenance, outreach, survey design, data analysis,

      write-up.

    • Lukas Hensel, Postdoctoral Research Associate, Blavatnik School of Government, Uni-
      versity of Oxford, UK. Survey implementation, translation and maintenance; data prepa-

      ration; weight construction; data analysis.




                                               15
    • Andriy Ivchenko, Expilab, Barcelona, Spain. Survey design, implementation, and main-
      tenance, translation, website design, outreach.

    • Jon M. Jachimowicz, Assistant Professor, Organizational Behavior Unit, Harvard Busi-

      ness School, US. Organization, survey design implementation, translation and mainte-
      nance, outreach, survey design, data analysis, write-up.

    • Gordon Kraft-Todd, Postdoctoral Research Associate, Boston College. Survey imple-

      mentation, translation, and maintenance.

    • Elena Reutskaja, Associate Professor, IESE Business School, Barcelona, Spain. Survey

      design, outreach for data collection, media, translations, GDPR compliance.

    • Christopher Roth, Assistant Professor, Department of Economics, Warwick University,

      UK. Survey design, survey implementation, translation and maintenance, write-up.

    • Marc Witte, Postdoctoral Research Associate, Economics Department, New York Univer-

      sity in Abu Dhabi. Survey design, maintenance, data preparation, data analysis, results

      preparation, write-up.

    • Erez Yoeli, Research Scientist, MIT, US. IRB Application, survey implementation, trans-

      lation and maintenance, analysis.


B     Questionnaire
B.1    Self-Reported Past and Future Behaviors

In which country do you mostly live?




                                              16
B.1.1    Past Behaviors

To what extent do the following statements describe your behavior for the past week? [Does
not apply at all / Applies very much]


   • I stayed at home.

   • I did not attend social gatherings.

   • I kept a distance of at least two meters to other people.

   • If I had exhibited symptoms of sickness, I would have immediately informed the people

        around me.

   • I washed my hands more frequently than the month before.

B.1.2    Future Behaviors

   • Do you need to leave your home in the next 5 days? Yes/No

   • What are the reasons for you to leave your home (check all that apply)? Please try to be

        as honest as possible. Your answers will be kept confidential.

          – Going to work

          – Walking a pet

          – Doing physical activity (e.g. exercising, jogging)

          – Procuring food for yourself or family

          – Going to the pharmacy

          – Going to the hospital / receiving medical treatments

          – Taking care of dependents

                                                17
          – Meeting friends or relatives

          – Getting tired of being inside of the house

          – Getting bored

          – Getting some adrenaline (from breaking the law)

          – Exercising my freedom

          – Other

B.2      Beliefs, Perceptions, Emotions
B.2.1    Personal beliefs about coronavirus measures:

   • What do you think: should people in your country cancel their participation at social

        gatherings because of the coronavirus right now? [Yes/No]

   • What do you think: should people in your country not shake other people’s hands because

        of the coronavirus right now? [Yes/No]

   • What do you think: should all shops in your country other than particularly important

        ones, such as supermarkets, pharmacies, post offices, and gas stations, be closed because

        of the coronavirus right now? [Yes/No]

   • What do you think: should there be a general curfew in your country (with the exception

        of grocery shopping, necessary family trips, and the commute to work) because of the
        coronavirus right now? [Yes/No]

B.2.2    Perception of others beliefs about coronavirus measures:

   • How many of 100 people in your country do you think believe that participation at social

        gatherings should be cancelled because of the coronavirus right now?


                                                 18
   • How many of 100 people in your country do you think believe that one should not shake
        other people’s hands because of the coronavirus right now?

   • How many of 100 people in your country do you think believe that all shops in your

        country other than particularly important ones, such as supermarkets, pharmacies, post
        offices, and gas stations, should be closed because of the coronavirus right now?

   • How many of 100 people in your country do you think believe there should be a general

        curfew in your country (with the exception of grocery shopping, necessary family trips,

        and the commute to work) because of the coronavirus right now?

B.2.3    Financial sanctioning of risky behaviors:

   • What do you think: should risky behaviours, which might enable further spread of the

        coronavirus, be financially punished? Yes/No

   • Which fines should be enforced for the following risky behaviours (amount in your coun-

        try currency)?

          – Participation at social gatherings

          – Going out despite exhibiting symptoms of coronavirus

B.2.4    Case predictions

   • How many people in your country do you think will be infected 1 month from now?

   • Without looking it up, what is your estimate of the number of people in your country who
        are currently infected?




                                                 19
B.2.5    Perceptions of government/public response & efficacy

   • Do you think the reaction of your country’s government to the current coronavirus out-
        break is appropriate, too extreme, or not sufficient? [5-point scale]

   • How much do you trust your country’s government to take care of its citizens? [5-point

        scale]

   • How factually truthful do you think your country’s government has been about the coro-

        navirus outbreak? [5-point scale]

   • Do you think the reaction of your country’s public is appropriate, too extreme, or not

        sufficient? [5-point scale]

   • What do you think: How effective are social distancing measures (e.g., through a general

        curfew) to slow down the spread of the coronavirus? [5-point scale]

B.2.6    Worries battery

   • I am nervous when I think about current circumstances. [5 point scale]

   • I am calm and relaxed. [5 point scale]

   • I am worried about my health. [5 point scale]

   • I am worried about the health of my family members. [5 point scale]

   • I am stressed about leaving my house. [5 point scale]

B.3      Personal Info

   • What year were you born? [1919-2020]

   • How many years of education did you complete?

                                                 20
   • What is your monthly household income, before tax, your country’s currency?

   • What is your marital status? [a: married/co-habitating, b: single/divorced]

   • How many people live in your household?

   • Which gender do you identify with? [Male/Female/Other]

   • How healthy are you? [poor/fair/good/excellent]

   • How many of the following conditions do you have: cardiovascular diseases, diabetes,

      hepatitis B, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic kidney diseases, and cancer?

      [0 - 5 or more]

   • What is your postal code?

B.4    PHQ9

How often have they been bothered by the following over the past 2 weeks?

   • Little interest or pleasure in doing things? [4 point scale]

   • Feeling down, depressed, or hopeless? [4 point scale]

   • Trouble falling or staying asleep, or sleeping too much? [4 point scale]

   • Feeling tired or having little energy? [4 point scale]

   • Poor appetite or overeating? [4 point scale]

   • Feeling bad about yourself — or that you are a failure or have let yourself or your family

      down? [4 point scale]




                                               21
   • Trouble concentrating on things, such as reading the newspaper or watching television?
        [4 point scale]

   • Moving or speaking so slowly that other people could have noticed? Or so fidgety or

        restless that you have been moving a lot more than usual? [4 point scale]

B.5      Personality Battery

To which extent do the following questions apply to you? I see myself as . . .

   • Extraverted, enthusiastic [5 point scale]

   • Critical, quarrelsome [5 point scale]

   • Dependable, self-disciplined [5 point scale]

   • Anxious, easily upset [5 point scale]

   • Open to new experiences, complex [5 point scale]

   • Reserved, quiet [5 point scale]

   • Sympathetic, warm [5 point scale]

   • Disorganized, careless [5 point scale]

   • Calm, emotionally stable [5 point scale]

   • Conventional, uncreative [5 point scale]

B.6      List experiment
B.6.1    Control condition

   • In my opinion, my country should pay higher salaries to nurses.

                                                 22
    • In my opinion, my country’s government should continue paying the wages of workers
        who are laid off in response to the corona virus pandemic.

    • In my opinion, my country should focus on providing free internet access to people work-

        ing from home during the corona virus pandemic.

    • In my opinion, my country’s government should provide hospital beds for citizens of
        countries that are more affected by the corona virus pandemic.

B.6.2    Treatment condition

additional question:

    • In my opinion, there should be a general curfew in my country (with the exception of

        grocery shopping, necessary family trips, and the commute to work) because of the coro-

        navirus right now.


C       Construction of Indices
C.1      Worries index

To measure worries we use all questions from the worries battery in section B.2.6. We construct

the worries index based on the all worries items. We use the z-scored transformation of the sum
of all items. Higher values indicate higher levels of worries.

C.2      Depression Index

To measure depression we employ the widely used personal health questionnaire (1). We con-

struct the PHQ-9 index based on the all items of the PHQ-9 except for the suicide question (for
details on the questions see Section B). We use the z-scored transformation of the sum of all
PHQ-9 items. Higher values indicate higher levels of depression.


                                                23
C.3    Misperception Index

We construct our misperception measures by taking the difference between people’s beliefs
about others’ views minus the actual views of others regarding (i) cancellation of social gather-

ings, (ii) appropriateness of hand-shakes, (iii) store closures, (iv) a general curfew. We use the
z-scored transformation of the sum of all misperception items to construct our misperception
index. Higher values indicate higher levels of misperceptions.

C.4    Country-level policy restriction index

We leverage the data from (2) that is up to date as of April 6th. The data is a country-by-daily

data set capturing the different measures countries adopt to constrain the spread of COVID-19.

   We focus on the main subcomponents S1-S6 capturing government actions grouped as S1 -

School closures, S2 Workplace closures, S3 Cancelation of public events, S4 Closure of public

transporation, S5 Public information, S6 Restrictions on internal movement, S7 Restrictions on

International travel.

   The data distinguishes general - country-wide - restrictions versus targeted ones. Further,

the data distinguishes recommendations versus requirements. We construct restrictions indices

that are specific to our sample-countries and time window and not use the Stringency index

that is provided by (2). This is because for the sample period under consideration, from March

20 to April 5, 2020, most countries had adopted already quite stringent measures with regard
to international travel and public information campaigns. As a result, these and a few other

subcomponents add little variation.

   We use the (2) data to create a set of indicator variables that capture whether a country
applied measures in a specific domain S1-S6 that are general – i.e. apply to the country as a

whole. Similarly, we also use a robustness measure that constructs an index based on trans-

formed indicator variables capturing whether restrictions in the domain S1-S6 are general and

                                               24
are mandatory. Using these sets of dummy variables, we then construct the first principal com-
ponent of the data for the set of countries in our estimations and for the time period under

considerations.
   Table 1 presents the factor loadings for the first three principal components for the measures
S1-S6 that are coded as applying countrywide (but are not necessarily mandatory). We observe

that the first principal component is positively loaded with little weight being placed, however,
on the Public Information component. This is not surprising as most countries by March 20,

2020 had ongoing public information efforts.
          Table 1: Principal components to construction COVID-19 country restriction index: general-country wide (but
          not necessarily mandatory) measures

                                                                              Comp1      Comp2      Comp3    Unexplained
           General recommended/mandated School closures                       0.407      -0.050     0.889        0.020
           General recommended/mandated Workplace closures                    0.451      -0.199     -0.388       0.329
           General recommended/mandated Public event cancelation              0.425      0.207      -0.126       0.479
           General recommended/mandated Public transport closure              0.400      -0.334     -0.159       0.458
           General recommended/mandated Public information                    0.222      0.892      -0.077       0.094
           General recommended/mandated Restrictions internal movement        0.491      -0.086     -0.107       0.357




   Table 2 presents the factor loadings for the first three principal components constructed on

the dummy variables capturing general and mandated policy changes. Naturally, informatin

campaigns do not have a “mandatory” dimension. As such, this feature, that already added little

to the variation is dropped. As before we observe positive loading on all subcomponents.
                  Table 2: Principal components to construction COVID-19 country restriction index: general and
                  mandatory restrictions

                                                                     Comp1     Comp2       Comp3      Unexplained
                   General mandated School closures                   0.400     0.613      0.681         0.000
                   General mandated Workplace closures                0.476     -0.010     -0.252        0.393
                   General mandated Public event cancelation          0.436     0.347      -0.565        0.220
                   General mandated Public transport closure          0.412     -0.672     0.373         0.130
                   General mandated Restrictions internal movement    0.503     -0.228     -0.118        0.319




   We use these two first principal components to study the impact of country-level policy

changes on perceptions at the individual level presented in Figure 2.



                                                              25
D     Online survey reach statistics

The link to the survey went live on March 20, 2020 with a call to participate being launched
via social media. That launch produced nearly 1.4 million impressions and was retweeted

4,892 times. The initial tweets account for 31,211 clicks on the landing page http://www.
covid19-survey.org. This is a minority of all clicks on the landing page, indicating that
there was a substantial multiplication due to the link to the survey being broadly shared on so-

cial media, via email and through other channels. Several media outlets featured links to the

landing page and the call to participate. The landing page was accessed by 391,476 different

users from March 20 - April 8, 2020. Out of those visitors, 157,264 started the survey, while

112,136 survey completes were registered.


E     Statistical methodology

This appendix describes the main empirical specifications for which we present regression co-

efficients in the main figures.

E.1    Figure 1

This figure shows descriptive statistics on reported engagement in protective behavior (panel

A), own and perceived attitudes about what should be done (panel B), as well as perceptions

of government response to the COVID-19 crisis (panels C and D). The sample includes re-
spondents from countries for which we had at least 200 responses (N = 107, 565). For all

four panels, we first collapsed the individual-level data to obtain country-level averages. In this

step, all individual responses were re-weighted to be representative of each respondent’s coun-
try’s demographic in terms of age bins, gender, income brackets, and education level using the

weights described in Appendix F. For panels A and B, we then further collapsed the data to



                                                26
generate global sample means. In this step, we weighted the averages by the country’s popula-
tion for panels A and B. In Panel C and D we present the distribution of the country-averages

to highlight the cross-country variation in the measures.

E.2    Figure 2

This figure shows bivariate and multivariate regressions of perceptions and mental health out-
comes on government responses to the Covid-19 crisis. For six panels, we obtained country-

level averages, weighting individual responses to be representative of each respondent’s country

in terms of age and income brackets, gender, and education level (using the weights described

in detail in Appendix F.

   Panel A shows an unweighted country-level scatterplot of the proportion of respondents

who think that government reaction has been insufficient and the worries index.

   In panel B, we estimate country-level regressions of two mental health indices and a public

attitude misperception index on four different indicators of perceptions of government response,

for a total of 12 separate regressions. Each regression has the following form:



                                Yc = α + β ∗ Pc + γ ∗ Xc + c                                 (1)

where Yc is the outcome of interest in country c – either the average worries index, the average
depression index, or the average misperception index. The coefficient of interest that is dis-
played in panel b) is β, which is estimated in a separate regression for each outcome variable: i)

the share of respondents who perceive government response as insufficient, ii) the share of re-
spondents who perceive public response as insufficient, iii) the share of respondents who think
the government has been truthful, and iv) the share of respondents who trust their country’s

government. Xc is a vector of control variables consisting of the country-level means of i) the
day-to-day change (∆) in Covid-19 cases per capita, ii) the day-to-day change (∆) in Covid-19

                                               27
deaths per capita, and iii) the number of Covid-19 deaths per capita. In each regression, stan-
dard errors are robust and the countries are weighted by their population. The tabular versions

of these results are presented in Table 3.
   In panel C, we run country-day-level regressions of seven different outcome variables on an
index of government restrictions, for a total of seven separate regressions. Each regression has

the following form:


                         Ycd = α + β ∗ Rcd + γ ∗ Xcd + νc + νd + cd                          (2)

   where Ycd is the outcome of interest in country c on day d – i) the share of respondents who

perceive government response as insufficient, ii) the share of respondents who think the govern-

ment has been truthful, iii) the share of respondents who trust their country’s government, iv)

the share of respondents who perceive public response as insufficient, v) the average mispercep-

tion index, vi) the average worries index, and vii) the average depression index. The coefficient

of interest that is displayed in panel c) is β, which is estimated for the country’s daily general

restriction index Rcd . Xcd is a vector of control variables consisting of the country-day means

of i) the day-to-day change (∆) in Covid-19 cases per capita, ii) the day-to-day change (∆) in

Covid-19 deaths per capita, and iii) the number of Covid-19 deaths per capita. νc and νd are
country and day fixed effects. In each regression, standard errors are robust and the countries

are weighted by their population. The tabular version of these results are presented in Panel A
of Table 4.
   In panel D, we run a similar analysis to panel c), however on individual-level data. In this

difference-in-difference analysis, we compare respondents in the UK to non-UK respondents,
pre- and post-UK-lockdown. We estimate the following regressions for all individuals from
countries with at least 5000 respondents who took the survey between the 20th and 30th March

2020:

                                               28
                              Yi = β ∗ Li + γ ∗ Xi + νe + νa + νd + i                                 (3)

       where Yi is the outcome of interest of individual i – i) whether the respondent perceives

government response as insufficient, ii) whether the respondent thinks the government has been
truthful, iii) whether the respondent trusts their country’s government, iv) whether the respon-
dent perceives public response as insufficient, v) the individual-level misperception index, vi)

the individual-level worries index, and vii) the individual-level depression index. The coeffi-

cient of interest that is displayed in panel d) is β, which is estimated for an indicator variable Li

taking the value of one if the respondent’s country is the UK and the response day is after the

announcement of UK’s lockdown on the evening of March 23rd, and zero otherwise.4 Xi is a

vector of individual-level control variables consisting of the respondent’s country’s daily means

of i) the day-to-day change (∆) in Covid-19 cases per capita, ii) the day-to-day change (∆) in

Covid-19 deaths per capita, iii) the number of Covid-19 cases per capita, and iv) the number of

Covid-19 deaths per capita. νe , νa and νd are country-education, country-age-gender and day

fixed effects. In each regression, standard errors are clustered by country-age and gender of the

respondents. The tabular version of these results are presented in Panel B of Table 4.

       Panels e) and f) display event studies for the UK lockdown, estimated on individual-level
data between March 20th and 30th.

                                                30
                                                X
                                         Yi =          td + νa + i                                    (4)
                                                d=20

       where Yi is the outcome of interest of individual i – i) whether the respondent perceives
government response as insufficient and ii) the individual-level worries index. td are the daily

coefficients. We plot these daily effects on the outcome of interest, centered around the 23rd
   4
    Please note that the remaining difference-in-difference indicators for the country UK and for the post-
lockdown days alone are absorbed by the fixed effects.


                                                       29
of March, once for the UK only and once for all other countries with at least 5000 responses
in total except the UK. We include country-age fixed effects νa . In each regression, standard

errors are clustered by country-age and gender of the respondents.
                                                              Table 3: Correlation between perceptions and mental health indices

                                                              Worries index                              Depression index                          Misperception index
                                               (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)       (10)        (11)       (12)

 Panel A: Fig 2b
 Public reaction insufficient              0.560***                                           0.329***                                  2.502***
                                            (0.202)                                            (0.050)                                   (0.103)
 Government reaction insufficient                         0.897***                                         0.272                                   2.461***
                                                           (0.205)                                        (0.164)                                   (0.590)
 Government untruthful                                                  1.047***                                     0.220                                    2.632***
                                                                         (0.271)                                    (0.236)                                    (0.867)
 Don’t trust government                                                            1.144***                                    0.318                                     2.616***
                                                                                    (0.193)                                   (0.200)                                     (0.736)

 ∆ Mean confirmed Covid19
                                               Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
      cases per capita
 ∆ Mean confirmed Covid19
                                               Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
     deaths per capita
 Mean confirmed Covid19
                                               Yes           Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
    deaths per capita

Notes: Observations at the country level. Standard errors are robust.




                                                                                              30
                 Table 4: Country-level and UK case study difference-in-difference studying impact of policy changes

                                    Government                                            Public
                                                       Government       Do not trust                  Misperception    Worries    Depression
                                      reaction                                           reaction
                                                       not truthful     government                       index          index       index
                                    insufficient                                       insufficient
                                         (1)                 (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)           (6)         (7)

Panel A: Fig 2c
General Restrictions Index            -0.028***           -0.008        -0.028***      -0.077***         -0.070        -0.024      -0.066**
                                        (0.009)           (0.008)         (0.008)        (0.018)         (0.059)       (0.059)      (0.029)

Mean confirmed Covid19
                                          Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
    cases per capita
Mean confirmed Covid19
                                          Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
   deaths per capita
Country FE                                Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
Day FE                                    Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes

Panel B: Fig 2d
After 23 March x UK                   -0.153***         -0.182***       -0.135***      -0.074***       -0.520***      -0.150***    -0.049*
                                        (0.024)           (0.020)         (0.019)        (0.019)         (0.044)        (0.035)    (0.029)

∆ Confirmed Covid19
                                          Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
   cases pc capita
∆ Confirmed Covid19
                                          Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
  deaths per capita
Confirmed Covid19
                                          Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
 cases per capita
Confirmed Covid19
                                          Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
 deaths per capita
Country-education FE                      Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
Country-age-gender FE                     Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
Day FE                                    Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
Notes: Observations at the country level. Standard errors are robust.




                                                                                  31
F         Weight Construction

This section describes the construction and use of weights included with the survey data. The
included weights correct for differences in income, education, and age and gender structure

between survey respondents and the general population in each country. For countries that lack
data on one of the dimensions, the weights correct for the available dimensions.
        We use data on the population structure from the United Nations statistical agency to con-

struct the weights.5 To weight by income we use data from the Gallup World Poll.6
        Table 5 displays the age-gender bins used for reweighting to account for the population

structure. This definition means that we cannot construct weights for respondents who indicate

‘other’ as gender. To construct income weights, we use country-level income quintiles. Finally,

we use three education categories to construct weights: less than 8 years of education, between

nine and 14 years of education, and 15 and more years of education.

        These age bins are then used to construct weights based on the frequency of observations in

the survey data according to the following formula:


                                                        weightjb · Nc
                                       j weightibc =                                              (5)
                                                            Njb
        where j weightibc is the weight for individual i in bin b, for category j (age-gender, income,

education), and country c. weightjb is the fraction of the population in bin b of category j. Njb is
the number of individuals in our survey in bin b and Nc is the number of observations in country

c. Intuitively, this formula put more weight on individuals in in bins with few observations and

individuals in larger bins.
        To construct aggregate individual-level weights we multiply the weights in different cate-
    5
        The data can be accessed here: http://data.un.org/Data.aspx?d=POP&f=tableCode%3A22 .
    6
        We use the latest available wave of data for each country.




                                                      32
gories.7



                                    weightijbc = Πj∈(educ,inc,ag) j weightibc               (6)

       We also construct weights that account for the differential sample size across countries
(weighting all countries equally) by dividing the weights by the number of observations in
our sample.



                                     weight sampleijbc = weightijbc /Nc                     (7)

                                    Table 5: Age bins used for reweighting

                                                       Age bin
                                                       18 - 19
                                                       20 - 24
                                                       25 - 29
                                                       30 - 34
                                                       35 - 39
                                                       40 - 44
                                                       45 - 49
                                                       50 - 54
                                                       55 - 59
                                                       60 - 64
                                                        65+




   7
       This implicitly assumes independence of distributions of the different categories.

                                                          33
G     Robustness of findings
G.1    Group-level analysis

In this Appendix, we report the results of an exercise that highlights the level of uniformity in

attitudes towards social distancing measures and towards the broader government responses to
the COVID-19 pandemic. We proceed in two steps. We first split our data by country, gender,
median income, and median age. This produces 464 distinct social groups (with group size

ranging from N=2636 to N=15). Second, for each question, we sort the groups by their average

response and then plot them in Figure 6. In Figure 7 we show the same graph, but with dot sizes

proportional to the number of observations per subgroup. Finally, we repeat the same exercise

exercise using the representative data for the UK and US (Figure 8).

    This exercise shows a remarkable level of uniformity in attitudes towards social distancing

and the broader government response to the pandemic. We are unable to find a single social

group where the majority of individuals think that the reaction of their government has been

excessive. Similarly, there is no social group where a majority of individuals believe that social

distancing measures are not effective.

G.2    Robustness of UK case study

In this Appendix we show that the UK case study results are robust to (i) using a different set of
counterfactual and to accounting for differential selection into the survey over time. The results
of both analysis support the conclusions of the analysis presented in the main paper.


Varying counterfactuals     For the main analysis we use a set of four countries (Germany, Swe-
den, the United States, and Brazil) as control group in the difference-in-differences estimation.

The results of this analysis are displayed in Table 6. The main results on “Government reaction

insufficient” are extremely robust to the choice of counterfactiual. Further results are qualita-

                                               34
tively similar for almost all specifications, though some estimates are more noisily estimated
and not always statistically significant.

             Table 6: Robustness of UK case study to using different counterfactuals


                                          UK vs Germany       UK vs US     UK vs Brazil     UK vs Sweden


    Public reaction insufficient               -0.020           -0.009          0.042          -0.141∗∗∗
                                              (0.044)          (0.034)         (0.047)          (0.022)

    Government reaction insufficient         -0.118∗∗∗        -0.142∗∗∗       -0.144∗∗∗        -0.215∗∗∗
                                              (0.040)          (0.029)         (0.039)          (0.026)

    Trust government                           0.053            0.053          0.077∗           0.146∗∗∗
                                              (0.055)          (0.035)         (0.039)          (0.024)

    Government truthful                        0.031            0.052           0.075           0.104∗∗∗
                                              (0.052)          (0.033)         (0.046)          (0.024)

    Misperception index                       -0.185∗∗         -0.100∗          -0.107         -0.565∗∗∗
                                               (0.075)         (0.057)         (0.090)          (0.049)

    Worries index                              -0.096           -0.048          -0.114          -0.145∗∗
                                              (0.111)          (0.074)         (0.102)           (0.056)

    Depression index                           -0.006           -0.127          -0.050          -0.080∗
                                              (0.083)          (0.095)         (0.093)          (0.045)

    Number of observations                     19424            22208          22378             16894

Notes: Notes: Coefficient estimates represent the estimated treatment effect of the announcement of a lockdown in
the UK as described in SI-E using different countries with more than 5000 responses as counterfactual. Columns
indicate the country of comparison. Rows indicate the dependent variable. Heteroskedasticity robust standard
errors are displayed in parenthesis. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.




Time varying selection into the survey Another potential concern is that the selection into

the survey changed over time. This change in the composition of respondents could lead to

differential answers to the survey that are not related to the announcement of the lockdown
in the UK. To alleviate this concern, we reconstruct all weights based on the samples before

                                                        35
and after the lockdown announcement. Figure 3 shows that the main effects on perceptions of
government and the public are robust to accounting for differential selection over time in this

way. The effect on the worries index becomes somewhat muted when including these weights.


H      Other Supplementary Figures and Tables

          Table 7: Relationship between own behavior and own and perceived attitudes


                                                              Self-reported behavior index
                                                         (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
            Own attitudes count                       0.461*** 0.292*** 0.294*** 0.296***
                                                       (0.061)     (0.028)    (0.028)     (0.027)
            Perceived attitudes index                 0.221*** 0.115*** 0.110*** 0.107***
                                                       (0.045)     (0.029)    (0.028)     (0.028)
            Age                                          No          No         Yes         Yes
            Female                                       No          No         Yes         Yes
            Income bracket                               No          No         Yes         Yes
            Education bracket                            No          No         Yes         Yes
            Own health                                   No          No         Yes         Yes
            COVID-19 cases per capita                    No          No         No          Yes
            Lagged COVID-19 cases per capita             No          No         No          Yes
            COVID-19 deaths per capita                   No          No         No          Yes
            COVID-19 deaths per capita                   No          No         No          Yes
            Country-age-gender FE                        No          Yes        Yes         Yes
            Observations                               107565      107354     101678      101313

Notes: This tables shows four different regressions of the outcome variable specified in the column header on
first-order and second-order attitudes towards protective behavior. Standard errors are clustered by country and are
shown in parenthesis. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01.
               Figure 3: Impact of lockdown announcement in the UK - reweighted

       Public reaction
          insufficient

          Government
              reaction
           insufficient

           Do not trust
           government

     Government not
            truthful

        Misperception
                index


        Worries index


           Depression
                index
                              -.8              -.6           -.4            -.2                       0
                                             Effect of lockdown: coefficient estimate


Notes: Notes: Coefficient estimates represent the estimated treatment effect of the announcement of a lockdown
in the UK as described in SI-E using countries with more than 5000 responses as counterfactual. Observations
are weighted to be representative of age, gender,education, and income. Weights are constructed as described in
SI-F for the pre and post announcement period to account for differential selection into the survey. Horizontal bars
indicate 90% confidence intervals. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity.




                                                        37
Figure 4: Cross-country variation in self-reported COVID-19 protective behaviors in the last 7
days
                       (a) Stay at home                                                                                                           (b) Keep at least 2m distance

                                                                                                                               Argentina                                                                                                                             Argentina
                                                                                                                               Ecuador                                                                                                                              Albania
                                                                                                                          Philippines                                                                                                                            Bulgaria
                                                                                                                            Albania                                                                                                                             Kenya
                                                                                                                          Kenya                                                                                                                             Ecuador
                                                                                                                          Spain                                                                                                                                 Italy
                                                                                                         Dominican Republic                                                                                                                             Portugal
                                                                                                                      Greece                                                                                                                             Poland
                                                                                                                   Malaysia                                                                                                                              Latvia
                                                                                                              South Africa                                                                                                                                Spain
                                                                                                                Colombia                                                                                                                          Switzerland
                                                                                                              Venezuela                                                                                                                                 Austria
                                                                                                                   Italy                                                                                                                           Philippines
                                                                                                             Morocco                                                                                                                                Denmark
                                                                                                              Portugal                                                                                                                             Germany
                                                                                                             Uruguay                                                                                                                           Canada
                                                                                                              Poland                                                                                                                           France
                                                                                                            Slovakia                                                                                                                     Netherlands
                                                                                                           Romania                                                                                                                            Ireland
                                                                                                           France                                                                                                                           Morocco
                                                                                                            Qatar                                                                                                                        Belgium
                                                                                                           Turkey                                                                                                                  United States
                                                                                                         Czechia                                                                                                                        Uruguay
                                                                                                        Vietnam                                                                                                                       Czechia
                                                                                                      Canada                                                                                                                         Hungary
                                                                                                       Austria                                                                                                               New Zealand
                                                                                                       Israel                                                                                                                        Turkey
                                                                                                   Denmark                                                                                                                            Qatar
                                                                                                       Peru                                                                                                               United Kingdom
                                                                                                    Nigeria                                                                                                                   Malaysia
                                                                                              United States                                                                                                                     Finland
                                                                                                   Belgium                                                                                                                Venezuela
                                                                                               Switzerland                                                                                                                     Israel
                                                                                                Germany                                                                                                                        China
                                                                                                 Thailand                                                                                                                   Norway
                                                                                                   China                                                                                                                   Romania
                                                                                                Norway                                                                                                                      Greece
                                                                                           Indonesia                                                                                                                       Nigeria
                                                                                        Netherlands                                                                                                                       Slovakia
                                                                                             Ireland                                                                                                                     Australia
                                                                                       Bulgaria                                                                                                                          Peru
                                                                               United Kingdom                                                                                                                  South Africa
                                                                                         Latvia                                                                                                                 Colombia
                                                                                        Brazil                                                                                                                  Thailand
                                                                                     Australia                                                                                                                Indonesia
                                                                                New Zealand                                                                                                               South Korea
                                                                                       Chile                                                                                                            Sweden
                                                                                   Mexico                                                                                                     Dominican Republic
                                                                                  Hungary                                                                                                             Ukraine
                                                                             Finland                                                                                                            India
                                                                  South Korea                                                                                                               Brazil
                                                                  Sweden                                                                                                                  Russia
                                                              Singapore                                                                                                               Singapore
                                                              Japan                                                                                                              Vietnam
                                                               India                                                                                                          Mexico
                                                             Ukraine                                                                                                         Belarus
                                                             Russia                                                                                                         Chile
                                        Belarus                                                                                                                     Japan




      0     10    20     30         40    50     60      70                                       80                 90                100   0   10   20    30      40     50     60     70                                                    80                  90                 100
                              I stayed home (percentage)                                                                                                    I kept 2m distance (percentage)




           (c) Tell others about symptoms                                                                                                        (d) Washing hands more regularly

                                                                                                                              Argentina                                                                                                                                        Argentina
                                                                                                                  Dominican Republic                                                                                                                                            Albania
                                                                                                                                   India                                                                                                                                         India
                                                                                                                               Albania                                                                                                                                      Uruguay
                                                                                                                             Uruguay                                                                                                                                       Thailand
                                                                                                                                Italy                                                                                                                                      Portugal
                                                                                                                             Spain                                                                                                                                           Kenya
                                                                                                                           Bulgaria                                                                                                                                     Philippines
                                                                                                                           Czechia                                                                                                                                        Turkey
                                                                                                                          Thailand                                                                                                                                     Vietnam
                                                                                                                          Portugal                                                                                                                                     Greece
                                                                                                                         Romania                                                                                                                               New Zealand
                                                                                                                           Austria                                                                                                                                 Ecuador
                                                                                                                      Philippines                                                                                                                              Switzerland
                                                                                                                          Mexico                                                                                                                                   Canada
                                                                                                                         Norway                                                                                                                                     Austria
                                                                                                                       Denmark                                                                                                                                 Venezuela
                                                                                                              United Kingdom                                                                                                                                      Ireland
                                                                                                                          Chile                                                                                                                            United States
                                                                                                                       Hungary                                                                                                                          United Kingdom
                                                                                                                  Switzerland                                                                                                                                    Mexico
                                                                                                                     Morocco                                                                                                                                   Australia
                                                                                                                    Germany                                                                                                                                Netherlands
                                                                                                                       France                                                                                                                                       Italy
                                                                                                                  Venezuela                                                                                                                                      Spain
                                                                                                                      Finland                                                                                                                                   Nigeria
                                                                                                                    Belgium                                                                                                                                   Morocco
                                                                                                                    Vietnam                                                                                                                                    Finland
                                                                                                                    Canada                                                                                                                                   Germany
                                                                                                                Netherlands                                                                                                                                    France
                                                                                                                     Poland                                                                                                                                    Poland
                                                                                                                      Latvia                                                                                                                                Denmark
                                                                                                                      Qatar                                                                                                                                     Qatar
                                                                                                                     Israel                                                                                                                                  Belgium
                                                                                                                     Brazil                                                                                                                     Dominican Republic
                                                                                                                  Greece                                                                                                                                 Colombia
                                                                                                                 Slovakia                                                                                                                             South Korea
                                                                                                            United States                                                                                                                                 Sweden
                                                                                                                  Ireland                                                                                                                                    Brazil
                                                                                                                Sweden                                                                                                                                   Malaysia
                                                                                                                 China                                                                                                                                      Peru
                                                                                                              Ecuador                                                                                                                                    Ukraine
                                                                                                                Kenya                                                                                                                                Bulgaria
                                                                                                          South Africa                                                                                                                             Romania
                                                                                                             Australia                                                                                                                              Hungary
                                                                                                            Colombia                                                                                                                                Norway
                                                                                                       New Zealand                                                                                                                                Czechia
                                                                                                           Malaysia                                                                                                                                 Japan
                                                                                                           Peru                                                                                                                                 Indonesia
                                                                                                      Turkey                                                                                                                                     Russia
                                                                                                   Nigeria                                                                                                                                        Israel
                                                                                                 Russia                                                                                                                                       Belarus
                                                                                              Ukraine                                                                                                                                     Singapore
                                                                                          Indonesia                                                                                                                                           Latvia
                                                                                            Belarus                                                                                                                                         China
                                                                                     Singapore                                                                                                                                         Slovakia
                                                                            South Korea                                                                                                                                        Chile
                                                                            Japan                                                                                                  South Africa




      0     10     20      30    40     50      60    70     80     90                                                                 100   0   10   20     30    40     50     60       70    80                                                                 90                 100
             I would have informed people about symptoms (percentage)                                                                                  I washed hands more frequently (percentage)

          (e) Not attending social gatherings

                                                                                                                               Philippines
                                                                                                                                Argentina
                                                                                                                                Ecuador
                                                                                                                                Czechia
                                                                                                                              Thailand
                                                                                                                               Greece
                                                                                                                               Latvia
                                                                                                                             Poland
                                                                                                                            France
                                                                                                                            Austria
                                                                                                                         Canada
                                                                                                                     Switzerland
                                                                                                                           Kenya
                                                                                                                        Malaysia
                                                                                                                         Norway
                                                                                                                           Israel
                                                                                                                        Portugal
                                                                                                                          Spain
                                                                                                                       Uruguay
                                                                                                                          India
                                                                                                                       Albania
                                                                                                                      Germany
                                                                                                                      Belgium
                                                                                                                      Bulgaria
                                                                                                                     Denmark
                                                                                                                United States
                                                                                                                Netherlands
                                                                                                                    Slovakia
                                                                                                                    Vietnam
                                                                                                               South Africa
                                                                                                                Venezuela
                                                                                                         United Kingdom
                                                                                                                    China
                                                                                                                   Qatar
                                                                                                                  Turkey
                                                                                                                 Finland
                                                                                                               Morocco
                                                                                                         New Zealand
                                                                                                                  Peru
                                                                                                            Romania
                                                                                                              Ireland
                                                                                                              Chile
                                                                                                     Indonesia
                                                                                                       Nigeria
                                                                                                    Colombia
                                                                                                     Australia
                                                                                                          Italy
                                                                                                   Russia
                                                                                                  Brazil
                                                                                       South Korea
                                                                                            Japan
                                                                                        Hungary
                                                                                        Ukraine
                                                                                     Mexico
                                                                                  Sweden
                                                                                Belarus
                                                                          Singapore
                                        Dominican Republic




      0     10    20     30      40      50      60      70                                       80                 90                100
                         I did not attend social gatherings

This figure presents the country averages for the five COVID-19 protective behaviors that were surveyed. Countries are included if they
                                                                     38 by education, gender, age and income to render them
contributed at least 200 respondents. Individual observations were reweighted
representative at the country-level.
         Figure 5: Cross-country variation in Perceptions of Public- and Government response
          (a) Government reaction insufficient                                                                                                                                                                           (b) Public reaction insufficient

                                                                                                                                                                          Turkey                                                                                                                                                                                                India
                                                                                                                                                                Belarus                                                                                                                                                                                            Dominican Republic
                                                                                                                                                        United States                                                                                                                                                                                                    Romania
                                                                                                                                                             Russia                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ecuador
                                                                                                                                                         Indonesia                                                                                                                                                                                                 Peru
                                                                                                                                                Brazil                                                                                                                                                                                            United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                    United Kingdom                                                                                                                                                                                                   Netherlands
                                                                                                                                           Mexico                                                                                                                                                                                                      Uruguay
                                                                                                                                    Japan                                                                                                                                                                                                              Albania
                                                                                                                               Australia                                                                                                                                                                                                 United States
                                                                                                                              Colombia                                                                                                                                                                                                     Hungary
                                                                                                      Dominican Republic                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Argentina
                                                                                                          Hungary                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Indonesia
                                                                                                    Thailand                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Australia
                                                                                                       Chile                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Colombia
                                                                                               Philippines                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Greece
                                                                                                  Spain                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Bulgaria
                                                                                                France                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mexico
                                                                                                 India                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Brazil
                                                                                             Poland                                                                                                                                                                                                                             France
                                                                                        Switzerland                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ireland
                                                                                           Greece                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Russia
                                                                                  Venezuela                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Morocco
                                                                                     Ireland                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Japan
                                                                             Bulgaria                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Canada
                                                                             Canada                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ukraine
                                                                       South Korea                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Switzerland
                                                                          Nigeria                                                                                                                                                                                                                          South Africa
                                                                     Malaysia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Belarus
                                                                 Netherlands                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Venezuela
                                                                Germany                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Malaysia
                                                              Sweden                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Finland
                                                          South Africa                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Italy
                                                            Portugal                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Vietnam
                                                           Ukraine                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Germany
                                                          Norway                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Denmark
                                                         Romania                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Poland
                                                       Belgium                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Belgium
                                                 Finland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                New Zealand
                                              Singapore                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Norway
                                                 Italy                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Thailand
                                           Uruguay                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Qatar
                                        Latvia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Israel
                                        Qatar                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Spain
                                New Zealand                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sweden
                                    Ecuador                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Turkey
                                 Israel                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Nigeria
                              Denmark                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Latvia
                        Morocco                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Portugal
                     Austria                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Austria
                 Slovakia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Chile
                   China                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Singapore
                Czechia                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Slovakia
             Argentina                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Kenya
               Albania                                                                                                                                                                                                             South Korea
        Vietnam                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Czechia
          Kenya                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Philippines
       Peru                                                                                                                                                                                                   China




        0               10                 20    30     40      50       60      70    80                                                                                  90      100                0                10                20           30      40      50       60     70     80                                                                           90            100
                                            Government reaction insufficient (percentage)                                                                                                                                                          Public reaction insufficient (percentage)



 (c) Do not trust government to keep me safe                                                                                                                                              (d) Government has not been truthful about COVID-
                                                                                                                                                                                          19
                                                                                                                                                                    Venezuela
                                                                                                                                                                   Thailand
                                                                                                                                                        Mexico
                                                                                                                                                        Brazil
                                                                                                                                                       Russia
                                                                                                                                            Bulgaria
                                                                                                                                          Colombia                                                                                                                                                                                                       Venezuela
                                                                                                                                  United States                                                                                                                                                                                                     Russia
                                                                                                                      Dominican Republic                                                                                                                                                                                         United States
                                                                                                                       Poland                                                                                                                                                                                             Dominican Republic
                                                                                                              Japan                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Chile
                                                                                                           Ukraine                                                                                                                                                                                                            Colombia
                                                                                                          Greece                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mexico
                                                                                                         Turkey                                                                                                                                                                                                        Brazil
                                                                                                       Czechia                                                                                                                                                                                                    Belarus
                                                                                                       Belarus                                                                                                                                                                                                  Poland
                                                                                                       Nigeria                                                                                                                                                                                                Nigeria
                                                                                             United Kingdom                                                                                                                                                                                                   Japan
                                                                                                     India                                                                                                                                                                                                Ukraine
                                                                                                   Chile                                                                                                                                                                                                 Turkey
                                                                                            Hungary                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bulgaria
                                                                                Australia                                                                                                                                                                                                    India
                                                                         Indonesia                                                                                                                                                                                                      Thailand
                                                                       France                                                                                                                                                                                                     Indonesia
                                                                Philippines                                                                                                                                                                                                        Greece
                                                                Morocco                                                                                                                                                                                                         Hungary
                                                            Spain                                                                                                                                                                                                   United Kingdom
                                                         Israel                                                                                                                                                                                                             France
                                                      Romania                                                                                                                                                                                                            Czechia
                                              Malaysia                                                                                                                                                                                                               Philippines
                                             Slovakia                                                                                                                                                                                                                Spain
                                     South Africa                                                                                                                                                                                                    Australia
                                   Germany                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ecuador
                                     Ireland                                                                                                                                                                                                   China
                                   Portugal                                                                                                                                                                                             Slovakia
                                       Italy                                                                                                                                                                                            Italy
                            Netherlands                                                                                                                                                                                              Israel
                                China                                                                                                                                                                                        Switzerland
                         Switzerland                                                                                                                                                                                           Romania
                         Sweden                                                                                                                                                                                             Malaysia
                            Peru                                                                                                                                                                                         Belgium
                          Latvia                                                                                                                                                                                        Germany
                       Ecuador                                                                                                                                                                                            Ireland
                    Singapore                                                                                                                                                                                           Portugal
                      Uruguay                                                                                                                                                                                               Peru
                      Belgium                                                                                                                                                                                          Morocco
                   Canada                                                                                                                                                                                           South Africa
                 Albania                                                                                                                                                                                                Albania
                 Austria                                                                                                                                                                                           Sweden
               Finland                                                                                                                                                                                           Uruguay
            Argentina                                                                                                                                                                                        South Korea
             Denmark                                                                                                                                                                                         Netherlands
             Norway                                                                                                                                                                                             Norway
        South Korea                                                                                                                                                                                        Singapore
    New Zealand                                                                                                                                                                                                Latvia
         Kenya                                                                                                                                                                                              Canada
     Vietnam                                                                                                                                                                                             Argentina
       Qatar                                                                                                                                                                                              Qatar
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Austria
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Denmark
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Kenya
        0               10                 20             30       40     50     60     70                                                                80               90      100             Vietnam
                                                                                                                                                                                              New Zealand

                                                         Don't trust government (percentage)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      0                10                20             30    40      50      60     70                                                             80                    90            100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Government untruthful (percentage)

This figure presents the country averages for the perceptions about the governemnts and the public’s reaction to COVID-19. Countries are
included if they contributed at least 200 respondents. Individual observations were reweighted by education, gender, age and income to render
them representative at the country-level.




                                                                                                                                                                                         39
                                      Figure 6: Average responses by subgroup
                                                  Snowball sample
(a) The reaction of the government has been extreme                         (b) Social distancing measures are effective




This figure shows subgroup averages of individual perceptions of (i) whether the government response to the COVID-19 pandemic has been
excessive and (ii) whether social distancing is effective. The sample includes respondents from countries for which we have at least 200
responses (N = 107, 565). To produce the figure, we first split the sample into 464 subgroups based on country, gender, median age and
median income. We then calculate average perceptions in each subgroup, order the subgroups by their average perception, and plot these
values in the figure.




                                                                   40
                                   Figure 7: Average responses by subgroup
                                Snowball sample, dots weighted by subgroup size
(a) The reaction of the government has been extreme                         (b) Social distancing measures are effective




This figure shows subgroup averages of individual perceptions of (i) whether the government response to the COVID-19 pandemic has been
excessive and (ii) whether social distancing is effective. The sample includes respondents from countries for which we have at least 200
responses (N = 107, 565). To produce the figure, we first split the sample into 464 subgroups based on country, gender, median age and
median income. We then calculate average perceptions in each subgroup, order the subgroups by their average perception, and plot these
values in the figure, weighting each subgroup by its sample size in our data.




                                                                   41
                                       Figure 8: Average responses by subgroup
                                                 Representative sample
(a) The reaction of the government has been extreme                          (b) Social distancing measures are effective




This figure shows subgroup averages of individual perceptions of (i) whether the government response to the COVID-19 pandemic has been
excessive and (ii) whether social distancing is effective. The sample includes respondents from the representative surveys in the US and UK
(N = 2, 000). To produce the figure, we first split the sample into subgroups based on country, gender, median age and median income. We
then calculate average perceptions in each subgroup, order the subgroups by their average perception, and plot these values in the figure.




                                                                    42
Figure 9: Results without applying weights - Global Reactions and Perceptions of Reactions to
COVID-19
A High global compliance with protective behaviors                                                                                        B Large under-estimation of others’ attitudes
                                                                                                                                                   97.45




                                                                                                                                      90 100
                             I did not attend                                                                                                                  91.71
                           social gatherings                                                                        92.01

                                                                                                                                                                          77.87    79.72
                                                                                                                                                                                                         76.57




                                                                                                                                      80
                              I washed hands                                                                                                                                                  71.39
                              more frequently                                                                      89.43




                                                                                                                                      70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     62.48
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              59.06




                                                                                                                                 40 50 60
                                                                                                                                  Percentage
          I would have informed
        people about symptoms                                                                                       92.23


                                               I kept 2m
                                                distance                                                 73.53

                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                      20
                                                   I stayed
                                                      home                                                    83.33
                                                                                                                                      10


                                                                                                                                                                   Own attitudes about
                                                                                                                                                                   what should be done                    Perceived attitudes
                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                              0   20   40        60      80        100                            Stop social   Stop      Close    Introduce Stop social   Stop      Close    Introduce
                                                                                            Percentage                                            gatherings handshakes   stores     curfew  gatherings handshakes   stores     curfew




C Broad cross-country agreement that government D Large cross-country variation in perception of suf-
response is not excessive                       ficiency of government and public response

                                                         Morocco
                                                                   Bulgaria                                                                          Public
                                                   Ukraine
                                               Qatar
                                         Czechia
                                                                                                                                                   reaction
                                           Israel
                                        Albania
                                                                                                                                                insufficient
                                      China
                               Venezuela
                                 Portugal
                             Poland
                               India
                          Denmark
                            Finland
                      Philippines
                         Norway
                       Greece
                       Austria
                      Belgium
                                                                                                                                               Government
                          Peru
                        Japan
                       Nigeria
                                                                                                                                                   reaction
                       Kenya
                  Singapore
                                                                                                                                                insufficient
                       Latvia
                   Germany
                  Argentina
                        Italy
                   Malaysia
                     France
                  Sweden
                  Hungary
                 Slovakia
                     Brazil
                  Russia
           South Korea
           South Africa                                                                                                                        Do not trust
                   Spain
              Colombia
        United States
                                                                                                                                               government
               Ecuador
              Romania
              Australia
             Thailand
              Vietnam
        Netherlands
             Canada
    United Kingdom
       New Zealand
        Switzerland
            Uruguay
          Indonesia
               Chile
Dominican Republic                                                                                                                             Government
            Mexico
            Ireland
           Belarus
                                                                                                                                                not truthful
           Turkey




                 0                10                 20    30     40      50     60     70     80             90     100                                       0            20            40         60                80           100
                                                     Government reaction too extreme (percentage)                                                                                          Percentage

Notes: This figure shows descriptive statistics of personal and perceptions of societal reactions to COVID-19. Panel A presents self-reported
engagement in protective behavior. Panel B contrasts respondents’ attitudes and perceived attitudes of compatriots about protective behaviors
and policies. Panel C shows the share of respondents who think that the government action has been excessive by country. Panel D displays
cross-country variation in perceptions of sufficiency of government and public reactions to COVID-19 and of trust in and perceived
truthfulness of governments. The sample was collected using snowball sampling from March 20th to April 6th 2020 (N = 107, 565).
Respondents from countries with at least 200 responses are included. Responses are weighted to be representative at the country level in terms
of age, gender, income, and education. Panel A and B are further weighted by country population to account for different country sizes. Panel
C and D display weighted country averages.




                                                                                                                            43
Figure 10: Results without applying weights - Perceptions of Government Policy, Public Reaction, Social Norms, and Mental
Health
A Positive association of perceived insuffi-B Associations of perceived govern- C Policy shifts to more restrictions reduce
cient government response and worries       ment/public reaction and mental health worries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Public reaction
            .5




                                                                                                                                                        Worries                Depression             Misperception               insufficient
                                                                                                                                                         index                   index                    index
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Government
                                                                                                                  Public                                                                                                                    reaction
                                                                                                 US             reaction                                                                                                                 insufficient
                                                                                                             insufficient
                                                                                          GB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Do not trust
  Worries index (SDs)
                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         government
                                                                                                          Government
                                                                                                              reaction
                                                                                                           insufficient                                                                                                    Government not
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  truthful
                                              DK           DE
                                                                                                          Government                                                                                                              Misperception
  -.5




                                                                                                           not truthful                                                                                                                   index


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Worries index
                                                                                                          Do not trust
                                                                                                          government
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Depression
            -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                index
                         0                .2            .4              .6              .8            1                                            0   .5    1    1.5      0                .5   0     1   2    3     4                                    -.2                   -.1                  0                   .1
                                               Government reaction insufficient (share)                                                                            Standard deviations                                                                           Effect of stricter policy measures: coefficient estimate


D UK lock down on March 23 reduced wor- E UK lock down immediately improved per-F UK lock down directly reduced worries
ries                                    ception of government response
              Public reaction




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                                                                 .1




                 insufficient

                        Government
                            reaction
                                                                                                           Government reaction insufficient




                         insufficient
                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                Coefficient estimate for




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Coefficient estimate for
                        Do not trust




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                        government




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Worries index
        Government not
                                                                                                                          -.1




               truthful

                 Misperception




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2
                         index
                                                                                                            -.2




                  Worries index


                         Depression
                                                                                                                                 -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.4
                              index
                                        -.6                   -.4                   -.2               0                                       20        21        22       23         24         25        26         27                              20   21         22        23         24        25         26        27
                                                      Effect of lockdown: coefficient estimate                                                                            Day in March                                                                                         Day in March

Notes: All indices are defined and described in SI-C regressions are further described in SI-E. Respondents from countries with at least 200 responses are included. Panel A shows the
cross-country relationship between the share of respondents perceiving their government’s response as insufficient and a worries index. Panel B captures pairwise relationship between the
variables indicated in the figure heading and row across countries. The regressions in Panel C are estimated using the country x date weighted average data, controlling for country and
day fixed effects; the independent variable is an index of strictness of government response in a country. The regressions in Panel D are estimated using the individual-level data from the
UK and a set of control group countries. The regressions control for country-by-education-by-gender fixed effects and date fixed effects. The independent variable is an indicator variable
taking the value 1 for respondents participating from the UK after the 23 March 2020. Panels E and F illustrate the impact of the UK lockdown announcement among respondents from
the UK compared to the average time trend among participants from control group countries on perceptions of sufficiency of the government response and the worries index. The
underlying data is the survey data that was collected using snowball sampling from March 20th to April 6th 2020 (N= 107,565).
References

1. K. Kroenke, R. L. Spitzer, J. B. Williams, Journal of General Internal Medicine 16, 606
   (2001).

2. T. Hale, A. Petherick, T. Phillips, S. Webster, Variation in government responses to COVID-

   19 (2020).




                                             45
