                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           DID THE PAYCHECK PROTECTION PROGRAM HIT THE TARGET?

                                          João Granja
                                       Christos Makridis
                                      Constantine Yannelis
                                          Eric Zwick

                                      Working Paper 27095
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27095


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020

We thank seminar participants at the Princeton-Stanford Conference on Corporate Finance and
Macro, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, the Stigler Center Economic Effects of
COVID-19 Workshop, the University at Texas Austin McCombs School of Business, the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the Congressional Budget
Office and the Bank of Portugal as well as Scott Baker, Jean-Noel Barrot (discussant), Sylvain
Catherine, Jediphi Cabal, Raj Chetty, Mike Faulkender, Sam Hanson, Steve Kaplan, Anil
Kashyap, Mike Minnis, Josh Rauh (discussant), Tiago Pinheiro, Larry Schmidt, Adi Sunderam,
and Luigi Zingales for comments. Laurence O’Brien and Igor Kuznetsov provided excellent
research assistance. João Granja gratefully acknowledges support from the Jane and Basil
Vasiliou Faculty Scholarship and from the Booth School of Business at the University of
Chicago. Yannelis and Zwick gratefully acknowledges financial support from the Booth School
of Business at the University of Chicago. We are grateful to the Small Business Administration,
Womply, and Homebase for providing data. This draft is preliminary and comments are
welcome. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27095.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by João Granja, Christos Makridis, Constantine Yannelis, and Eric Zwick. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Did the Paycheck Protection Program Hit the Target?
João Granja, Christos Makridis, Constantine Yannelis, and Eric Zwick
NBER Working Paper No. 27095
May 2020, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. E6,E62,G2,G21,G28,G38,H25,H32,H81,I38

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper provides a comprehensive assessment of financial intermediation and the economic
effects of the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), a large and novel small business support
program that was part of the initial policy response to the COVID-19 pandemic in the US. We
use loan-level microdata for all PPP loans and high-frequency administrative employment data to
present three main findings. First, banks played an important role in mediating program targeting,
which helps explain why some funds initially flowed to regions that were less adversely affected
by the pandemic. The top-4 banks alone account for 36% of total pre-policy small business loans,
but disbursed less than 3% of all PPP loans in the first round of funding. Second, we exploit
regional heterogeneity in lending relationships and individual firm-loan matched data to show
that the short- and medium-term employment effects of the program were small compared to the
program’s size. Third, many firms used the loans to make non-payroll fixed payments and build
up savings buffers, which can account for small employment effects and likely reflects
precautionary motives in the face of heightened uncertainty. Limited targeting in terms of who
was eligible likely also led to many inframarginal firms receiving funds and to a low correlation
between regional PPP funding and shock severity. Our findings illustrate how business liquidity
support programs affect firm behavior and local economic activity and how policy transmission
depends on the agents delegated to deploy it.

João Granja                                     Constantine Yannelis
Booth School of Business                        Booth School of Business
University of Chicago                           University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue                         5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637-1610                          Chicago, IL 60637
joaogranja@chicagobooth.edu                     and NBER
                                                constantine.yannelis@chicagobooth.edu
Christos Makridis
MIT Sloan School of Management                  Eric Zwick
christos.a.makridis@gmail.com                   Booth School of Business
                                                University of Chicago
                                                5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
                                                Chicago, IL 60637
                                                and NBER
                                                ezwick@chicagobooth.edu
1        Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic triggered an unprecedented economic freeze and a massive immedi-
ate policy response. Among the firms most affected by the freeze were millions of small busi-
nesses without access to public financial markets or other ways to manage short-term costs.
Without an existing system of social insurance to support these firms, policymakers around the
world rushed to develop new programs to contain the damage, including wage subsidies, small
business grants, and guaranteed business loan schemes.1
        This paper studies a large and novel business support program that was part of the crisis re-
sponse in the US, the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). Part of the CARES Act, the PPP offers
guaranteed, forgivable loans to provide liquidity to small and mid-sized businesses and pre-
vent job losses. The program is administered by the Small Business Administration (SBA) with
the loan application process operated by commercial banks. The loans are forgivable—that is,
they become grants—if firms do not permanently lay off workers or change their compensa-
tion, and if firms use the funds for eligible expenses. The PPP ultimately deployed more than
$500 billion within just four months of passage, making it one of the largest firm-based fiscal
policy programs in US history.
        We have three main findings. First, banks played an important role in mediating program
targeting, which helps explain why some funds initially flowed to regions that were less ad-
versely affected by the pandemic. Second, the short- and medium-term employment effects of
the program were small compared to the program’s size. Third, many firms used the loans to
make non-payroll fixed payments and build up savings buffers, which can account for small
employment effects and likely reflects precautionary motives in the face of heightened uncer-
tainty. Limited targeting in terms of who was eligible likely also led to many inframarginal firms
receiving funds and to a low correlation between regional PPP funding and shock severity.
        We bring data from two sources to study the PPP. First, we use loan-level microdata from
the SBA for all PPP loans, which includes lender, geography, and some borrower- and loan-
level information.2 The data offer a clear look at which lenders are most active in disbursing
    1
     For example, the UK, France, Germany, Spain, Italy, and Australia introduced or expanded loan guarantee
and small business grant schemes in response to the pandemic. Many of these countries also separately imple-
mented temporary wage subsidy programs to provide incomes to unemployed workers directly through firms.
While the program we study combines these features, the larger source of wage support in the US came via the
unemployment insurance system.
   2
     The data include identifying borrower information for larger loans only, which we use in a matched sample
analysis, and precise loan amounts for smaller loans only. An earlier version of this paper used data from a


                                                      2
loans, how program participation evolves over time, and at the geographic distribution of PPP
lending across the U.S. economy. Second, we obtained high-frequency employment data from
Homebase, a software company that provides free scheduling, payroll reporting and other
services to small businesses, primarily in the retail and hospitality sectors. The granularity of
the data, coupled with the focus on sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic, allows us
to trace out the response of employment, wages, hours worked, and business closures in almost
real-time and evaluate the effects of PPP support. We complement these primary data sources
with a number of other sources, including county unemployment insurance claims, the Census
Small Business Pulse survey, small business revenue data from Womply, and worker earnings
in small businesses from the COVID-19 economic tracker (Chetty, Friedman, Hendren and
Stepner, 2020).
   In the first part of the paper, we consider two dimensions of program targeting. First,
did the funds flow to where the economic shock was greatest? A central policy goal of the
program was to prevent unnecessary mass layoffs and firm bankruptcies by injecting liquidity
into firms. These potential benefits are likely greatest in areas with more pre-policy economic
dislocation and disease spread. We find no evidence that funds flowed to areas that were more
adversely affected by the economic effects of the pandemic, which we proxy using declines in
hours worked, business shutdowns, and coronavirus infections and deaths. If anything, we find
evidence that funds flowed to areas less hard hit. In the first round of funding, the fraction
of establishments receiving PPP loans is greater in areas with better employment outcomes,
fewer COVID-19 related infections and deaths, and less social distancing. After exhausted
funds were replenished in late April, funding differences between regions closed partly, but not
completely, and continued for at least two months. Over both rounds of funding, the correlation
between pre-policy economic dislocation and program participation was approximately zero,
which likely reflects the program’s broad definition of eligibility (Barrios, Minnis, Minnis and
Sijthoff, 2020).
   Second, given that the PPP used the banking system as a conduit to access firms, what role
did the banks play in mediating policy targeting? Anecdotal evidence suggests some banks
were eager to participate in the program, while others were unable or unwilling to process
large numbers of loans in the short program window before the first round of funds were
Freedom of Information Act request on the number of approved PPP loans and approved PPP amounts during the
first round of the program, which were aggregated separately by lender and by geography.



                                                    3
committed.3 We examine how banks of different sizes and lending strategies participated in the
program, and then use differences across banks to ask whether there are systematic differences
in program targeting at the regional level driven by bank behavior.
       We find significant heterogeneity across banks in terms of disbursing PPP funds, which
reflects more than mere differences in underlying loan demand and appears to contribute to
the weak correlation between economic declines and PPP lending. For example, because of an
asset cap restriction in place since 2018, Wells Fargo disbursed a significantly smaller portion
of PPP loans relative to their market share of small business loans during the first round of
the program. We construct a measure of geographic exposure to bank performance in the PPP
using the distribution of deposits across geographic regions. The measure exploits the fact that
most small business lending is local (Brevoort, Holmes and Wolken, 2010; Granja, Leuz and
Rajan, 2018), comparing lenders that did more PPP lending, relative to other small business
lending, versus their counterparts who did less. We find that areas that were significantly
more exposed to banks whose PPP lending shares exceeded their small business lending market
shares received disproportionately larger allocations of PPP loans.
       These findings shed light on the nature of and the mechanism underlying PPP loan disburse-
ment. In the initial wave of funding, PPP loans were disproportionately allocated to areas least
affected by the crisis: in the last week of March, twenty percent of businesses were shut down in
regions with the highest decile of PPP loan disbursement; in contrast, more than thirty percent
of businesses were shut down in regions in the lowest decile of PPP loan disbursement. A major
factor behind this pattern was the significant heterogeneity in the intensity of PPP participation
across lenders. Our findings indicate that underperforming banks—whose participation in the
PPP underperformed their share of the small business lending market—account for two-thirds
of the small business lending market, but only twenty percent of total PPP disbursements in the
first round. The top-4 banks in the U.S. economy (JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, Wells
Fargo, and Citibank) alone accounted for 36% of the total number of small business loans but
disbursed less than 3% of all PPP loans during this time. These banks were disproportionately
located in areas that received less PPP funding. The regional funding gap narrowed during
the second round, partly driven by substitution to non-local banks and also by the entry of
   3
    For example an article from Forbes notes that in the days preceding the launch of the program, Fifth-Third
Bank did not initially participate in the program, while Old National only processed loans for customers that
had an existing account. Bank of America was the first bank to process PPP loans, and they only took loans
from customers with “pre-existing business lending and business deposit relationship with Bank of America, as of
February 15, 2020.”


                                                       4
Fintech and other non-traditional lenders. Nevertheless, a large gap persisted across regions
for at least another month.
       In the second part of the paper, we study the effect of the PPP on economic outcomes. Our
results on bank participation motivate a research design to evaluate the PPP using bank-driven
differences in regional exposure to the program. This variation across regions allows us to iso-
late the effect of the PPP from differences in loan demand or confounding correlations between
PPP funding and local economic outcomes. Our research design relies on the assumption that
pre-policy bank deposit shares in particular regions are not correlated with the various out-
comes we study. This assumption holds once we condition on relevant observables, such as the
relationship between PPP funding and the initial severity of the crisis. We use this research de-
sign to study business shutdowns, reductions in hours worked, initial unemployment insurance
(UI) claims, and small business revenues at the county level.
       We do not find evidence that the PPP had a substantial effect on local economic outcomes
during the first round of the program, and find modest effects on hours worked in May and
June. We do not find an effect on business shutdowns. We establish this finding using weekly
firm-level employment and shutdown data from Homebase, which covers small retail estab-
lishments especially hard hit by the crisis. Consistent with modest employment effects, we also
find small effects of the program on small business revenues in May and June. We confirm the
firm-level evidence by documenting limited impacts on initial unemployment insurance claims
at the county level. Given that one motivation for the program was to provide an escape valve
for congested state UI systems, the absence of a significant effect on UI claims during the initial
weeks of the program is striking. Our confidence intervals on employment outcomes are wide
enough to permit modest effects of the program, but precise enough to reject large effects.
       We complement our aggregate regional design with a timing design using matched firm-
loan data. We are able to match 1,176 firms in Homebase to PPP loans and then compare
firms that received loans earlier versus later.4 We instrument for the date of PPP receipt using
regional exposure to lenders that disbursed different amounts of PPP funding. This variation
allows us to capture the effect of firms receiving loans during a crisis in earlier versus later
weeks. Results from this research design also show modest effects that fall within the confi-
dence interval of our bank exposure design.
   4
    We focus on this limited matched sample, as we are only able to identify firms for a subset of PPP loans. The
public Treasury PPP data includes firm identifiers only for loans above $150,000, or 13.5% of all loans disbursed.



                                                        5
   The fact that the program disbursed significant funds, yet had little effect on employment,
leads to the natural question of what firms did with the money. We draw on the Census Small
Business Pulse Survey to show that PPP funds allowed firms to build up liquidity and to meet
loan and other non-payroll spending commitments. For these firms, the PPP may have strength-
ened balance sheets at a time when shelter-in-place orders prevented workers from doing work
and when unemployment insurance was more generous than wages for a large share of work-
ers.
   This finding is important because it implies that, while employment effects are small in
the short run, they may well be positive in the longer run because firms are less likely to
close permanently. The program may also likely had important effects in terms of promoting
financial stability by avoiding corporate loan defaults and business evictions. At the same time,
because program eligibility was defined broadly, many less affected firms received PPP funding
and may have continued as they would have in the absence of the funds, either by spending
less out of retained earnings or by borrowing less from other sources. For these firms, while
the statutory incidence of funding falls on labor and creditors, the economic incidence falls
mainly on business owners.
   This paper joins a literature focusing on how government interventions following crises
impact recovery and the broader economy. Agarwal, Amromin, Ben-David, Chomsisengphet,
Piskorski and Seru (2017) and Ganong and Noel (2018) study the impact of mortgage mod-
ifications following the Great Recession. House and Shapiro (2008) and Zwick and Mahon
(2017) study the effect of fiscal stimulus in the form of temporary tax incentives for business
investment, and Zwick (Forthcoming) documents the role of delegated agents in mediating
take-up of tax-based liquidity support for small firms. Mian and Sufi (2012), Parker, Soule-
les, Johnson and McClelland (2013), Kaplan and Violante (2014), Biggs and Rauh (2020) and
Baker, Farrokhnia, Meyer, Pagel and Yannelis (2020) study how stimulus payments following
recessions affect household consumption. This paper evaluates a very large stimulus program
aimed at providing liquidity and payroll support to small firms.
   This paper also joins a rapidly growing literature studying the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on the economy. While we offer a comprehensive evaluation of the PPP, a growing
number of studies also explore various aspects of the PPP program. Barrios, Minnis, Min-
nis and Sijthoff (2020) study the relationship between payroll and allocation of funds. Elenev,
Landvoigt and Van Nieuwerburgh (2020) theoretically assess the optimal targeting of PPP loans


                                               6
during the pandemic, focusing on the idea of providing support to small versus larger firms that
differ in their liquidity constraints. Cororaton and Rosen (2020) examine the firm characteris-
tics of public firms that received PPP loans, underscoring the importance of targeting loans to
firms that need liquidity most. Consistent with our findings, Papanikolaou and Schmidt (2020)
use sectoral variation in the ability to work remotely and find that the PPP provided smaller
per-employee relief to the sectors most exposed to employment declines. Our targeting results
contrast with the rollout of a similar lending program in Italy where smaller firms and those in
more adversely affected areas were more likely to receive support (Core and De Marco, 2020).
      Two studies use the size threshold of 500 employees to study the employment effects of the
program. This research design estimates a different treatment effect, as it uses variation local
to larger firms, while most PPP loans were disbursed to much smaller firms.5 Consistent with
our findings, these papers find either modest or negligible effects. Chetty, Friedman, Hendren
and Stepner (2020) find no employment effects of the PPP and can rule out modest effects.
Autor, Cho, Crane, Goldar, Lutz, Montes, Peterman, Ratner, Villar and Yildirmaz (2020) find
that the PPP boosted employment at eligible firms by 2–4.5%. Because larger firms typically
face less severe liquidity constraints, they may have been more likely to respond to funds
by immediately recalling workers, rather than building up precautionary savings and making
other fixed payments.
      Motivated in part by our targeting results, Bartik, Cullen, Glaeser, Luca, Stanton and Sun-
deram (2020) adopt a cross-sectional variant of our research strategy, which leverages the fact
that larger banks provided relatively fewer PPP loans. They use variation in firms’ exposure
to larger banks to instrument for PPP receipt, under the assumption that firms banking with
larger institutions are similar other than their exposure to underperforming PPP lenders. They
find a 14-30 percentage point rise in firm survival probabilities and a positive, but statistically
insignificant, effect on employment. Morse and Bartlett (2020) use survey data and find that
PPP receipt increases survival probabilities for micro-businesses. Both findings are potentially
consistent with our results that firms treated the program more as liquidity support than as an
immediate incentive to recall unemployed workers.
      Our paper provides a comprehensive assessment of an important and large forgivable loan
guarantee program. We join work studying subsidized lending and loan guarantees, a widely-
  5
   Approximately 0.4% of PPP loans were disbursed to firms with more than 250 employees, which account for
13% of covered employment among all borrowers.



                                                    7
used form of government intervention in credit markets. Classic work such as Smith (1983),
Gale (1990), and Gale (1991) focuses on modeling government credit interventions such as
loan guarantees. Early empirical work focused on loan guarantee programs in France (Lelarge,
Sraer and Thesmar, 2010). Recent theoretical work has studied government guarantees to
banks (Atkeson, d’Avernas, Eisfeldt and Weill, 2018; Kelly, Lustig and Van Nieuwerburgh, 2016)
as economic stimulus (Lucas, 2016), and a burgeoning empirical literature examines the ef-
fects of loan guarantees on credit supply, employment, and small business outcomes (Bachas,
Kim and Yannelis, 2020; Barrot, Martin, Sauvagnat and Vallee, 2019; Mullins and Toro, 2017;
Gonzalez-Uribe and Wang, 2019). Our results also highlight how public policy interventions
can interact with other policies (e.g., unemployment insurance, state-level lockdowns) and
how fiscal policy transmission depends on the agents delegated to deploy it (e.g., banks).
        The remainder of this draft is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the PPP. Section 3
discusses the main data sources used. Section 4 describes how the distribution of relative per-
formance in the PPP is correlated with bank and other characteristics, documents how differ-
ences across banks in PPP activity imply geographic differences in PPP exposure, and explores
the implications for PPP targeting to different geographic areas. Section 5 analyzes the effects
of the PPP on labor market and local economic outcomes using our bank exposure and timing
research designs. Section 6 explores mechanisms behind these effects. Section 7 concludes.



2        The Paycheck Protection Program (PPP)
The Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) began on April 3rd, 2020 as part of the 2020 CARES
Act as a temporary source of liquidity for small businesses, authorizing $349 billion in forgiv-
able loans to help small businesses pay their employees and additional fixed expenses during
the COVID-19 pandemic. Firms apply for support through banks and the Small Business Ad-
ministration (SBA) is responsible for overseeing the program and processing loan guarantees
and forgiveness. An advantage of using the banking system (including FinTech) as a conduit
for providing liquidity to firms is that, because nearly all small businesses have pre-existing
relationships with banks, this connection could be used to ensure timely transmission of funds.
        The lending program was generally targeted toward small businesses of 500 or fewer em-
ployees.6 Although the initial round of funding was exhausted on April 16th, a second round
    6
        A notable exception was made for firms operating in NAICS Code 72 (accommodations and food services),


                                                       8
of $310 billion in PPP funding was passed by Congress as part of the fourth COVID-19 aid bill.7
Small businesses were eligible as of April 3rd and independent contractors and self-employed
workers were eligible as of April 10th. The initial deadline for firms to apply to the program
was June 30, but this was eventually extended to August 8.
    The terms of the loan were the same for all businesses. The maximum amount of a PPP loan
is the lesser of 2.5 times the average monthly payroll costs or $10 million. The average monthly
payroll is based on prior year’s payroll after subtracting the portion of compensation to individ-
ual employees that exceeds $100,000.8 The interest rate on all loans is 1% and their maturity
is two years. Under the initial bill, the PPP loans can be forgiven if two conditions are met.
First, proceeds must be used to cover payroll costs, mortgage interest, rent, and utility costs
over the eight-week period following the provision of the loan, but not more than 25 percent
of the loan forgiveness amount may be attributable to non-payroll costs. Second, employee
counts and compensation levels must be maintained. If companies cut pay or employment
levels, loans may not be forgiven.9 However, if companies lay off workers or cut compensation
between February 15th and April 26th, but subsequently restore their employment levels and
employee compensation, their standing can be restored.
    Congress expanded PPP on June 3rd, allowing more flexible terms for loan forgiveness.
The updates to the PPP expanded the duration from eight-weeks to twenty-four and extended
the deadline to rehire workers until the end of the year. This effectively gave small businesses
more time to use program funds and rehire workers. Additionally, the minimum amount of
funds used for payroll while still qualifying for forgiveness was lowered from 75 to 60 percent.
    An important feature of the program is that the SBA waived its standard “credit elsewhere”
test used to grant regular SBA 7(a) loans. This test determines whether the borrower has the
ability to obtain the requested loan funds from alternative sources and amounts to a significant
which are eligible to apply insofar as they employ under 500 employees per physical location. Firms whose
maximum tangible net worth is not more than $15 million and average net income after Federal income taxes
(excluding any carry-over losses) of the business for the two full fiscal years before the date of the application is
not more than $5 million can also apply. See the SBA for further information about the program.
   7
     The traditional SBA program responding to disasters is the Economic Injury Disaster Loan (EIDL) program.
EIDL amounts are deducted from PPP forgiveness. Recipients of an EIDL loan can receive a $10,000 loan advance
that does not need to be paid back. The EIDL loan itself is capped at a maximum of $2 million, is not forgivable,
and the funds can be used flexibly for operating expenses. The EIDL and PPP programs functioned in tandem,
and EIDL loans are further discussed in section 6 .
   8
     Payroll costs include wages and salaries but also payments for vacation, family and medical leave, healthcare
coverage, retirement benefits, and state and local taxes.
   9
     Loan payments on the remainder of the loan can be deferred for six months and interest accrues at 1%.



                                                         9
barrier in the access to regular SBA loans. Instead, under PPP rules, applicants were only
required to provide documentation of their payroll and other expenses, together with a simple
two-page application process where they certify that the documents are true and that current
economic uncertainty makes this loan request necessary to support ongoing operations. In
sum, the PPP program was designed to be a “first-come-first-served” program with eligibility
guidelines that allowed it to reach a broad spectrum of small businesses.
       During the first weeks of April, demand for PPP loans outstripped supply, which was lim-
ited by statute. Between April 3 and 16 all of the initial $349 billion was disbursed, and the
program stopped issuing loans for a period of time. The House and Senate passed a bill to add
an additional $320 billion in funding on April 21 and 23 respectively, which was signed into
law on the 24th. The PPP began accepting applications on April 27 for the second round of
funding. While 60% of the second round funds were allocated within two weeks of initial dis-
bursement, for the remainder of the second round funds were disbursed much less quickly, with
unallocated PPP funds being available in late June. By early July, more than $130 billion re-
mained available in PPP funds. Loan disbursement remained low throughout July and August,
suggesting that the second round had sufficient funds to meet demand. The program stopped
accepting applications on August 8, culminating in $525 billion in disbursement through the
PPP.



3       Data
We draw upon microdata made available through the Small Business Administration (SBA) and
the Department of Treasury containing all PPP loans, allowing us to observe all loans approved
under the program.10 For all loans, the data include lender name, the borrower’s self-reported
industry and corporate form, workers covered by the loan, and some demographic data on
firm owners. For loans below $150,000, the data include precise loan amounts but do not
report the name and address of the borrower. For loans above $150,000, the data include
only a range rather than a precise loan amount but include borrower name and address. Our
targeting analysis and bank exposure research design use data for all loans aggregated to either
the regional or local geography level. We use the additional borrower detail for larger loans in
  10
    An earlier version of this paper used data from a Freedom of Information Act request on the number of
approved PPP loans and approved PPP amounts during the first round of the program.



                                                   10
our matched sample research design.
       We merge this data set with the Reports of Condition and Income (Call Reports) filed by
all active commercial banks as of 2020:Q1. Specifically, we use a bigram string comparator
for the lender name to match the lender names in the PPP data set to commercial and savings
banks in the Call Reports data set. The main challenge in this process is that many lender
names are matched to multiple distinct banks with the same legal name. For instance, there
are fifteen distinct banks whose legal name is “Community State Bank” filing a call report in
the first quarter of 2020. We address this issue by assigning each loan made by these distinct
banks with similar legal names to the similarly-named bank with the branch that is closest to
the zip code where the loan was made.11 We are able to match 4,370 bank participants in
the PPP program to the Call Reports data set. We did not match 795 commercial and savings
banks that filed a Call Report in the first quarter of 2020. We assume that these banks did not
participate in the PPP program and made no PPP loans. Overall, lenders in the PPP sample
that we matched to the Call Report account for 90.5% of all loans disbursed under the PPP.
       We classified 926 PPP program participants as credit unions and 45 participants as agricul-
tural credit associations. We also classified the remaining 123 participants as non-bank PPP
lenders. This group is very heterogenous and comprises small community development funds
(e.g. Montana Community Development Corporation), as well as finance companies and Fin-
tech lenders. After careful investigation of companies websites, we classified thirteen non-bank
lenders as Fintech lenders. Interestingly, Fintech lenders account for 4.2% of the total number
of loans in the program and a single Fintech lender, Kabbage Inc., accounts for more than half
of the loans made by Fintech lenders.
       We obtain financial characteristics of all banks from the Call Reports, which provide detailed
data on the size, capital structure, and asset composition of each commercial and savings bank
operating in the United States. Importantly, we obtain information on the number and amount
of small business loans outstanding of each commercial and savings bank from the “Loans to
Small Business and Small Farms Schedule” of the Call Reports. Using this information, we
benchmark the participation of all commercial and savings banks in the PPP program relative
to their share of the small business lending market prior to the program.
       To compute measures of exposure of each state, county, and ZIP to PPP lenders, we combine
  11
    Most of these banks with similar legal are small and operate in different states. Given the proximity between
lenders and PPP borrowers across the entire sample, we are confident that our allocation process assigns most
loans to their correct lender.


                                                      11
the matched-PPP-Call-Reports data set with Summary of Deposits data containing the location
of all branches and respective deposit amounts for all depository institutions operating in the
United States as of June 30th, 2019.12 In our bank exposure research design, we take advantage
of the idea that small business lending is mostly local (e.g., Granja, Leuz and Rajan (2018)) and
use the distribution of deposits across geographic regions to create our Bartik-style measure of
exposure of these regions to lenders that over- or underperformed in terms of their national
share of PPP lending relative to their respective national share of the small business lending
market. We use data from the County Business Patterns dataset to approximate the amount
of PPP lending per establishment and the fraction of establishments receiving PPP loans in the
region and to investigate whether the fraction of establishments receiving PPP loans in a region
is affected by that region’s exposure to the performance of its local banks in the PPP.13
       To evaluate whether PPP amounts were allocated to areas that were hardest-hit by the
COVID-19 crisis and whether the program improved economic employment and other eco-
nomic outcomes following its passage, we use data from multiple available sources on the
employment, social distancing, and health impact of the crisis. We obtained detailed data on
hours worked among employees of firms that use Homebase to manage their scheduling and
time clock. Homebase processes exact hours worked by the employees of a large number of
businesses in the United States. We use information obtained from Homebase to track em-
ployment indicators at a weekly frequency at the establishment level. The Homebase data set
disproportionately covers small firms in food and beverage service and retail, therefore it is
not representative of aggregate employment. At the same time, the Homebase data are quite
useful for evaluating the employment impacts of the PPP specifically since many hard-hit firms
are in the industries Homebase covers and much of the early employment losses came from
these firms. To broaden our targeting analysis, we complement the Homebase data set with
official weekly state unemployment insurance filings from the Department of Labor.
       We use the Homebase data in our bank exposure and matched sample analysis to measure
  12
     A significant number of depository institutions merged in the second half of 2019, which means that some
branches are assigned to commercial and savings banks that no longer exist as stand-alone institutions. Notably,
SunTrust Banks, Inc. merged with Branch Banking and Trust Company (BB&T) to create the sixth largest financial
institutions in the United States. We use the bank mergers file from the National Information Center to adjust the
branch network of merged institutions and account for these mergers.
  13
     The County Business Patterns data include establishments for all firms, including those too large to qualify for
the PPP. We use these data to examine how the use of the banking system to deploy the PPP funds affected their
distribution. The maintained assumption is that the unobservable share of establishments that are not eligible to
receive PPP funds is not systematically associated with the exposure to the PPP performance of local banks in the
region.


                                                        12
the impact of PPP funding on employment and business shutdowns. To broaden this analy-
sis, we supplement the Homebase data with three additional data sources. First, we obtain
county-by-week initial unemployment insurance claims from state web sites or by contacting
state employment offices for data. We use initial unemployment insurance claims as a mea-
sure of flows into unemployment. Second, we supplement the Homebase data with data from
Womply, a company that aggregates data from credit card processors. The Womply data in-
cludes aggregate card spending at small businesses at the county-industry level, defined by the
location where a transaction occurred. Small businesses are defined as businesses with rev-
enues below SBA thresholds. We complement these data sources with additional county-level
employment data from Opportunity Insights, which are described in detail in Chetty, Friedman,
Hendren and Stepner (2020).14 . The employment rates are based on the data from Paychex,
Earnin, and Intuit. Like Homebase, the Earnin sample consists of predominantly lower income
workers who sign up using a cell phone app. The original data is on the county/day level and it
spans the period from Jan 14th 2020 to Jun 17th 2020. In order to match our research design
in other parts of the analysis, we aggregate the data on the county/week level and limit it to
the period from Mar 22nd 2020 (beginning of week 10) to Jun 23rd 2020 (end of week 23).
       We obtain counts of COVID-19 cases by county and state from the Center for Disease Con-
trol and use data on the effectiveness of social distancing from Unacast. Unacast provides a
social distancing scoreboard that describes daily changes in average physical mobility. Unacast
measures the change in average distance travelled using individuals’ GPS signals. The data is
available on a daily basis at the county level. We obtain information on the effective dates of
statewide shelter-in-place orders from the New York Times.15
       To understand the mechanisms underlying our results, we draw on data from the Census
Bureau’s Small Business Pulse Survey (SBPS), launched within seven weeks of the national
emergency declaration in March (Buffington, Dennis, Dinlersoz, Foster and Klimek, 2020). To
obtain real-time information tailored towards small businesses, the SBPS was run weekly from
April 26th to June 27th with businesses contacted via email based on the Census Bureau’s
Business Register, which is populated using responses to the Economic Census across the 50
states (and D.C. and Puerto Rico). Furthermore, the SBPS focuses on businesses with receipts
  14
     We also refer readers to Chetty, Friedman, Hendren and Stepner (2020) who provide comparisons between
HomeBase and aggregate employment, showing that it provides an overall good glimpse of employment dynamics.
  15
     See https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-stay-at-home-order.
html.


                                                    13
that are greater than or equal to $1,000 but retain 500 employees or fewer. This sampling frame
closely fits the target population for the PPP. Each week, the sample weights are adjusted to
maintain representativeness.
    Our goal in assembling these diverse data is to conduct a comprehensive assessment of
how business liquidity support affects firm behavior. We observe both intensive and extensive
margin employment and operating responses by targeted firms and in their local labor markets.
We link this behavior to data on the performance and geographic footprint of banks, the agents
used to transmit funds to eligible firms as quickly as possible. With the Census data, we draw
upon responses to questions about small business liquidity, loans, defaults, and applications for
various forms of private and public government assistance, including specific questions about
the PPP and EIDL programs.



4     Program Targeting and Bank Performance

4.1    Paycheck Protection Program Exposure

Table 1 shows summary statistics for the 20 largest financial institutions in the United States,
as measured by total assets. The second and third columns show the share of total PPP volume
and the share of the small business loan (SBL) market, respectively, for each institution as of
the fourth quarter of 2019. The fifth column presents relative bank performance in terms of
loan volume, which is measured as

                                        Share Vol. PPP − Share Vol. SBL
                      P P P E b,Vol =                                   × 0.5
                                        Share Vol. PPP + Share Vol. SBL

where Share Vol. PPP is the share of PPP volume for bank b, and Share Vol. SBL is the bank’s
small business loan volume share. The next three columns present similar information to
columns (2) through (4) using the share of the total number of PPP and SBL loans rather than
their dollar volume, where

                                        Share Nbr. PPP − Share Nbr. SBL
                     P P P E b,N br =                                   × 0.5.
                                        Share Nbr. PPP + Share Nbr. SBL

Share Nbr. PPP is the share of the number of PPP loans made by bank b, and Share Nbr. SBL is
the bank’s total small business loan market share, based on the number of loans outstanding


                                                   14
on each bank’s balance sheet as of the fourth quarter of 2019.
       Figure 1 shows the distribution of P P P E b,N br (henceforth, PPPE) as of the end of the first
round of the PPP (April 15th, 2020) and when the flow of second round funds approximately
ends (June 30th, 2020).16 These histograms provide a window into the evolution of bank per-
formance in deploying PPP loans. Recall that values close to -0.5 indicate little to no participa-
tion in the program relative to a bank’s initial small business lending share. Both histograms
show a wide dispersion of relative performance, with some banks overperforming their ex-
pected share of PPP loans given their share of small business loans, while many other banks
significantly underperform.
       The second round histogram shows a shift in PPPE, with some banks that barely participated
in the first round considerably improving their performance subsequently. This improvement
allowed these banks to attain a share of the PPP program more commensurate with their share
of the small business lending market. Yet, there remains a wide spread between banks. If most
eligible borrowers ultimately received funding, this pattern suggests considerable reallocation
of borrowers across lenders during the program.
       Figure 2 shows the cumulative share of PPP and SBL lending by all banks at the end of the
first (Panel A) and second funding rounds (Panel B). There are significant dislocations between
the share of PPP lending of underperforming banks and the share of PPP that we would expect
had these banks issued PPP loans in proportion to their share of the small business lending
market. The blue hollow triangles and red hollow circles represent, respectively, the cumulative
share of the PPP and small business lending of banks whose PPPE is below a certain threshold.
       The plot provides visual evidence that many lenders underperformed in terms of PPP dis-
bursement. The red hollow circles, representing all small business lending, generally follow
a straight line. If there were no heterogeneity in PPP performance, the blue hollow trian-
gles would follow a similar pattern. This is not the case, and the S-shaped pattern indicates
that many banks disbursed relatively few PPP loans, while roughly a third disbursed half the
PPP loans. Panel A shows that commercial and savings banks representing 20% of the small
business lending market simply did not participate at all in the first round of the program
(P P P E = −0.5). At the end of the first round, the group of banks whose share of the program
was below their share of the small business lending market (P P P E < 0) made less than 20%
  16
    Although the PPP application window continued into August, we refer to the end of June as the end of the
second round because nearly all funds were disbursed by then.



                                                    15
of the PPP loans, but account for approximately two-thirds of the entire small business lending
market. The top-4 banks are central to this fact, as Table 1 shows that these banks accounted
for 36% of total pre-policy small business loans, but disbursed less than 3% of all PPP loans
in the first round. Panel B shows that these dislocations became less pronounced during the
second round, which accounted for 30% of total PPP lending. In the second round, the banks
that underperformed in the first round were able to catch up and partly close the performance
gap. Overall, the evidence is consistent with substantial heterogeneity across lenders in their
responses to the program’s rollout.


4.2       Bank Performance Over Time

Figure 3 traces the evolution of PPP lending over time and by bank size using different metrics.
We plot cumulative average PPPE using a number-based approach (Panel A), average PPPE
using a volume-based approach (Panel B), average loan size (Panel C), and the fraction of loans
above $1 million (Panel D). Panels A and B show that banks with total assets below $50 billion
deployed a greater share of PPP loans relative to their respective share of small business loans.
Conversely, large banks underperformed relative to their share of small business lending. The
differences in bank PPPE across categories of bank size were very large throughout the first
round. These differences partly converged at the beginning of the second round.17 In spite
of this partial convergence, large banks still largely underperformed, which is consistent with
a few press accounts suggesting that clients of large banks were frustrated by their banks’
inability to process PPP in the first round and switched to smaller banks and non-banks that
were able to accelerate their loan applications. As demand for PPP funds waned during May,
the evolution of bank PPPE across size categories stabilized.
       Figure 3, Panels C and D suggest that all banks made larger loans in the earliest weeks
of the program. The average size of loans declines significantly over time and jumps down
at the beginning of the second round. Nearly 50% of the loans disbursed by banks whose
total assets ranged between $50 billion and $1 trillion were over $1 million as of April 3rd.
That figure falls to roughly 30% by April 8th and 20% by April 13th. By April 18th, loan sizes
across banks of different sizes begin to converge between $200,000 and $450,000. This fact
  17
    The differences were noted in the the popular press. For example a April 6 Wall Street Journal Article “Big
Banks Favor Certain Customers in $350 Billion Small-Business Loan Program" and a July 31 Wall Street Journal
Article “When Their PPP Loans Didn’t Come Through, These Businesses Broke Up With Their Banks".



                                                     16
may be consistent with higher awareness and sophistication by larger borrowers (Humphries,
Neilson and Ulyssea, 2020), or with banks prioritizing certain customers, such as existing loan
customers who tend to be larger.18 Interestingly, the top-4 banks disbursed a relatively smaller
fraction of large loans compared to other large banks, which likely reflects the large number of
microbusinesses and small businesses connected to these banks, especially in urban regions.
       Overall, these findings suggest that the banking system did not play a neutral role in me-
diating the allocation of PPP funds during the program. There were large differences in per-
formance across banks, which likely reflect differences in the ability and willingness of banks
to respond to the sudden influx of PPP applications.19 In the second round, most underper-
forming banks were able to improve their bank PPPE and ultimately process a number of PPP
applications more commensurate with their overall share of the small business lending mar-
ket. Despite this improvement, differences in first round performance resulted in substantial
differences in the timing of access to the program because of the first-come-first-served nature
of the program and limited first round PPP budget. Appendix Figure A.2 shows that exposure
to underperforming PPPE banks is associated with meaningful differences in when borrowers
could access funds. Only 25% of all PPP borrowers located in ZIP codes whose banks underper-
formed obtained PPP approval prior to the end of the first round. By contrast, approximately
42% of all PPP borrowers in ZIP codes whose banks overperformed had access to funds in the
first round.


4.3       Geographic Exposure to Bank PPP Performance

Significant heterogeneity across lenders in processing PPP loans would not necessarily result
in aggregate differences in PPP lending across regions if small businesses can easily substitute
  18
      See for example https://www.cbsnews.com/news/paycheck-protection-program-big-banks-loans-larger-
clients-over-smaller-businesses/. It is also the case that sole proprietors, who represent approximately 15% of
total PPP loans, were only allowed to apply with a delay that likely excluded many such firms from accessing
funds until the second round.
   19
      For example, Wells Fargo was severely constrained from expanding its balance sheet as a result of an asset
cap imposed by the Fed in the aftermath of the fake accounts scandal. This asset cap was only lifted on April 10,
when the Fed excluded PPP loans from the formula it uses to restrict Wells Fargo’s growth. The asset cap limited
Wells Fargo’s ability to lend under the PPP in the early days for the first phase of the program. Appendix Figure
A.1 shows that counties with greater presence of Wells Fargo branches received significantly less PPP during the
first round. Another piece of evidence suggesting that banks’ abilities to process loans differed substantially across
banks and that such differences are associated with the bank’s PPP performance is presented in Appendix Table
A.1. In that table, we show that the ability of banks to include information about the program in their websites
and to receive online applications is positively associated with bank performance.



                                                         17
to lenders that are willing to accept and expedite applications. If many lenders, however,
prioritize their existing business relationships in the processing of PPP applications, firms’ pre-
existing relationships might determine whether and when they are able to access PPP funds.
In this case, the exposure of geographic areas to banks that underperformed as PPP lenders
might significantly determine the aggregate PPP amounts received by small businesses located
in these areas.
   To examine if geographic areas that were exposed to underperforming banks received less
PPP lending overall, we construct regional measures of PPPE by distributing bank-level PPPE
based on the share of deposits of each bank in a region. We first consider the distribution
of PPPE during the first round of funding. Appendix Figure A.3 presents a national map of
county-level PPPE using the first round distribution of PPP funds and a map of ZIP-level PPPE
for the Chicago and New York metro areas. Exposure varies across the United States with some
western areas containing a large Wells Fargo presence exhibiting much lower levels of PPPE.
More rural areas in the Midwest and Northeast show higher PPPE. Within the NYC metro area,
the distribution of PPPE tends toward less affluent and less densely populated ZIP codes but
the same is not the case in the Chicago area, which probably reflects the heterogeneous role of
exposure to bank PPP performance.
   Table 2 reports the results of bivariate regressions of PPPE exposure on ZIP-level observ-
ables. The variables are normalized so that coefficients can be interpreted as the effect of a one-
standard-deviation change. The table confirms our earlier descriptive evidence–the top-4 banks
disbursed significantly fewer PPP loans relative to their overall market share, while institutions
with smaller deposits performed better relative to their small business market share. These pat-
terns manifest in terms of regional PPPE. Perhaps surprisingly, ZIP codes with a greater fraction
of SBA approved lenders that approved a regular SBA loan in the past three years and ZIP codes
with more branches per capita have slightly lower PPPE.
   The table suggests that early PPP disbursement may have been targeted towards areas less
affected by the economic effects of the pandemic. More populous areas, areas with higher
population density, as well as areas with higher COVID-19 cases and deaths also see lower
PPPE. Areas where greater social distancing took place, as measured by declines in movement,
see higher PPPE. While there is no statistically significant relationship between unemployment
and PPPE, areas that saw a greater revenue drop prior to the start of the program also see
higher PPPE.


                                                18
       Figure 4 explores the relationship between PPPE exposure and PPP lending at the state-
level.20 Figure 4, Panel A plots the fraction of all small businesses receiving PPP loans in each
state during the first round of lending. There is a strong positive relationship between PPP
lending and PPPE at the state level. States with the highest PPPE saw nearly 40% of small
businesses receiving PPP funding in round one; states with the lowest PPPE saw just 10% of
small businesses receiving funding.21
       A potential concern with these results is that the causality runs reverse. That is, banks
do relatively better where demand for PPP loans is abundant. To address this concern, we
compare survey measures on firm applications and PPP receipt. The Small Business Census
survey includes questions on both PPP application and receipt. Figure 4, Panel B compares
PPPE to the percentage of businesses in each state reporting having applied for but not yet
received PPP funds as of the end of round one in each state. The difference between PPP
application and receipt is much lower in states with higher exposure to banks that allocated
more PPP funds. In other words, even conditional on applying, businesses were more likely to
receive PPP funds in states where there were more banks allocating funds.
       Figure 5 explores the relation between exposure to bank PPP performance during the first
round and PPP lending at a finer geographic level. Specifically, we compute the PPPE of each
county during the first round and we partition counties in bins based on their PPPE after de-
meaning using the average PPPE of their respective state to ensure that the empirical relations
hold when we use only within-state variation. A strong positive relation between county PPPE
and the fraction of businesses receiving PPP at the end of the first round (week 13) further sup-
ports the idea that the allocation of funds following the first round was shaped by the exposure
to the performance of local banks.
       Figure 5 also shows that the strong positive relation between county PPPE and the fraction
of businesses receiving PPP persists over the following weeks but becomes gradually weaker
later in May and into June. We interpret this pattern as further suggesting that the relation be-
  20
      Figure 4 plots the relationship between the percent of firms receiving funds and numbers-based PPPE. Ap-
pendix Figure A.4 shows the same relationship holds for PPP amounts per firm in round one and volume-based
PPPE.
   21
      A potential concern is that the fraction of establishments receiving PPP at a regional-level includes the total
count of PPP loans in the area regardless of whether the PPP recipient is a self-employed individual or a sole
proprietorship but the total number of establishments from County Business Patterns does not include these
establishments if they do not have wage workers on their payroll. Figure A.24 shows that when we exclude
self-employed individuals and sole-proprietorships from the analysis we obtain PPPE measures that very highly
strongly correlated with the ones we use in the main analysis.



                                                        19
tween PPPE and the fraction of businesses receiving PPP is driven not by differences in demand
for PPP loans across regions but rather by their exposure to banks that underperformed. Other-
wise, this positive association would not necessarily disappear over time and areas with weak
PPPE would continue to show a lower fraction of businesses receiving PPP. Instead, the positive
relation between county PPPE in the first round and the fraction of businesses receiving PPP
over time slowly weakens, suggesting either that underperforming local banks improved their
performance in deploying PPP over time or that small businesses in areas where local banks
underperformed were able to obtain funds from other non-local lenders.
   We further probe the relation between local PPPE and the allocation of PPP funds in Table
3. We compute the local exposure to bank performance at the ZIP level by taking the weighted
average of bank PPPE for all branches within ten miles of the center of the respective ZIP code.
We then assess the association between ZIP PPPE and the fraction of businesses receiving PPP
in that ZIP-by-industry group after conditioning on county-by-industry fixed effects. Thus, we
evaluate whether businesses within the same county and industry had different fortunes in
obtaining PPP loans because they were located in ZIP codes whose nearest banks performed
relatively well in deploying PPP funds compared to businesses in the same county and industry
but in ZIP codes whose banks underperformed.
   Columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 further support the idea that local exposure to banks that
underperformed in the PPP had a negative impact on the ability of businesses to obtain PPP
funds during the first round. Even within a given county and industry, being within 10 miles of
banks that underperformed in the first round was associated with a significantly lower share
of businesses receiving PPP during the first round. In columns (3) and (4), we assess whether
this impact persisted through both rounds of the program. Consistent with the findings we
discussed above, local ZIP exposure to banks that over- or underperformed in the first round is
not significantly associated with the total fraction of businesses receiving PPP after both rounds
of the program.
   A potential explanation for these findings is that many banks that underperformed during
the first round improved their performance in subsequent weeks. To evaluate this conjecture,
we compute a PPPE measure based on the performance of each bank in both rounds. This
measure therefore captures whether borrowers in a ZIP code are exposed to local banks that
over- or underperformed during the entire program rather than only during the first round.
Columns (5) and (6) of Table 3 show that local exposure to banks that underperformed over


                                               20
the entire program is associated with a lower fraction of businesses receiving PPP. We interpret
the collection of findings in columns (3) through (6) as indicative that exposure to underper-
forming banks in the first round forced many borrowers to wait additional weeks to receive PPP
funds but did not necessarily affect whether they ultimately received PPP funds. When pro-
gram funds were replenished, many banks were able to process delayed applications. However,
areas served by banks that were permanently unable or unwilling to offer PPP loans received
a significantly lower fraction of loans per establishments.
   Another possible reason for the gradual weakening of the relation between local PPPE and
the fraction of businesses receiving PPP is that non-local banks and non-banks stepped in to
substitute for underperforming local banks. To investigate this possibility, we decompose the
total fraction of establishments receiving PPP in each ZIP and industry into the fraction of es-
tablishments receiving loans from local banks (defined as banks with a branch within 10 miles
of zip), non-local banks (defined as all banks with branches that are farther than 10 miles from
the zip), credit unions, Fintech companies, and all other non-banks participating in the PPP.
Figure 6 shows the average fraction of establishments receiving PPP during round one, round
two, and the entire program by source of PPP funding. The chart shows that only approxi-
mately 20% of all establishments were able to obtain funding during the first round, and local
banks accounted for most of these loans. Fintech lenders and non-banks participated very little
during the first round. During the second round, local banks still accounted for the majority
of disbursed loans, but both Fintech lenders and especially non-local banks participated to a
much larger extent, consistent with these non-bank institutions substituting for local banks in
the area. Over the entire program, local banks accounted for more than two-thirds of all loans,
while Fintechs and non-banks accounted for five percent of loans.
   Next, we evaluate whether the presence of non-local banks and Fintechs mattered most in
areas that were exposed to local banks that underperformed in the PPP. In Table 4, we repeat
the specifications of columns (2) and (4) of Table 3 after decomposing the total fraction of
establishments receiving PPP by funding source. Table 4, Panel A, column (2) shows that local
PPPE is associated with a greater fraction of establishments receiving loans from local banks
in the first round. Columns (3), (4), and (5) show that ZIP PPPE is negatively associated
with the fraction of establishments receiving loans from non-local banks, credit unions, and
Fintech lenders, suggesting that these financial institutions had a greater role in PPP lending
in areas with worse local bank performance. Despite the statistical significance of these effects,


                                               21
their economic magnitude is relatively small, indicating these substitute lenders were unable
to offset the dislocations from underperforming local banks during the first round.
   In Table 4, Panel B, we examine if these non-local sources of funding had an economically
larger role in substituting for local banks during the second round of the PPP program. In
column (2), we find that local PPPE remains an important determinant of the fraction of loans
from local banks, though the relationship is somewhat weaker. Consistent with the findings
in Erel and Liebersohn (2020), we find in columns (3), (4), (5), and (6) that other financial
institutions such as non-local banks and Fintechs substitute for local banks in areas where their
performance is weak. Non-local banks are the most important source of funds in areas where
local banks underperform. Fintechs are less important but still quite elastic to the effect of
weak local bank performance. Despite their relatively small share of loans, Fintech’s presence
in local areas almost doubles in response to a one-unit increase in local PPPE. By the end of
the program, the total effect of substitute lenders is large enough to fully offset the strong
performance of local banks in high PPPE areas.
   The collection of results in this section suggests that exposure to bank-specific heterogeneity
in their willingness and ability to extend PPP loans was a significant determinant of the allo-
cation of PPP loans in the economy. Next, we examine how the PPP allocation and exposure
to bank performance correlated with the local magnitude of the epidemic.


4.4   Are PPP Allocations Targeted to the Hardest Hit Regions?

Were PPP funds disbursed to geographic areas that were initially most affected by the pan-
demic? Given that one of the policy goals of the program was to inject liquidity into small
businesses and prevent unnecessary bankruptcies, we examine whether funds flowed to dis-
tressed areas with more pre-policy economic dislocation and disease spread. In addition, we
ask whether the significant heterogeneity in bank performance and exposure to bank perfor-
mance across regions played an important role in the targeting of the program.
   Figure 7 partitions the distribution of ZIP codes according to the ratio of PPP loans in the
first round to the number of establishments in the ZIP code (Panels A and C) and according
to first round ZIP-level PPPE (Panels B and D). We then compare areas with high and low PPP
allocations in terms of economic and health outcomes prior to any funds being distributed. In
Panel A, we observe a negative relationship between the share of business shutdowns in the



                                               22
week of March 22nd–March 28th and the share of businesses receiving PPP in round one.22
In Panel C, we repeat the analysis using the decline in hours worked between January and
the week of March 22nd–March 28th. An analogous relationship holds, with regions receiving
more PPP funding during the first round displaying smaller shocks in terms of the initial de-
cline in hours worked. Panels B and D display similar relationships using ZIP-level PPPE. The
strong correspondence between the patterns we observe between both the PPP fraction (Pan-
els A and C) and PPPE (Panels B and D) and the pre-PPP employment outcomes also gives us
confidence that our measure of PPPE is detecting meaningful variation in the banking structure
that mediated the disbursement of funds.23
       The results suggest that PPP funds were not initially targeted towards geographic areas
that were most affected by the economic shock, at least in terms of small business employ-
ment declines. If anything, PPP funds in the first round were disproportionately allocated to
geographic areas that were less hard hit by the first wave of the crisis. Appendix Figure A.9
confirms our findings using the Homebase data with another public data source—we find no
consistent relationship between PPP allocation and bank exposure with state UI claims.
       We also explore whether funds initially flowed to areas with early pandemic outbreaks.
Appendix Figures A.10 and A.11 show that there is a slight negative correlation between loans
and PPPE with COVID-19 confirmed cases and deaths at the state level. Appendix Figure A.12
shows similar results to Figure 7 using COVID-19 cases and deaths. Appendix Figure A.13
indicates that states with earlier shelter-in-place orders—which were presumably harder hit
by the pandemic—saw lower fund allocations during the first round. Appendix Figure A.14
shows that there is little correlation between the magnitude of social distancing at the state
level and PPP allocations. The totality of the evidence suggests that there was little targeting
of funds in the first round to geographic areas that were harder bit by the pandemic and, if
anything, areas hit harder by the virus and subsequent economic impacts initially received
smaller allocations.
  22
     Following Bartik, Betrand, Lin, Rothstein and Unrath (2020), we define a business shutdown as businesses
that report zero hours worked during a week using the data from HomeBase.
  23
     Appendix Figures A.6 and A.5 plot the relation between the share of business shutdowns and the decline in
the ratio of hours worked prior to any funds being distributed and the measures of PPP allocation at the state
level. Moreover, Appendix Figures A.7 and A.8 repeat this analysis at the county level. Across exhibits, the PPP
funds disbursed in the first round are not flowing to regions that are most hit by the economic dislocations of the
pandemic. In Tables A.2 and A.3, we employ cross-sectional regression specifications at the ZIP level to further
support the idea that the PPP funding did not flow to areas with largest pre-PPP declines in employment and
ratios of shutdown businesses.



                                                       23
   Next, we examine whether the relationship between the allocation of PPP funds and the
severity of the pre-PPP employment shock across regions changes when we consider the al-
location of PPP funds during the entire program. Figure 8 partitions the distribution of ZIP
codes according to the ratio of PPP loans disbursed during the entire program to the number
of establishments in the ZIP code (Panels A and C) and according to ZIP level PPPE (Panels
B and D), now using lending information for the entire program. Interestingly, in Panels A
and C, we find that the relationship between the pre-PPP employment outcomes and the share
of businesses receiving PPP during the entire program flattens. In contrast, Panels B and D
show that the relationship between PPPE in the entire program and the pre-PPP employment
outcomes did not change much relative to the analogous panels of Figure 7.
   Our interpretation of these results is that between the first and second round of the program,
non-local banks and non-banks stepped-in and partly responded to the residual demand of
businesses in areas that were both exposed to underperforming banks during the first round
and were more severely hit initially by the pandemic. Thus, the targeting of the program
improved during the second round despite the fact that areas with greater pre-PPP economic
dislocations remained exposed to banks that performed worse in deploying PPP. These plots
further support the conjecture that the use of the banking system to deploy PPP funds had a
strong non-neutral impact in their allocation over time.
   Our targeting results likely also reflect the pre-existing bank relationships across regions,
rather than a problem with implementation: perhaps banks were caught off guard by the
pandemic and the corresponding policies taken to social distance. A related factor that may
influence these geographic patterns is differential loan demand in harder hit areas. Because
PPP support is more generous for firms that maintain their payroll, the program likely appealed
more to firms with smaller reductions in their business. To the extent these geographic patterns
reflect such differences in loan demand for the first round, the evidence suggests the PPP
functioned less as social insurance to support the hardest hit areas and more as liquidity support
for less affected firms.
   This interpretation remains true when considering both rounds of funding, as the relation-
ship between shock severity and PPP funding turns less negative without turning positive. Our
findings are also consistent with the broad eligibility criteria for PPP loans—most firms be-
low the size threshold could apply for funding—and the absence of conditionality in program
generosity—loan forgiveness did not depend on shock severity. The argument in Barrios, Min-


                                               24
nis, Minnis and Sijthoff (2020) that firm payroll closely predicted PPP loan receipt accords
with this view. Nevertheless, our bank-level results also point to an important loan supply
factor distorting the distribution of PPP loans, especially during the program’s initial rollout.



5     Employment Impacts and Local Economic Activity

5.1    Research Design

Our results on PPP performance differences across banks motivate a research design for evalu-
ating the PPP. The basic idea is to use differences in local area PPP exposure (PPPE) to partition
geographies and compare the evolution of local outcomes for high versus low PPPE regions.
By exploiting differential exposure to banks that performed poorly in distributing PPP funding
during the first round of the program, we can isolate the effect of the PPP from other differ-
ences across regions that may drive differences in PPP loan demand. As described above, we
map bank level aggregates for PPP lending from the SBA data onto local geographies using
measures of local bank branch presence. The research design is akin to a Bartik instrument
and therefore relies on the assumption that pre-policy bank deposit shares in particular regions
are not correlated with the various outcomes we study, conditional on observables.
    We focus our analysis on the time period between the third week of January and the first
week of July to study the short- and medium-term effects of the PPP in the immediate aftermath
of the pandemic when the injection of liquidity was thought to matter the most for sustaining
employment. Starting the sample period in January allows us to establish a baseline period
prior to the pandemic, thereby controlling for time-invariant determinants of economic activity
within the same location. The PPP began accepting loans on April 3rd and all of the initial funds
were exhausted by April 16th. During this period, banks played a key role in allocating limited
funds, creating the variation we use to identify the effects of the program. We exploit the
fact that firms are located in regions that vary in their exposure to bank performance, which
mediates both the level of PPP loan disbursement and its timing. With the second round of
funds, which began on April 27th, PPP funding limits were no longer binding and the gap
between high and low PPPE exposure regions mostly closed. Thus, as we move to study the
program later in May and June, we will interpret the research design as assigning some firms
funding with a lag, instead of as assigning some firms no funding at all.


                                               25
       In our main analysis, we present reduced form regressions of employment and local eco-
nomic outcomes on PPPE while allowing for separate treatment effects by week or month.
Given the rapid nature and size of the economic shock, we highlight two important consid-
erations when analyzing data from this time period. First, our targeting analysis shows that
regions receiving more PPP funding were less hard hit by the initial shock, in part due to the
banking channel we emphasize. Thus, it is important to properly condition on this non-random
assignment of PPP funding. For example, if one does not break out the data finely enough or
condition properly for targeting differences—for example by treating all of March as a pre-
period benchmark—then one might detect a spurious effect of the program. We show this
issue is very clear in week-by-week outcomes around the policy window.24
       To account for these targeting differences, we estimate the effects of the program by com-
paring weeks in the post-PPP period to the two weeks in the post-lockdown, pre-PPP period.
The pre-lockdown period serves as a baseline for constructing establishment-level employment
shocks in our Homebase analysis. We also include time-varying controls and state-by-time-by-
industry fixed effects to estimate treatment effects under weaker versions of the Bartik as-
sumption. Once we adjust for targeting differences, including these more restrictive controls
has little effect on our estimates.
       A second consideration is that research designs that exploit differences in PPP receipt or
application without an instrument for loan supply or eligibility will likely overstate the impact
of the program. Demand for PPP loans is likely correlated with omitted firm-level factors, such
as whether the firm anticipates being able to use the funds during the forgiveness window.
Our PPPE instrument attempts to isolate loan supply drivers independent of loan demand. An
alternative strategy pursued by Chetty, Friedman, Hendren and Stepner (2020) and Autor, Cho,
Crane, Goldar, Lutz, Montes, Peterman, Ratner, Villar and Yildirmaz (2020) uses variation from
above and below the PPP eligibility cutoff, with the latter study also controlling for industry-by-
week and state-by-week effects. Relative to our approach, this strategy has the strength that
it focuses on a fixed program characteristic as an instrument. However, the estimates from
this approach are local to the eligibility cutoff, while nearly all loans and the majority of funds
were received by much smaller firms. In addition, this approach cannot be used to evaluate
the broader aggregate impact of the program on local labor markets.
  24
    There are a few other ongoing analyses of the PPP that also recognize the presence of targeting. For example,
motivated by an earlier version of our paper, Bartik, Cullen, Glaeser, Luca, Stanton and Sunderam (2020) exploit
the fact that firms connected to bigger banks (especially the top-4) were less likely to receive PPP loans.


                                                      26
5.2    Small Business Employment

A significant portion of the policy and media interest in the PPP concerned the program’s po-
tential employment effects. We examine business shutdowns (i.e., hours worked reduced to
zero during the entire week), declines in hours worked, and unemployment insurance claims
and find no evidence of substantial effects of the PPP on these outcomes, and at most modest
effects.
   Figure 9 presents simple difference-in-difference graphs for each of our employment and
local activity outcomes. We divide all firms in the sample based on whether they are located
in regions with above- or below-median PPPE. We use PPPE measured at the ZIP level for
Homebase analyses and at the county level for other less granular outcomes. We use vertical
markers to demarcate the post-lockdown, pre-PPP period; the post-PPP launch; when the first
round of PPP funds are exhausted; and when the second round of PPP funding begins. The top
left panel shows business shutdowns, the top right panel shows hours worked, the bottom left
panel shows initial UI claims and the bottom right panel shows small business revenue.
   For both measures of small business employment, we see a dramatic decline in employment
starting in the week prior to the lockdowns. Consistent with our targeting results, this decline
is modestly larger for regions with low PPPE. Importantly, during the first round of PPP, the gap
between high and low PPPE areas does not widen further, indicating little incremental impact
of PPP during this time. As time progresses, the gap for the ratio of hours worked widens
gradually during May, which suggests intensive-margin employment effects, while the gap for
shutdowns remains unchanged. Unemployment claims show a similar pattern, with an initial
gap opening up the week before PPP funds are disbursed and then remaining relatively stable
over time. Business revenue declines sharply in the week prior to the lockdowns, and levels are
quite similar for regions with low and high levels of PPE through April but opening modestly
in May.
   Figure 10 plots coefficients and standard errors for regressions of differences in employment
outcomes on exposure to PPPE. We estimate weekly regressions of the form:


                            ∆ yi jnt = αsn + β P P P E j + Γ X i jnt + εi jnt


where ∆ yis jn is the difference between the outcomes yis jn (shutdown, hours decline, UI claims,
revenue) of firm or region i in each week relative to the average value in the two weeks prior


                                                  27
to the PPP launch; P P P E j is the exposure of region j (county or ZIP) to bank PPPE; αsn are
state-by-industry fixed effects; and X i jnt are additional control variables.
   The top-left and top-right panels plot the estimates where the outcome variables are dif-
ferences in business shutdown and decline in hours worked relative to January, respectively,
both measured in Homebase at the establishment level. The bottom-left panel plots estimates
where the outcome variable is the difference in the ratio of initial unemployment filings to total
employment at the county level. In the bottom-right panel, the outcome is the difference in
average small business revenues for small businesses within 3-digit NAICS industry and county.
   The coefficients capture the effect of PPP exposure on the outcome of interest under the
identifying assumption that the firms and areas differentially exposed would have trended sim-
ilarly in the absence of the PPP. Given the fast-moving employment losses and differential state
policies, the choice of baseline and fixed effects are particularly important. We account for
differential targeting by using as a baseline the two weeks prior to PPP funds being disbursed,
which is consistent with the aggregate time series in Figure 9. The state-by-industry-by-week
fixed effects imply that we are comparing trajectories for firms within state-by-industry groups
and allowing general time trends within these groups. Focusing on within-state estimates is
particularly important because many lockdown and reopening policy decisions occur at the
state level. There is some evidence that state shutdown orders impacted the decline in eco-
nomic activity (Goolsbee and Syverson, 2020).
   The results align with the raw differences across high and low PPPE regions in Figure 9.
We see little effect on any outcome until the end of May, and on business shutdowns and UI
filings until the end of the sample period. Beginning in May there are statistically significant
positive effects on hours worked and local area small business revenues.
   Table 5 presents our difference-in-difference estimates, in which we pool the weekly effects
into months. We estimate the following specification:

                      Eis jnt = αi + δ jnt + β1 1[April] × P P P E j
                                          + β2 1[May] × P P P E j
                                          + β3 1[June] × P P P E j + γX j + "is jnt ,

where Eis jnt is an outcome (business shutdowns or the decline in hours worked) for firm i in
state s, region j (county or zip), and industry n in week t. The term αi captures firm fixed
effects, δsnt are state-by-industry-by-week fixed effects, P P P E j is regional PPP exposure based



                                                   28
on round one fund disbursements, and "is jnt is an error term.
       The coefficients β1 , β2 , and β3 capture the differential effect of PPP exposure on the out-
come of interest during each time period relative to the two weeks prior to the launch of PPP.
The identifying assumption is that the firms differentially exposed would have trended simi-
larly in the absence of the PPP, conditional on fixed effects and controls. Due to the inclusion
of state-by-industry-by-week fixed effects, we are comparing trajectories for firms within state-
by-industry groups and allowing general time trends within these groups. The coefficient β1
captures differences between firms after the initial rollout of the PPP, when most regions re-
mained under some form of shelter-in-place order. The coefficient β2 captures effects in May,
as many regions began to lift restrictions. The coefficient β3 captures effects as PPP funding
ended in June and state reopenings continued.
       In the top panel, the outcome of interest is business shutdowns, while in the bottom panel
it is the decline in hours worked. All columns include state-by-industry-by-week fixed effects.
The first two columns and second two columns exclude and include firm fixed effects, respec-
tively. The second and fourth columns add pandemic controls, which include social distancing
and COVID-19 cases and deaths per capita measured prior to PPP interacted with month fixed
effects.
       The table confirms the finding of no statistically or economically significant relationship
between PPP bank exposure and these employment outcomes in April, during the initial month
that PPP loans were offered. Moreover, our least squares estimates are not simply statistically
insignificant with large confidence intervals; rather, they are precise zeros. In May and June,
we continue to find precise zero effects for business shutdowns. In contrast, the decline in
hours worked measure increases for firms with higher PPP exposure in May and June. The
effect sizes are small—approximately 2 percentage points in May and 3 percentage points in
June for a unit increase in PPPE—but highly statistically significant.
       As another way of interpreting our magnitudes, consider the following comparison. The
difference between PPPE for top versus bottom quartile ZIP codes is 0.44. This difference
implies an increase in the share of establishments receiving PPP funding of 8.4 percentage
points, which is large relative to the mean level of 22%.25 Using the reduced form estimates
for April in Table 5, column (4), this change in funding implies a increase in the probability
  25
    This calculation comes from 0.44 × 0.19, which is the coefficient of PPP per establishment as of the end of
round one on PPPE in a ZIP-level regression with state fixed effects.



                                                     29
of firm shutdown of 0.1 percentage points (= 0.44 × 0.002). The lower bound of the 95%
confidence interval is well below a one percentage point effect. An analogous calculation for
the decline in hours worked gives similarly small effect sizes. Thus, relative to the aggregate
patterns in Figure 9—a 40 percentage point increase in the probability of firm shutdown and
60 percentage point reduction in the ratio of hours worked relative to January—we can reject
modest effect sizes during this period.
   As we move into May and June, the results for business shutdowns do not change. How-
ever, the effect sizes for the decline in hours worked increase. In May, the point estimate of
0.019 implies an increase in hours worked of 0.8 percentage points (= 0.44 × 0.019) with a
95% confidence upper bound of 1.3 percentage points (= 0.44 × (0.019 + 1.96 × 0.005)). The
analogous estimates for June are 1.3 and 1.8 percentage points, respectively. Because the sec-
ond round of funds did not reach firms until late in May, our research design can be interpreted
as comparing firms that did receive funds to those that did not for April and May. In June, the
research design is better interpreted as reflecting differences between early and late recipients.
Thus, our estimates may be conservative regarding the overall employment effects of the pro-
gram by this point in time. On the other hand, if many firms that did not receive funds early
decided to close permanently, then our estimates for June can be more easily compared to
those in April and May.
   Our results are consistent with contemporaneous evidence from other researchers using
different data sets and research designs. Most prominently, Chetty, Friedman, Hendren and
Stepner (2020) use high frequency employment data from Homebase and Earnin and study the
evolution of employment outcomes for firms above and below the 500 employee PPP eligibility
threshold. They also find insignificant effects of the PPP on employment. Autor, Cho, Crane,
Goldar, Lutz, Montes, Peterman, Ratner, Villar and Yildirmaz (2020) use payroll data from
ADP, a large payroll processor, and also use the 500 employee threshold design to estimate
employment effects. They find that the PPP boosted employment at eligible firms by 2–4.5%.
   Relative to this approach, our research design has a few benefits. First, it is not local to firms
around the 500 employee threshold; most PPP borrowers are considerably smaller. Second,
that design requires smaller firms and larger firms to trend similarly around the reform, which
is a strong assumption if smaller firms are more vulnerable to shocks and because the PPP coin-
cided with other programs operated by the Federal Reserve to help larger firms. Third, we use
our design in the next section to study impacts on aggregate local labor market and economic


                                                30
outcomes, which is not feasible with the threshold design. Nevertheless, it is informative that
similar results emerge from different data sets and research designs.26


5.3      Local Labor Market and Economic Activity

The top panel of Table 6 presents results using a broader measure of employment outcomes:
initial UI claims. The outcome variable is the difference between initial UI filings in a week
and average initial UI filings two weeks prior to the launch of the PPP, measured at the county
level and scaled by county-level employment. The results paint a similar picture to those in
Table 5. Again, there is no statistically or economically significant relationship between PPP
loans or PPP bank exposure and UI claims. While the results are slightly less precise than those
using outcomes from the Homebase data, the coefficients imply very modest effects at best.
Following the calculations above, the 95% lower bound estimated effect for the month of June
is -3.1 basis points (= 0.44 × (0.071 − 1.96 × 0.052)), which is negligible relative to a mean in
the weeks prior to PPP of 3.0 percentage points.
       We complement our Homebase analysis with results using employment data from Earnin,
an app targeting lower income workers but with broader employer coverage than Homebase.
Appendix Figure A.15 repeats the earlier analysis, replacing the main outcomes with the dif-
ference in county level employment in a week and its average shutdown status in weeks 10
and 11. The Earnin data suggests a pattern similar to the hours worked estimates, albeit with
significant effects appearing earlier in April and slightly smaller magnitudes. We also divide
the sample by quartiles of earnings.
       The middle panel of Table 6 presents regressions of employment growth in Earnin on
county-level PPPE. The estimates suggest very small effects in April that increase modestly
in May and June. The 95% upper bound estimate for June is 0.7 percentage points (= 0.44 ×
(0.007 + 1.96 × 0.004)). Appendix Table A.4 presents the results from the split-sample anal-
ysis, which reveals that the employment effect is insignificant for the lowest earning quartile
of workers and larger in magnitude and significant for the top earnings quartile.27 One rea-
  26
     Another reason we may find smaller effects than Autor, Cho, Crane, Goldar, Lutz, Montes, Peterman, Ratner,
Villar and Yildirmaz (2020) is that our data measure hours worked while their data measure payroll. If firms
partly deploy PPP to compensate furloughed workers who remain functionally unemployed, then this difference
in measurement could account for some of the gap between our estimates. Our results on UI claims lean against
this interpretation, which would imply a reduction in claims that we do not observe.
  27
     Following the calculation above, for the highest earnings quartile, the 95% upper bound effect size for the
month of June is 1.0 percentage points (= 0.44 × (0.013 + 1.96 × 0.005)).


                                                      31
son firms may have selectively deployed PPP funds to higher earning workers is because these
workers face lower replacement rates from expanded UI. Another reason is that these work-
ers may be less likely to work in customer-facing roles that were restricted by public health
measures, for example, they are less likely to be waiters and bartenders.
   While much of the focus of the PPP was in countering a surge in unemployment and busi-
ness closures, we now explore the potential effects of PPP on the evolution of small business
revenues as a proxy for local consumption activity. The bottom right panel of Figure 10 shows
a significant relationship arising between small business revenue and PPPE, beginning in April.
   We find a slight positive correlation between county PPPE and consumer spending. We find
a positive relationship between PPP exposure and small business revenue, which is statistically
significant at the 10% level in April and at the 1% level in subsequent months. The relationship
is only significant at the 10% level for June once we introduce additional control variables,
such as the social distancing index and coronavirus cases and deaths per capita. Although
our fixed effects already purge potentially endogenous time-varying shocks arising from state
policymaking (e.g., stay-at-home orders and nonessential business closures), local enforcement
of these rules, as well as time-invariant heterogeneity across locations, could be correlated
with the change in consumer spending. For example, since areas that were more adversely
affected by the pandemic have higher concentrations of retail employment, and these areas
have lower quality banking relationships, then we are likely to overestimate the effects of
consumer spending.
   To disentangle these factors, column (3) omits the time-varying county controls and adds
county-by-industry fixed effects, which again produces a positive correlation between PPPE in
June. The results in column (3) are quite similar to those in column (1), suggesting a positive
relationship between PPP exposure and small business revenue. Although the time-invariant
heterogeneity is removed, differences in social distancing and coronavirus cases and deaths
are likely still correlated with consumer spending. Column (4) validates this hypothesis by
introducing the controls and fixed effects, producing a relationship between PPPE and the
change in consumer spending, which is only significant at the 10% level.




                                              32
5.4    Matched Sample Analysis

We complement our regional estimates with a sample of 1,176 firms, for which we are able to
match PPP loan information to payroll information from Homebase. In this analysis, we focus
on the timing of the receipt of PPP loans and whether differences in timing materially affected
short-term employment outcomes. The public PPP data only include firm identifiers for loans
above $150,000, which account for 13.5% of all PPP loans. Thus, for the vast majority of firms
we cannot determine whether or when they obtained a PPP loan. We focus on firms that we
identify as obtaining a PPP loan, and compare outcomes for firms that received loans earlier
versus later. Because this approach is subject to the critique that the timing of loan receipt may
reflect differences in loan demand across firms, we also instrument for the timing of receipt
using PPPE exposure.
   Figure 11 shows the percent of businesses shut down and the ratio of hours worked over
time split based on whether they received a loan in week 12 or earlier versus those that received
a loan in week 16 or later. Vertical lines indicate these two breakpoints, which effectively par-
tition firms in the sample into top, middle, and bottom terciles in terms of when they received
loans. In terms of business shutdowns, trends are parallel prior to the disbursement of PPP
loans, and then diverge following loan disbursement. In terms of hours worked, we see a gap
open up prior to PPP loan disbursement, which may reflect a combination of our targeting re-
sults and differences in loan demand. Following PPP disbursement, the gap grows over time.
The raw data is suggestive of earlier PPP receipt leading to higher employment and business
survival rates.
   Table 7 presents results from the individual matched sample exploring the timing of PPP
receipt, regressing outcomes on the week in which a firm received PPP. We focus on outcomes in
the week of May 2 to May 9, the final week before the second round of PPP loans was disbursed.
Therefore, the regression is measuring employment effects using first round recipients as a
“treatment” group and second round recipients—who have not yet received their loans—as a
“control” group. We estimate the following specification:


                            ∆ yisn = αsn + ζWeekP P Pi + ΦX ist + "is


where ∆ yis j is the difference between the outcomes yis j (shutdown, hours) of firm i in week
16 and the average outcome for the same firm during the two weeks prior to the launch of


                                               33
PPP. WeekP P Pi is the week in which a firm received a PPP loan, and thus ζ captures the effect
of receiving a PPP loan one week later. The first two columns show OLS estimates, varying
industry or state-by-industry fixed effects, while the second two columns show IV estimates,
instrumenting the week in which a firm received PPP with PPPE measured at the ZIP level. The
terms αsn represent state-by-industry fixed effects and X ist are additional control variables.
    The results in Table 7 are largely consistent with our bank exposure results, suggesting
modest short-term effects of the PPP. In Panel B, column (3), we find that obtaining a PPP
loan one week earlier leads to an increase in hours worked of 4.3% (s.e.=1.5%) for a firm
receiving a PPP loan a week earlier. We find no significant effects on business shutdowns in
the IV specification. In both cases, when we include state-by-industry effects, the IV estimates
become imprecise, which prevents us from drawing strong conclusions for this sample.
    A potential concern is that firms that obtained PPP earlier or later may be on different
trends. To address this, Figure 12 shows weekly coefficients of regressions corresponding to
Table 7. The top panels show OLS estimates corresponding to column (1) of Table 7, while the
bottom panel presents IV estimates corresponding to column (3) of Table 7. The coefficients
of both the OLS and IV closely align with the timing of PPP receipt. We see parallel trends
initially, with early and late receipt firms diverging in mid-April after PPP loans were received.
By late May, as all firms in the sample begin to receive PPP loans, we see the gap in hours
worked close, consistent with the late-receipt firms receiving PPP loans.



6    Interpretation and Mechanisms
We find limited evidence that PPP funding has significant effects on employment or local eco-
nomic activity during the first month of the program. In the subsequent months, we find more
evidence of employment effects on the intensive margin, but can still rule out large employ-
ment effects of the program. If firms did not primarily maintain or increase employment, what
did they do with these funds? In this section, we present evidence that PPP funds were used
as liquidity support and to meet loan and other spending commitments.
    There are several non-mutually exclusive channels through which businesses may have ab-
sorbed the funds without immediate employment effects. First, program eligibility was defined
broadly, so many less affected firms likely received funds and continued as they would have
in the absence of the funds. In these cases, the program’s benefits accrue to the firm’s own-


                                               34
ers. This interpretation is consistent with our results indicating limited targeting of PPP funds,
due to both bank mediation and the design of the program. Related to this idea, it is possible
that PPP funds crowded out private market borrowing, as firms or banks may substitute more
generous PPP loans for other lending that would have happened otherwise (Gale, 1991).
   Second, despite restrictions on the share of funds ultimately forgiven that needed to be
spent on payroll, firms retained significant flexibility in how they could use the funds over
time. Firms could elect to use funds for required payments initially, to leave the funds in the
bank, or to use only the share that they are able to use when they can. For these firms, the
PPP may have strengthened balance sheets at a time when shelter-in-place orders prevented
workers from doing work and when unemployment insurance was more generous than wages
for a large share of workers. An implication of this channel is that, while employment effects
are zero in the short run, they may well be positive in the medium run because firms are less
likely to close permanently. This interpretation is also consistent with the delayed employment
response we see in the data.
   There was also likely considerable uncertainty about how to use the funds, either because
of evolving regulatory guidance or because small businesses struggled to understand the rules
in the first place. Initially, firms needed to spend funds in an eight-week window in order
to qualify for forgiveness. As it became clear the crisis was only slowly receding, legislative
changes to the program in early June gave firms flexibility to spend the funds in a 24-week
window. Even absent this significant policy uncertainty, firms may respond to periods of high
economic uncertainty, such as the ongoing pandemic (Baker, Bloom, Davis and Terry, 2020),
by holding cash as a precautionary buffer to use in the future.
   Third, some firms may have increased employment or called back workers. Small effects for
these firms are indeed consistent with our null initial and modest medium-term results. These
effects may be particularly muted given the large expansion of UI benefits, causing former
employees to prefer unemployment over a return to work and employers to prefer to take care
of employees via temporary layoffs when shelter-in-place orders are in effect.


6.1    Fixed Payments

To explore the effects of PPP on non-employment financial outcomes, we use information from
the Census Small Business Pulse Survey questions on PPP applications and financial conditions.



                                               35
The survey was conducted weekly from April to June, so these data cover the same sample
period as our employment analysis. In the top panel of Table 8, we examine whether receipt
of PPP allowed firms to avoid becoming delinquent on scheduled payments (either loan or
non-loan). We estimate regressions of the relationship between PPP fund allocation and the
percentage of firms reporting missing loan payments at the state-industry level. In Table 8,
we show similar regressions using the percentage of firms missing other scheduled payments
such as rent, utilities, supplier payments, and payroll.28 In light of our targeting results, these
regressions add controls for pre-PPP measures of crisis severity, including the pre-PPP decline
in hours worked from Homebase, the pre-PPP counts of COVID cases and deaths per capita,
and the pre-PPP social distancing index.
       The top panel of Table 8, column (1), indicates that a percentage point increase in the share
of firms reporting receiving PPP is not significantly associated with a decline in the percentage
of firms missing loan payments. This result, however, could indicate that areas and industries
with a lower percentage of businesses receiving PPP had a larger fraction of businesses that
were uninterested or unable to apply for funds. To address this issue, we use state PPPE to
capture geographic differences in access to the supply of PPP funds resulting from differences
across regions in their exposure to bank PPP performance. These differences are plausibly
unrelated to demand factors and therefore less likely to be confounded by them. In column (2),
we run a similar specification, but instead focus on the relation between the percentage of firms
reporting missing payments and state PPPE. In this case, an increase in state PPPE is associated
with a significantly lower percentage of firms reporting missing loan payments. In columns (3)
and (4), we present results of an IV strategy whereby we instrument for the percentage of firms
receiving PPP using state PPPE. Using this strategy, we find that a ten percentage point increase
in firms receiving PPP is associated with 1.5 percentage point (s.e.=0.5) decline in missing loan
payments.
       In the top panel of Table 8, we find that a ten percentage point increase in the share of firms
receiving PPP is associated with an even larger effect on missed non-loan payments. This result
reflects the fact that many small businesses do not necessarily have loans. Instead, their pri-
mary fixed obligations are rent payments, utilities, supplier payments, and fixed employment-
  28
     Unfortunately, the Pulse survey does not separate this category of other payments into payroll versus non-
payroll components. However, it does focus on “required” payments, which firms may interpret as referring to
payments for past labor rather than discretionary payments based on retaining workers going forward. Results
for this measure should be interpreted with some uncertainty about respondents’ interpretation of the question.



                                                     36
related expenses. Across all specifications, an increase in the percentage of firms receiving PPP
or in the access to PPP funds is associated with a lower percentage of firms reporting miss-
ing these types of payments. Specifically, the results of the IV strategy in columns (3) and
(4) suggest that a ten percentage point increase in firms receiving PPP is associated with a
4.4 percentage point (s.e.=0.7) decline in the number of firms reporting missing any type of
scheduled payments.
   Appendix Tables A.6 and A.7 show that the share of firms reporting missing loan and non-
loan payments is positively related to the fraction of small businesses reporting having ap-
plied, but not having received PPP funds. The percentage of firms that applied, but not did
not receive, PPP funding is plausibly less related to differences in demand for PPP funds across
geographies and industries and likely better captures timely access of small businesses to the
supply of PPP funds. These results further suggest that PPP might have been crucial in al-
lowing small businesses to make scheduled payments and survive the economic crisis without
permanently closing.


6.2    Liquidity Support and Precautionary Savings

The Census survey data also reveal that the PPP funds increased firms’ cash on hand. The
middle panel of Table 8 shows regressions results examining the relation between access to PPP
funds during the first round and the percentage of businesses reporting having three or more
months of cash on hand. This exercise also offers a useful sanity check of the informativeness
of the survey data. As above, these regressions include controls for pre-PPP measures of crisis
severity.
   Similar to results on missed payments, the coefficients reported in column (1) of Table 8
do not indicate an economically or statistically significant relation between cash-on-hand and
the percentage of firms in that state-by-industry group that reported receiving PPP. However,
when we examine the relation between state PPPE, which better isolates access to the supply
of PPP funds, access to PPP is economically and significantly related to the share of firms
reporting significant liquidity. In the reduced form specification presented in column (2), we
find that a unit increase in state PPPE is associated with a ten percentage point increase in
the share of firms reporting significant liquidity. In the IV regression, which uses state PPPE to
instrument for the share of firms receiving PPP, a ten percentage point increase in the share of



                                               37
firms receiving PPP is associated with a 2.7 percentage point (s.e.=1.3) increase in the share
of firms reporting at least three months of cash to cover business operations. Appendix Table
A.8 reports similar results when we use the share of small businesses that applied for but did
not receive PPP as our right-hand-side variable of interest.
       Overall, these results are consistent with the idea that the PPP provided firms with an
important liquidity cushion that they used to navigate the initial months of the pandemic.
These results also align with our evidence that PPP did not immediately induce employment
responses and only modest increased employment in the months following PPP receipt. Many
businesses may have retain the PPP funds in bank accounts as precautionary savings until they
were ready to resume activities, perhaps as demand for their goods and services return to
normal or as relaxed shelter-in-place orders permit them to reopen for business. Generally,
the results are not consistent with the idea that the PPP served as a large-scale alternative to
unemployment insurance for delivering funds directly to affected workers.


6.3       Crowd-Out

One potential mechanism explaining the small employment effects of the program is crowd-
out. Government loan programs crowding out private lending has long been a concern for
loan guarantee programs (e.g., Gale (1991)). In the counterfactual, PPP loans may have been
made under standard commercial loan programs. In the presence of substantial crowd-out,
the program would have little effect on employment and other firm outcomes. While we find
some evidence of modest crowd-out, the results suggest that magnitudes are small and private
lending would not have fully offset PPP lending. This finding is plausible because loans to
replace lost revenue would be unlikely to pass a private loan underwriting test.
       Appendix Figure A.19 shows suggestive evidence of crowd-out from California Uniform
Commercial Code (UCC) filings.29 The figure shows a significant spike in UCC filings in May,
following the exhaustion of PPP funds, which is consistent with the program crowding-out pri-
vate lending. On the other hand, the time series could simply reflect bureaucratic delays in
  29
    We obtained data from California on all UCC filings, which are required for all secured business loans to protect
creditor claims. These UCC laws are set at the state-level, although the National Conference of Commissioners
has sought to make them fairly uniform across states. We are able to observe the names and addresses of the
debtor and the secured property, together with the description of the property that has a security interest. We
subsequently match the UCC data with firm-level information from HomeBase. We refer readers to Edgerton
(2012) for further details about the UCC data and its features.



                                                        38
filing or the recovery. Appendix Figure A.20 shows scatterplots of the ratio of UCC filings per
establishment and the county exposure to the number-based PPPE under different time hori-
zons. The relationship is relatively flat, suggesting little relationship between the availability
of PPP loans and commercial lending.30
      While suggestive of some crowd-out, we use the bank Call Report data to explore this
pattern more broadly and formally. The Call Reports are quarterly at the bank level, and the first
two annual quarters (January-March, April-Jun) almost perfectly align with the disbursement
of PPP loans, which began on April 3. The number of loans in the second quarter is given by
C&I LoansQ2 = C&I LoansQ1 + P P P + N L − P where C&I LoansQi are commercial and industrial
loans in quarter i, P P P refers to PPP loans and N L are other new non-PPP commercial loans,
and P are loans that are paid or charged-off. We rearrange the equation in terms of quarterly
loan growth and write:
                                   C&I LoansQ2                P P P Loans
                                                  =1+γ                    +ζ                             (1)
                                   C&I LoansQ1               C&I LoansQ1
The coefficient γ captures crowd-out. If there is no crowd-out, an additional PPP loan leads to
one additional total loan and γ = 1. Under full crowd-out, an additional PPP loan if offset by
a reduction in another commercial loan, and γ = 0. Appendix Figure A.23 plots the ratio of
Commercial and Industrial Loans in Q2 2020 and Commercial and Industrial Loans in Q1 2020
and the ratio of PPP loans and Commercial and Industrial Loans in Q1 2020, while Table A.18
reports OLS and IV regressions examining the relation between the ratio of Commercial and
                                                                                      Q2     C&I Loans
Industrial Loans in Q2 2020 and Commercial and Industrial Loans in Q1 2020 ( C&I LoansQ1 ) and
                                                                         P P P Loans
the ratio of PPP loans and Commercial and Industrial Loans in Q1 2020 ( C&I  LoansQ1 ). Column

(2) instruments using lender PPPE. In column (1), the coefficient γ is 0.558 and statistically
significant at the 1 percent level. This is suggestive of some crowd-out, but not full crowd-
out. The OLS estimates may be biased if             P P P Loans
                                                   C&I LoansQ1    and ζ are correlated, so in column (2) we
instrument using lender PPPE. The IV estimate in column (2) provides an estimate of γ = 0.991,
and we cannot reject no crowd out. The confidence interval of the IV estimate allows us to
reject full crowd-out.
      Though we find limited evidence of private sector crowd-out, the PPP may have crowded
out other federal loan programs, namely, the Economic Injury Disaster Loan (EIDL) program.
If firms could obtain other federally guaranteed loans in the absence of PPP, this would also
 30
      Note that PPP loans are unsecured and hence are not included in UCC filings.



                                                        39
lead to the program having muted effects. The COVID-19 EIDL program is a SBA program
that provides economic relief to small businesses that experience a temporary loss of revenue
due to the coronavirus. The program offers advantageous terms for regular businesses with
interest rates set at 3.75% and maturity of 30 years with no prepayment penalties. Given these
terms, it is possible that the second-best option of firms that did not obtain access to PPP was
to apply for a loan under the EIDL program.
       Appendix Figure A.21 shows cumulative PPP and EIDL lending over time. Similar to UCC
filings, we see an uptick in EIDL loans after PPP funds level off in May. The SBA was slower
to open up the expanded EIDL provisions of the CARES Act, which may also account for this
lagged increase. The fact that EIDL loans only start rising in late May implies that crowd-out
of EIDL is unlikely to explain the modest effects we estimate for April and May.
       Appendix Figure A.22 shows scatterplots of the average fraction of small business establish-
ments that received an EIDL loan in each percentile bin based on state exposure to the PPPE
in the weeks of May 3-9 and June 28-July 4. The figure shows a weak relationship in the early
period with very few firms receiving EIDL loans. In the later period, there is a strong negative
relationship, consistent with crowd-out and indicating that higher PPP exposure is associated
with fewer EIDL loans. If firms that were unable to access PPP were more likely to apply for
and receive an EIDL loan, and if EIDL loans were sufficiently good substitutes for PPP loans,
that could help account for modest estimated effects of PPP in June.


6.4       UI Expansion

One possible reason why the observed employment effects were so small is that historically
high levels of UI made it difficult for firms to recall workers. Indeed, many workers saw UI
replacement rates above their usual salaries due to an additional $600 a week in federal ben-
efits (Ganong, Noel and Vavra, 2020). Some commentators and media reports suggested that
this benefit led to difficulties for firms in recalling workers, which could have attenuated the
employment effects of the PPP.31 While recent work such as Altonji, Contractor, Finamor, Hay-
good, Lindenlaub, Meghir, O’Dea, Scott, Wang and Washington (2020) suggest muted effect
of UI extensions on unemployment employment levels and the speed of returning to work, we
  31
   For example, the Wall Street Journal "Businesses Struggle to Lure Workers Away From Unemployment" on
May 8 suggested that “Businesses looking for a quick return to normal are running into a big hitch: Workers on
unemployment benefits are reluctant to give them up.”



                                                     40
consider this possibility exploiting state variation in UI replacement rates.
       We explore whether UI generosity attenuated the employment effects of PPP lending by
splitting our sample by the generosity of state UI benefits. Appendix Tables A.19, A.20 and A.21
repeat our employment, UI claims, and small business reveneue analyses, respectively, with the
sample divided between states with above- or below-median UI replacement rates. The results
do not support the hypothesis that the responses are greater in states with less generous UI.
For employment, shutdowns, and revenues, effect sizes are greater in high benefit states. For
UI filings, effects are qualitatively larger in low-benefit states, but the results are imprecise. It
is important to note that, even in states with less generous UI systems, replacements rates were
historically high for lower income workers and thus we may be unable to capture the effects
of a counterfactual without elevated UI benefits.



7       Concluding Remarks
This paper takes an early look at a large and novel small business support program that was
part of the initial crisis response package, the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). We explore
both program targeting, including the role that banks played in intermediating PPP funds, and
the overall short- and medium-term employment and local economic effects of the program.
       We consider two dimensions of program targeting. First, did the funds flow to where the
economic shock was greatest? Second, given the PPP used the banking system as a conduit
to access firms, we ask what role did the banks play in mediating policy targeting? We find
little evidence that funds were targeted towards geographic regions more severely affected by
the pandemic. If anything, the opposite is true and funds were targeted towards areas less
severely affected by the virus, at least initially. Bank heterogeneity played an important role
in mediating funds, affecting who received funds and when their applications were ultimately
processed.
       We construct a new measure of regional exposure to banks that underperformed in terms
of PPP allocation relative to their pre-PPP share of small business lending. Regions with higher
exposure to banks that performed well saw higher levels of PPP lending and received funds
more quickly.32 Limited targeting in terms of who was eligible likely also led to many infra-
  32
    The analysis here focuses on ex ante targeting of the PPP, that is, the distribution of funding provided at
the start of the program. Ultimate targeting will depend on the extent of loan forgiveness and defaults, as well
as subsequent changes to the PPP, including conditions for recoupment based on ex post economic hardship


                                                      41
marginal firms receiving funds and to a low correlation between regional PPP funding and
shock severity.
    Using a number of data sources and exploiting lender heterogeneity in disbursement of
PPP funds, we find evidence that the PPP had only a small effect on employment in the months
following the initial rollout. Our estimates are precise enough to rule out large employment
effects in the short-term. At the same time, the program may have played an important role in
promoting financial stability. Firms with greater exposure to the PPP hold more cash on hand,
and are more likely to make loan and other scheduled payments. Measuring these responses is
critical for evaluating the social insurance value of the PPP and similar policies and designing
them effectively.




and changes to program eligibility criteria going forward. See Hanson, Stein, Sunderam and Zwick (2020) for a
discussion of these dynamic policy considerations in the design of business liquidity support during the pandemic.


                                                       42
References
Agarwal, Sumit, Gene Amromin, Itzhak Ben-David, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Tomasz
  Piskorski, and Amit Seru. 2017. “Policy Intervention in Debt Renegotiation: Evidence from
  the Home Affordable Modification Program.” Journal of Political Economy, 125(3): 654–712.

Altonji, Joseph, Zara Contractor, Lucas Finamor, Ryan Haygood, Ilse Lindenlaub, Costas
  Meghir, Cormac O’Dea, Dana Scott, Liana Wang, and Ebonya Washington. 2020. “Em-
  ployment Effects of Unemployment Insurance Generosity During the Pandemic.”

Atkeson, Andrew, Adrien d’Avernas, Andrea Eisfeldt, and Pierre-Olivier Weill. 2018. “Gov-
  ernment Guarantees and the Valuation of American Banks.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

Autor, David, David Cho, Leland Crane, Mita Goldar, Byron Lutz, Joshua Montes,
  William B. Peterman, David Ratner, Daniel Villar, and Ahu Yildirmaz. 2020. “An Evalu-
  ation of the Paycheck Protection Program Using Administrative Payroll Microdata.” Mimeo.

Bachas, Natalie, Olivia Kim, and Constantine Yannelis. 2020. “Loan Guarantees and Credit
  Supply.” Journal of Financial Economics.

Baker, Scott R, Nicholas Bloom, Steven J Davis, and Stephen J Terry. 2020. “Covid-Induced
  Economic Uncertainty.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Baker, Scott R, Robert A Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela Pagel, and Constantine Yan-
  nelis. 2020. “Income, Liquidity, and the Consumption Response to the 2020 Economic Stim-
  ulus Payments.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Barrios, John, Michael Minnis, William Minnis, and Joost Sijthoff. 2020. “Assessing the
  Payroll Protection Program: A Framework and Preliminary Results.” Working paper.

Barrot, Jean-Noel, Thorsten Martin, Julien Sauvagnat, and Boris Vallee. 2019. “Employ-
  ment Effects of Alleviating Financing Frictions: Worker-level Evidence from a Loan Guaran-
  tee Program.” Working Paper.

Bartik, Alexander W., Marianne Betrand, Feng Lin, Jesse Rothstein, and Matt Unrath.
  2020. “Measuring the labor market at the onset of the COVID-19 crisis.” Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity.




                                             43
Bartik, Alexander W., Zoe B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, Christopher T. Stan-
  ton, and Adi Sunderam. 2020. “The Targeting and Impact of Paycheck Protection Program
  Loans to Small Businesses.” NBER Working Paper No. 27623.

Biggs, Andrew G, and Joshua D Rauh. 2020. “Funding Direct Payments to Americans Through
  Social Security Deferral.” Stanford GSB Working Paper, , (3580533).

Brevoort, Kenneth P., John A. Holmes, and John D. Wolken. 2010. “Distance Still Matters:
  The Information Revolution in Small Business Lending and the Persistent Role of Location,
  1993-2003.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Buffington, Catherine, Carrie Dennis, Emin Dinlersoz, Lucia Foster, and Shawn Klimek.
  2020. “Measuring the Effect of COVID-19 on U.S. Small Businesses: The Small Business
  Pulse Survey.” Census for Economic Studies, working paper.

Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, and Michael Stepner. 2020. “How did
  COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment? A New Real-time
  Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data.” NBER working paper.

Core, Fabrizio, and Filippo De Marco. 2020. “Public Guarantees for Small Businesses in Italy
  during COVID-19.” SSRN working paper.

Cororaton, Anna, and Samuel Rosen. 2020. “Public Firm Borrowers of the US Paycheck Pro-
  tection Program.” SSRN working paper.

Edgerton, Jesse. 2012. “Credit Supply and Business Investment During the Great Recession:
  Evidence from Public Records of Equipment Financing.” SSRN working paper.

Elenev, Vadim, Tim Landvoigt, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2020. “Can the Covid Bailouts
  Save the Economy?” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Erel, Isil, and Jack Liebersohn. 2020. “Does FinTech Substitute for Banks? Evidence from the
  Paycheck Protection Program.” SSRN working paper.

Gale, William. 1990. “Federal Lending and the Market for Credit.” Journal of Public Economics,
  , (42): 177–93.

Gale, William. 1991. “Economic Effects of Federal Credit Programs.” American Economic Re-
  view, 81(1): 133–52.



                                             44
Ganong, Peter, and Pascal Noel. 2018. “Liquidity vs. Wealth in Household Debt Obligations:
  Evidence from Housing Policy in the Great Recession.” National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search.

Ganong, Peter, Pascal J Noel, and Joseph S Vavra. 2020. “US Unemployment Insurance
  Replacement Rates During the Pandemic.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gonzalez-Uribe, Juanita, and Su Wang. 2019. “Dissecting the Effect of Financial Constraints
  on Small Firms.” Working Paper.

Goolsbee, Austan, and Chad Syverson. 2020. “Fear, lockdown, and diversion: Comparing
  drivers of pandemic economic decline 2020.”

Granja, João, Christian Leuz, and Raghuram Rajan. 2018. “Going the Extra Mile: Distant
  Lending and Credit Cycles.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hanson, Samuel, Jeremy Stein, Adi Sunderam, and Eric Zwick. 2020. “Business Conti-
  nuity Insurance and Business Continuity Loans: Keeping America’s Lights on During the
  Pandemic.” Policy Brief.

House, Christopher, and Matthew Shapiro. 2008. “Temporary Investment Tax Incentives:
  Theory with Evidence from Bonus Depreciation.” American Economic Review, 98(3): 737–
  768.

Humphries, John Eric, Christopher Neilson, and Gabriel Ulyssea. 2020. “Information Fric-
  tions and Access to the Paycheck Protection Program.”

Kaplan, Greg, and Gianluca Violante. 2014. “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal
  Stimulus Payments.” Econometrica, 82(4): 1199–1239.

Kelly, Bryan, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2016. “Too-Systemic-to-Fail: What
  Option Markets Imply about Sector-Wide Government Guarantees.” American Economic Re-
  view, 106(6): 1278–1319.

Lelarge, Clair, David Sraer, and David Thesmar. 2010. “Entrepreneurship and Credit Con-
  straints: Evidence From a French Loan Guarantee Program.” International Differences in En-
  trepreneurship, 243–273.

Lucas, Deborah. 2016. “Credit Policy as Fiscal Policy.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  , (Spring): 1–57.

                                             45
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2012. “The Effects of Fiscal Stimulus: Evidence from the 2009 Cash
  for Clunkers Program.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127: 1107–1142.

Morse, Adair, and Robert Bartlett. 2020. “Small Business Survival Capabilities and Policy
  Effectiveness: Evidence from Oakland.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mullins, William, and Patricio Toro. 2017. “Credit Guarantees and New Bank Relationships.”
  Policy Research Working Paper No, 8241.

Papanikolaou, Dimitris, and Lawrence DW Schmidt. 2020. “Working Remotely and the
  Supply-side Impact of Covid-19.” National Bureau of Economic Research.

Parker, Jonathan A, Nicholas S Souleles, David S Johnson, and Robert McClelland. 2013.
  “Consumer Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008.” American Economic
  Review, 103(6): 2530–53.

Smith, Bruce. 1983. “Limited Information, Credit Rationing, and Optimal Government Lend-
  ing Policy.” American Economic Review, 73(3): 305–18.

Zwick, Eric. Forthcoming. “The Costs of Corporate Tax Complexity.” American Economic Jour-
  nal: Economic Policy.

Zwick, Eric, and James Mahon. 2017. “Tax Policy and Heterogeneous Investment Behavior.”
  American Economic Review, 107(1): 217–248.




                                             46
             Figure 1: Histogram of Bank Paycheck Protection Program Exposure (PPPE)
Figure 1 plots the distribution of the bank PPPE measured at the end of the first round of the PPP (light yellow region) and of June 30th,
2020 (light blue region). We compute this measure as: P P P E b,N br = Share  Nbr. PPP−Share Nbr. SBL
                                                                        Share Nbr. PPP+Share Nbr. SBL × 0.5. We weigh each bank observation by its
size measured as total assets as of the end of 2019. Data is obtained from the SBA and call reports.




                                                                       47
                                                                                              Figure 2: PPPE and PPP Allocation
Figure 2 plots the cumulative share of PPP and SBL lending by all banks whose PPPE is below x, where x ∈ (−0.5, 0.5). Panel A plots
cumulative amounts using PPP data as of the end of the first round and Panel B reports cumulative amounts using PPP data as of June 30th,
2020. Data is obtained from the SBA and call reports.

                                                                                      Panel A: Cumulative PPP and SBL Lending at end of first round
                                                      1




                                                                                     Cumulative Share of PPP Lending
                                                                                     Cumulative Share of SBL Lending
                            Cumulative Shares of PPP Lending and SBL Lending
                                .2           .4       0  .6          .8




                                                                               -.5                                          0                         .5
                                                                                                                       Bank PPPE


                                                                                           Panel B: Cumulative PPP and SBL Lending on June 30th
                                                     1




                                                                                     Cumulative Share of PPP Lending
                                                                                     Cumulative Share of SBL Lending
                           Cumulative Shares of PPP Lending and SBL Lending
                               .2           .4       0  .6          .8




                                                                               -.5                                          0                         .5
                                                                                                                       Bank PPPE




                                                                                                                       48
                                                                          Figure 3: Evolution of PPPE and Average Loan Size by Bank Size
Figure 3 plots the evolution of average PPPE based on number of PPP loans (Panel A), average PPPE based on volume of PPP loans (Panel B),
the average loan size of loans (Panel C) and the fraction of loans above $1 million by size bin (Panel D). The size bins stratify all commercial
banks operating as of the fourth quarter of 2019 based on their total assets. Data is obtained from the SBA and call reports.

                                   Panel A: Number-based PPPE across Size Bins                                                                                                                                                                               Panel B: Volume-based PPPE across Size Bins
                       .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .5
                       .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4
                       .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .3
                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .2
 Bank PPPE (Nbr.)




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Bank PPPE (Vol.)
                       .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1
                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                       -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.1
                       -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.2
                       -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.3
                       -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.4
                       -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.5
                                  20


                                            20


                                                   20


                                                            20


                                                                     20


                                                                            20


                                                                                      0


                                                                                                0


                                                                                                          0


                                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                                              0


                                                                                                                                        0

                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                     02


                                                                                               02


                                                                                                         02


                                                                                                                   02


                                                                                                                             02


                                                                                                                                       02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             02
                                 r20


                                        r20


                                                 r20


                                                          r20


                                                                 r20


                                                                          r20




                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                  y2


                                                                                           y2


                                                                                                     y2


                                                                                                               y2


                                                                                                                         y2


                                                                                                                                   y2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        y2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 y2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           y2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               y2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y2
                                                                                                                                              jun


                                                                                                                                                      jun


                                                                                                                                                                jun


                                                                                                                                                                          jun


                                                                                                                                                                                    jun


                                                                                                                                                                                              jun




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    jun


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            jun


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jun


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                jun


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jun


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    jun
                            ap


                                       ap


                                                 ap


                                                        ap


                                                                 ap


                                                                          ap


                                                                                 ma


                                                                                          ma


                                                                                                    ma


                                                                                                              ma


                                                                                                                        ma


                                                                                                                                  ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ma


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ma


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ma


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ma


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ma


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ma
                                                                                                                                            02


                                                                                                                                                      07


                                                                                                                                                                12


                                                                                                                                                                          17


                                                                                                                                                                                    22


                                                                                                                                                                                              27
                        03


                                       08


                                              13


                                                       18


                                                                23


                                                                       28




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            07


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          22


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             18


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      23


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             28
                                                                                03


                                                                                          08


                                                                                                    13


                                                                                                              18


                                                                                                                        23


                                                                                                                                  28




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    18


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              23


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        28
                                                 <$1bln               [$1bln;$10bln]                 [$10bln;$50bln]                        [$50bln;$1000bln]                   [Top 4 Banks]                                                                          <$1bln               [$1bln;$10bln]                 [$10bln;$50bln]                        [$50bln;$1000bln]                   [Top 4 Banks]



                                       Panel C: Average Loan Size across Size Bins                                                                                                                       Panel D: Fraction of Loans above $1M across Size Bins
                       1250000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .5
                       1000000




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fraction of PPP Loans above $1million
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4
 Average Loan Amount
                       750000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .3
                       500000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .2
                       250000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                  20


                                            20


                                                   20


                                                            20


                                                                     20


                                                                            20


                                                                                     20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                 r20


                                        r20


                                                 r20


                                                          r20


                                                                 r20


                                                                          r20


                                                                                     20


                                                                                               20


                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                                                 20


                                                                                                                                                                           20


                                                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 y


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           y

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    jun


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            jun


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      jun


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                jun


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          jun


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    jun
                                                                                    y


                                                                                             y


                                                                                                       y


                                                                                                                 y


                                                                                                                           y


                                                                                                                                     y

                                                                                                                                              jun


                                                                                                                                                      jun


                                                                                                                                                                jun


                                                                                                                                                                          jun


                                                                                                                                                                                    jun


                                                                                                                                                                                              jun




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ap


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ma


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ma


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ma


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ma


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ma


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ma
                            ap


                                       ap


                                                 ap


                                                        ap


                                                                 ap


                                                                          ap


                                                                                 ma


                                                                                          ma


                                                                                                    ma


                                                                                                              ma


                                                                                                                        ma


                                                                                                                                  ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            07


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      12


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                17


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          22


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             18


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      23


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             28
                                                                                                                                            02


                                                                                                                                                      07


                                                                                                                                                                12


                                                                                                                                                                          17


                                                                                                                                                                                    22


                                                                                                                                                                                              27
                        03


                                       08


                                              13


                                                       18


                                                                23


                                                                       28




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                08


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          13


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    18


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              23


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        28
                                                                                03


                                                                                          08


                                                                                                    13


                                                                                                              18


                                                                                                                        23


                                                                                                                                  28




                                                 <$1bln               [$1bln;$10bln]                 [$10bln;$50bln]                        [$50bln;$1000bln]                   [Top 4 Banks]                                                                          <$1bln               [$1bln;$10bln]                 [$10bln;$50bln]                        [$50bln;$1000bln]                   [Top 4 Banks]




                                                                                                                                                                                                        49
                                                                                Figure 4: State Exposure to PPPE and PPP per Establishment
Figure 4 are scatterplots of state exposure to the number-based PPPE and the percentage of businesses receiving PPP in a state at the end of
the first round of PPP (Panel A) and state exposure to the PPPE based on the number of loans and the difference between the percentage of
businesses reporting having applied to PPP and percentage of business that received PPP in each state (Panel B). Data comes from the Census
Bureau Small Business Pulse Survey, SBA, Call Reports, Summary of Deposits, and County Business Patterns.

                                                                               Panel A: State Exposure to Number-based PPPE and Fraction of Small Businesses receiving PPP
                                                                               .5
                    Fraction of Small Businesses receiving PPP in Round #1




                                                                                                                                                                   ND
                                                                                                                                                               NESD
                                                                               .4




                                                                                                                                                                         OK
                                                                                                                                                    WY             IA
                                                                                                                                                                    MT        ME
                                                                                                                                                                     MS
                                                                                                                                                                   HIKS
                                                                                                                                                              AR              VT
                                                                               .3




                                                                                                                                                      MO
                                                                                                                                                   MN WI                NH
                                                                                                                           ID
                                                                                                                                            AL
                                                                                                                     UT                RIKY
                                                                                                                                       MA
                                                                                                                            COLA   TN       IN
                                                                                                                                    OH
                                                                                                                            AKTX      PA
                                                                                                                             IL                WV
                                                                                                                   SC GA
                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                         VA DE CT      MI
                                                                                                                         MD     NM
                                                                                                                   NC
                                                                                                          OR    FLWA
                                                                                                                   NY
                                                                                                                   NJ
                                                                                          NV   AZ DC
                                                                                               CA
                                                                               .1
                                                                                    -.2




                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                                                                                                      State PPPE (Round #1)


            Panel B: State Exposure to Number-Based PPPE and Difference between % Businesses Applying and Receiving PPP

                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                                     NJ
                                                                               50
                    Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP




                                                                                                    DC          FL
                                                                                          NV             OR               GA
                                                                                               AZ
                                                                                                                     NY
                                                                                                                                            CT
                                                                               40




                                                                                                                    WA
                                                                                                                     NC                  NM
                                                                                                                               MD                  MA
                                                                                                                                                   RI
                                                                                                                               VA      TX        OHMI
                                                                                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                                     SC                                            HI
                                                                                                                                     IL
                                                                                                                                    CO        TN
                                                                               30




                                                                                                                     UT                LA

                                                                                                                                    DE
                                                                                                                                    AK                    IN WV
                                                                                                                                                                     NH
                                                                                                                                                                    MS        VT
                                                                                                                                                   KYWI
                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                            AL   MN
                                                                                                                           ID
                                                                                                                                                         MO         SD
                                                                                                                                                                   IA         ME
                                                                                                                                                                    KS
                                                                                                                                                              AR    OK
                                                                                                                                                   WY              ND
                                                                                                                                                                 MT
                                                                               10




                                                                                                                                                               NE
                                                                                    -.2




                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                   .4




                                                                                                                      State PPPE (Round #1)




                                                                                                                               50
                                   Figure 5: County Exposure to PPPE in Round #1 and PPP per Establishment
Figure 5 are scatterplots of the average fraction of small business establishments that received a PPP loan in each percentile bin based on the
county exposure to the number-based PPPE. PPP fraction and county PPPE are demeaned using their respective state averages. Data comes
from SBA, Call Reports, Summary of Deposits, and County Business Patterns.
                   .7         .6
     PPP Fraction (Residualized)
    .2    .3     .4.1   .5




                                          -2              -1          0               1                                        2
                                                           PPPE Week 13 (Residualized)

                                          Week 13       Week 15         Week 17                Week 19                 Week 23




                                                                     51
             Figure 6: Average Fraction of Establishments receiving PPP by PPP Source
Figure 6 shows the fraction of establishments receiving PPP loans by source. Data comes from the SBA and Summary of Deposits.




                                                                 52
                                                                        Figure 7: Targeting of PPP Allocation in the First Round
Figure 7 stratifies all businesses in Homebase in 10 bins based on the fraction of establishments receiving PPP during the first round in their
zip code (Panels A and C) and based on their exposure to PPPE in the first round in a 10 miles radius of the center of their respective zip
code (Panels B and D). In Panels (A) and (B) the y-axis represents the share of Homebase businesses that shutdown in the week of March
22nd–March 28th and in Panels (B) and (D) it represents the average decline in hours worked in the week of March 22nd–March 28th relative
to a January baseline based on the average weekly hours worked in the last two weeks of January. Data is from SBA, Homebase, and County
Business Patterns.

  Panel A: Business Shutdowns and Fraction Receiving
                                                                                                                                              Panel B: Business Shutdowns and PPPE (Round #1)
                    PPP (Round #1)




                                                                                                                                                                   .4
                                       .4
  % Businesses Shutdown during Week 10




                                                                                                                                         % Businesses Shutdown during Week 10
                   .3




                                                                                                                                                          .3
                           .2




                                                                                                                                                                   .2
                                                   us.




                                                         2



                                                             3



                                                                    4



                                                                              5



                                                                                        6



                                                                                                  7



                                                                                                           8



                                                                                                               9



                                                                                                                              us.
                                  er B




                                                                                                                               B




                                                                                                                                                                                            PE




                                                                                                                                                                                                 2



                                                                                                                                                                                                     3



                                                                                                                                                                                                         4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E
                                                                                                                           per




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PP
                                Pp




                                                                                                                                                                                      t PP
                                                                                                                      PP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                st P
               t PP




                                                                                                                     st P




                                                                                                                                                                    s
                                                                                                                                                                 Lea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mo
    s
 Lea




                                                                                                                   Mo




                                                                                                                                                                                                             PPPE ZIP (Round 1)
                                                                 % of Businesses receiving PPP (Round 1)


                                                                                                                                           Panel D: Decline in Hours Worked and PPPE (Round
                                                   Panel C: Decline in Hours Worked and Fraction
                                                                                                                                                                  #1)
                                                             Receiving PPP (Round #1)
                                                                                                                                                                                       .5
                                              .5
  % Decline in Hours Worked Shock until Week 10




                                                                                                                                         % Decline in Hours Worked Shock until Week 10
                       .4




                                                                                                                                                              .4
  .3




                                                                                                                                                                   .3
                                                   us.




                                                         2



                                                             3



                                                                    4



                                                                              5



                                                                                        6



                                                                                                  7



                                                                                                           8



                                                                                                               9



                                                                                                                              us.
                                              er B




                                                                                                                            er B




                                                                                                                                                                                            E



                                                                                                                                                                                                 2



                                                                                                                                                                                                     3



                                                                                                                                                                                                         4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PE
                                                                                                                                                                                            PP
                                Pp




                                                                                                                       Pp




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    P
                                                                                                                                                                                 st P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               st P
               P




                                                                                                                      PP
          st P




                                                                                                                                                                 Lea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mo
                                                                                                                      st
 Lea




                                                                                                                   Mo




                                                                                                                                                                                                             PPPE ZIP (Round 1)
                                                                 % of Businesses receiving PPP (Round 1)




                                                                                                                                    53
                                                                            Figure 8: Targeting of PPP Allocation in Both Rounds
Figure 8 stratifies all businesses in Homebase in 10 bins based on the fraction of establishments in their zip code receiving PPP during the
entire program (Panels A and C) and based on their exposure to the zip-code PPPE measured using data for the entire program (Panels B and
D). In Panels (A) and (B) the y-axis represents the share of Homebase businesses that shutdown in the week of March 22nd–March 28th and
in Panels (B) and (D) it represents the average decline in hours worked in the week of March 22nd–March 28th relative to a January baseline
based on the average weekly hours worked in the last two weeks of January. Data is from SBA, Homebase, and County Business Patterns.

  Panel A: Business Shutdowns and Fraction Receiving                                                                                        Panel B: Business Shutdowns and PPPE (Rounds #1 +
                PPP (Rounds #1 + #2)                                                                                                                                #2)
                                       .4




                                                                                                                                                                          .4
  % Businesses Shutdown during Week 10




                                                                                                                                                % Businesses Shutdown during Week 10
                   .3




                                                                                                                                                                 .3
                           .2
                                                   us.




                                                         2



                                                             3



                                                                       4



                                                                                 5



                                                                                           6



                                                                                                     7



                                                                                                                  8



                                                                                                                      9



                                                                                                                                     us.




                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                  er B




                                                                                                                                      B
                                                                                                                                  per
                                Pp




                                                                                                                                                                                                   PE




                                                                                                                                                                                                        2



                                                                                                                                                                                                            3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                             PP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PP
               t PP




                                                                                                                                                                                             t PP
                                                                                                                            st P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              st P
    s




                                                                                                                                                                           s
 Lea




                                                                                                                          Mo




                                                                                                                                                                        Lea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mo
                                                                 % of Businesses receiving PPP (Rounds #1 + #2)                                                                                                     PPPE ZIP (Rounds #1 + #2)



                                                   Panel C: Decline in Hours Worked and Fraction                                            Panel D: Decline in Hours Worked and PPPE (Rounds
                                                          Receiving PPP (Rounds #1 + #2)                                                                         #1 + #2)
                                                                                                                                                                                              .5
                                              .5
  % Decline in Hours Worked Shock until Week 10




                                                                                                                                                % Decline in Hours Worked Shock until Week 10
                       .4




                                                                                                                                                                     .4
  .3
                                                   us.




                                                         2



                                                             3



                                                                       4



                                                                                 5



                                                                                           6



                                                                                                     7



                                                                                                                  8



                                                                                                                      9



                                                                                                                                     us.




                                                                                                                                                                          .3
                                              er B




                                                                                                                                   er B
                                Pp




                                                                                                                              Pp




                                                                                                                                                                                                   E



                                                                                                                                                                                                        2



                                                                                                                                                                                                            3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PE
                                                                                                                                                                                                   PP
               P




                                                                                                                             PP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P
          st P




                                                                                                                                                                                        st P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             st P
                                                                                                                             st
 Lea




                                                                                                                          Mo




                                                                                                                                                                        Lea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mo




                                                                 % of Businesses receiving PPP (Rounds #1 + #2)                                                                                                     PPPE ZIP (Rounds #1 + #2)




                                                                                                                                           54
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          55




  W                                                                                                                                                                                                     W
   ee                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee
         k1                         Initial Unemployment Insurance Claims (as % of Jan 2020 BLS County Emp.)                                                                                                k 1:                                                               % Businesses Shutdown
             :J                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ja
     W         an                                                                                                                                                                                        W            n1
      ee             19                  0                   1%                2%                            3%                    4%                                                                       ee            9-                 0                        .1                         .2         .3   .4
            k2            -J                                                                                                                                                                                   k2                Ja
                :J          an                                                                                                                                                                                       :J             n2
     W            an               25                                                                                                                                                                    W              an              5
      ee               26                                                                                                                                                                                   ee              26
           k3               -F                                                                                                                                                                                 k3                -F
     W
                :F             eb1                                                                                                                                                                       W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :F              eb
                   eb                                                                                                                                                                                                   eb              1
      ee
           k4          02                                                                                                                                                                                   ee              0 2-
                           -F                                                                                                                                                                                  k4                 Fe
   W            :F
                   eb
                              eb
                                  8                                                                                                                                                                     W           :F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        eb            b8
    ee                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee
       k5             9-                                                                                                                                                                                     k5             9-
            :F            Fe                                                                                                                                                                                      :F            Fe
  W             eb            b1
                                  5                                                                                                                                                                     W             eb            b1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
    ee
       k6           1 6-
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                             k6           1 6-
            :F            Fe                                                                                                                                                                                      :F            Fe
                eb            b2                                                                                                                                                                                                    b2
    W               2             2                                                                                                                                                                       W           eb
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2             2
       ee             3 -F                                                                                                                                                                                   ee             3 -F




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Low PPP
           k7                                                                                                                                                                                                    k7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      High PPP
                            eb                                                                                                                                                                                                    eb
  W             :M              29                                                                                                                                                                      W             :M              29
     ee              ar                                                                                                                                                                                    ee              ar
        k8               1-                                                                                                                                                                                   k8               1-
 W           :              M  ar                                                                                                                                                                      W           :              M  ar
   ee           Ma
                     r8           7                                                                                                                                                                      ee           Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r8           7




                                                                                           Low PPPE County
       k9                                                                                                                                                                                                    k9




                                                                      High PPPE County
                         -M                                                                                                                                                                                                    -M
W          : M               ar                                                                                                                                                                       W          : M               ar
  ee             ar             14                                                                                                                                                                      ee             ar             14
     k1             15                                                                                                                                                                                     k1             15
         0:              -M                                                                                                                                                                                    0:              -M
  W           Ma             ar                                                                                                                                                                         W           Ma             ar
    ee             r2           21                                                                                                                                                                        ee             r2           21
       k1              2-                                                                                                                                                                                    k1              2-
                                          Initial Lockdown Orders                                                                                                                                                                                    Initial Lockdown Orders
            1:            Ma                                                                                                                                                                                      1:            Ma
   W                           r2                                                                                                                                                                        W                           r2
     ee
                Ma                8                                                                                                                                                                        ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ma                8
                      r2                                                                                                                                                                                                    r2
         k1              9-                                                                                                                                                                                    k1              9-
  W                                            PPP Launch                                                                                                                                               W                                                  PPP Launch
              2:            Ap                                                                                                                                                                                      2:            Ap
   ee            Ap             r4                                                                                                                                                                       ee            Ap             r4
       k1             r5                                                                                                                                                                                     k1             r5
           3:             -A                                                                                                                                                                                     3:             -A
  W            Ap            pr
                                11                                                                                                                                                                      W            Ap            pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      11
   ee              r1                                                                                                                                                                                    ee              r1
       k1              2-                                                                                                                                                                                    k1              2-
           4:              Ap             PPP Runs out of Funds                                                                                                                                                  4:              Ap                  PPP Runs out of Funds
  W            Ap              r1
                                  8                                                                                                                                                                     W            Ap              r1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8
    ee             r1                                                                                                                                                                                     ee             r1
       k1              9-                                                                                                                                                                                    k1              9-
            5:             Ap                                                                                                                                                                                     5:             Ap
  W             Ap             r2
                                  5                                                                                                                                                                     W             Ap             r2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
     ee             r 2                                                                                                                                                                                    ee             r 2
        k1              6-                PPP 2nd Round begins                                                                                                                                                k1              6-                     PPP 2nd Round begins
W            6:             Ma                                                                                                                                                                        W            6:             Ma
  ee             Ma             y2                                                                                                                                                                      ee             Ma             y2
     k1               y3                                                                                                                                                                                   k1               y3
W       7 :M              -M                                                                                                                                                                          W       7 :M              -M
 ee             ay            ay                                                                                                                                                                       ee             ay            ay
    k1             10             9                                                                                                                                                                       k1             10             9
W
        8:              -M                                                                                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                              8:              -M
 ee         Ma              ay                                                                                                                                                                         ee         Ma              ay
    k1           y1             16                                                                                                                                                                        k1           y1             16
        9:            7 -M                                                                                                                                                                                    9:            7 -M
 W          Ma              ay
                                23                                                                                                                                                                     W          Ma              ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      23
   ee            y2                                                                                                                                                                                      ee            y2
      k2              4-                                                                                                                                                                                    k2              4-
          0:             Ma                                                                                                                                                                                     0:             Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      % Businesses Shutdown and ZIP PPPE (Round #1)




  W            Ma             y3
                                  0                                                                                                                                                                     W            Ma             y3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
    ee              y3                                                                                                                                                                                    ee              y3




                                                                                                                                            Initial Unemployment Filings and County PPPE (Round #1)
        k2               1-                                                                                                                                                                                   k2               1-
 W           1:
                 Ju
                            Ju
                                n6                                                                                                                                                                     W           1:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n6
   ee                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee
                    n7                                                                                                                                                                                                    n7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SBA, Homebase, County Business Patterns, state labor departments, and Womply.




      k2                                                                                                                                                                                                    k2
          2:             -Ju                                                                                                                                                                                    2:             -Ju
 W             Ju             n1                                                                                                                                                                       W             Ju             n1
   ee             n1              3                                                                                                                                                                      ee             n1              3
      k2               4-                                                                                                                                                                                   k2               4-
          3:               Ju                                                                                                                                                                                   3:               Ju
   W           Ju             n2                                                                                                                                                                         W           Ju             n2
      ee          n2              0                                                                                                                                                                                     n2              0
         k2            1 -Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                               k2            1 -Ju
              4:              n2                                                                                                                                                                                    4:              n2
                  Ju              7                                                                                                                                                                                     Ju              7
                      n2                                                                                                                                                                                                    n2
                           8-                                                                                                                                                                                                    8-
                              Ju                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ju
                                 l4                                                                                                                                                                                                    l4



                                                                                                                                                                                                        W
  W                                                                                                                                                                                                      ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                            k
   ee                                                                                                                                                                                                         1:
         k1
             :J                         Decline in Y/Y Change in Total Consumer Spending relative to January                                                                                                       Ja                                        % Decline in Hours Worked relative to January
               an                                                                                                                                                                                        W            n1                      0                .2           .4          .6           .8          1
     W               19                  -.6                   -.4                       -.2                  0                        .2                                                                   ee            9-
      ee                  -J                                                                                                                                                                                   k2               Ja
            k2                                                                                                                                                                                                      :J             n2
                :J          an                                                                                                                                                                           W              an             5
     W            an               25                                                                                                                                                                       ee              26
      ee               26                                                                                                                                                                                      k3               -F
           k3               -F                                                                                                                                                                                      :F             eb
                :F             e                                                                                                                                                                         W              eb             1
     W             eb           b1                                                                                                                                                                          ee              02-
      ee               02                                                                                                                                                                                      k4                Fe
           k4              -F                                                                                                                                                                           W           :F               b8
   W            :F
                   eb
                              eb
                                  8                                                                                                                                                                       ee            eb
    ee                                                                                                                                                                                                       k5             9-
       k5             9-                                                                                                                                                                                          :F           Fe
            :F            Fe                                                                                                                                                                            W             eb           b1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
  W             eb            b1
                                  5                                                                                                                                                                       ee              16
    ee
       k6           1 6-                                                                                                                                                                                     k6              -F
                          Fe                                                                                                                                                                                      :F             eb
            :F                                                                                                                                                                                                        eb             22
    W           eb            b2
                                  2                                                                                                                                                                       W               2 3-
                    23                                                                                                                                                                                       ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Low PPP




       ee                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Fe
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      High PPP




                        -F                                                                                                                                                                                       k7                b2
  W
           k7
                :M
                            eb
                                29                                                                                                                                                                      W             :M               9
     ee                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee              ar
                     ar                                                                                                                                                                                       k8              1-
        k8               1-                                                                                                                                                                            W           : M           Ma
 W           : M            Ma
                                r7                                                                                                                                                                       ee              ar          r7
                   a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 9: PPPE and Post-PPP Outcomes




   ee                                                                                                                                                                                                        k9             8-
                     r8
                                                                                           Low PPPE County




       k9
                                                                      High PPPE County




W          : M           -M                                                                                                                                                                           W          : M           Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r1
  ee                         ar                                                                                                                                                                         ee             ar              4
                 ar             14                                                                                                                                                                         k1             15
     k1             15                                                                                                                                                                                         0:             -M
         0:              -M                                                                                                                                                                                         M             ar
  W           Ma             ar                                                                                                                                                                         W              ar            21
    ee             r2           21                                                                                                                                                                        ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                             k1           2 2-
       k1             2-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Initial Lockdown Orders
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1:           Ma
                                                                                                             Initial Lockdown Orders
            1:            Ma                                                                                                                                                                                                        r2
   W                           r2                                                                                                                                                                        W            Ma               8
     ee
                Ma                8                                                                                                                                                                        ee              r2
                     r2                                                                                                                                                                                        k1             9-
         k1              9-                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ap               PPP Launch
  W           2:            Ap                                                                                    PPP Launch
                                                                                                                                                                                                        W           2:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ap            r4
   ee            Ap             r4                                                                                                                                                                       ee
                      r5                                                                                                                                                                                     k1            r5
       k1                 -A                                                                                                                                                                                     3:            -A
  W
           3:
               Ap            pr                                                                                                                                                                         W            Ap           pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     11
   ee                           11                                                                                                                                                                       ee              r1
                   r1                                                                                                                                                                                        k1             2-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PPP Runs out of Funds
       k1              2-                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ap
                                                                                                             PPP Runs out of Funds
           4:              Ap                                                                                                                                                                                    4:
  W            Ap              r1                                                                                                                                                                       W            Ap             r1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8
    ee             r1             8                                                                                                                                                                       ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                             k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9-
       k1              9-                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ap
            5:             Ap                                                                                                                                                                                     5:                r2
  W                            r2                                                                                                                                                                       W             Ap               5
     ee
                Ap
                    r2            5                                                                                                                                                                        ee             r2
        k1              6-                                                                                   PPP 2nd Round begins
                                                                                                                                                                                                              k1             6-             PPP 2nd Round begins
W            6:             Ma                                                                                                                                                                        W            6:            Ma
  ee             Ma             y2                                                                                                                                                                      ee             Ma            y2
     k1                                                                                                                                                                                                    k1              y3
                      y3                                                                                                                                                                                      7:               -M
W       7:                -M                                                                                                                                                                          W            Ma              ay
 ee          Ma               ay                                                                                                                                                                       ee
    k1            y1              9                                                                                                                                                                       k1            y1             9
        8:           0-                                                                                                                                                                                       8:           0-
W           M            Ma                                                                                                                                                                           W           M           Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y1
 ee            ay             y1                                                                                                                                                                       ee            ay
    k1             17             6                                                                                                                                                                       k1             17            6
        9:              -M                                                                                                                                                                                    9:             -M
 W          Ma              ay                                                                                                                                                                         W          Ma             ay
   ee            y2             23                                                                                                                                                                       ee            y2            23
      k2             4-                                                                                                                                                                                     k2             4-
          0:             Ma                                                                                                                                                                                     0:            Ma
  W                           y3                                                                                                                                                                        W            M             y3
               Ma
                                  0                                                                                                                                                                                     ay             0
                                                                                                                                            Small Business Revenue and County PPPE (Round #1)




    ee                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ratio Hours Worked over Time and ZIP PPPE (Round #1)




                    y3                                                                                                                                                                                        k2            31
        k2               1-                                                                                                                                                                                                     -Ju
 W           1:
                 Ju
                            Ju
                                n6                                                                                                                                                                     W           1:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ju            n6
   ee                                                                                                                                                                                                    ee               n7
      k2            n7                                                                                                                                                                                      k2
          2:             -Ju                                                                                                                                                                                    2:            -Ju
 W             Ju             n1                                                                                                                                                                       W             Ju            n1
   ee             n1              3                                                                                                                                                                      ee             n1             3
      k2               4-                                                                                                                                                                                   k2              4-
          3:               Ju                                                                                                                                                                                   3:              Ju
               Ju             n2                                                                                                                                                                                     Ju            n2
   W              n               0                                                                                                                                                                      W              n              0
      ee            21                                                                                                                                                                                      ee            21
         k2              -Ju                                                                                                                                                                                   k2             -Ju
              4:              n2                                                                                                                                                                                    4:             n2
                  Ju              7                                                                                                                                                                                     Ju             7
                      n2                                                                                                                                                                                                   n2
                           8-                                                                                                                                                                                                   8-
                              Ju                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ju
                                 l4                                                                                                                                                                                                   l4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure 9 shows the ratio of hours worked over time, the percent of businesses shut down, initial unemployment filings and small business revenue by above and below PPPE exposure. Data is from
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Figure 10: Weekly Elasticities of Employment and Firm Outcomes to PPPE
                                                            Figure 10 plots coefficients and respective standard errors of regression analyses investigating the impact of exposure to PPPE on differences on employment and firm outcomes defined as the
                                                            difference between these outcomes in each week relative to the average of these variables in the two weeks that preceded the launch of PPP (weeks 10 and 11). The top-left figure plots the
                                                            estimated coefficients, β, and respective standard errors of ∆Shut d ownis j = αs j + β Z ip P P P Ei + Γ X ist + εist , where ∆Shut d ownis j is the difference between the shutdown indicator of firm i in
                                                            each week and the average shutdown indicator of the same firm during the two weeks prior to the launch of PPP, Z ip P P P Ei is the average exposure of the zip to bank PPPE, αs j are state-by-industry
                                                            fixed effects and X is j are additional control variables. The top-right figure plots coefficients and respective standard errors of similar week-by-week regressions that use the change in the decline
                                                            in hours worked relative to January as the dependent variable. The bottom-left figure plots coefficients and respective standard errors of similar week-by-week regressions that use changes in
                                                            the ratio between the initial unemployment filings and total employment at the county level and the bottom-right figure plots the coefficients and respective standard errors of a similar empirical
                                                            specification that uses the changes in average small business revenues of small businesses within a 3-digit NAICS industry and county. Data is from SBA, Homebase, County Business Patterns, state
                                                            labor departments, and Womply.

                                                                                                                                                                  Weekly Coefficients of Business Shutdowns and Zip PPPE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Weekly Coefficients of Decline in Hours Worked and Zip PPPE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      State-Industry Fixed Effects                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  State-Industry Fixed Effects
                                                                                    .04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .08
                                                                                                                                                                            PPP Runs out of Funds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PPP 2nd Round begins




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PPP Runs out of Funds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PPP 2nd Round begins
                                                                                                                          PPP Launch




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PPP Launch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Vertical bands represent +/- 1.96 * St. Error of each point estimate
                                                                                    .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .04
                                                                             Beta




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Beta
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .02
                                                                                    0
                                 56




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vertical bands represent +/- 1.96 * St. Error of each point estimate
                                                                                    -.02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.02
                                                                                                 r28



                                                                                                                   pr4



                                                                                                                                                       1



                                                                                                                                                                      8



                                                                                                                                                                                                             5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              16



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              23



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              30



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          27


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ul4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r28



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pr4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      16



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      23



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      30



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    27


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ul4
                                                                                                                                                    pr1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pr1
                                                                                                                                                                  pr1



                                                                                                                                                                                                    pr2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          pr1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  pr2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8-J




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                8-J
                                                                                                  a


                                                                                                              9-A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                a


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9-A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -Ju
                                                                                                                                             -A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -A
                                                                                               -M




                                                                                                                                                                 -A



                                                                                                                                                                                                    -A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -A



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4-M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                7-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4-M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1-J




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1-J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            y3
                                                                                                                                r5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r5
                                                                                                              r2




                                                                                                                                                             r12



                                                                                                                                                                                             r19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r12



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                y3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n7
                                                                                        r22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n2
                                                                                                                             Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ju
                                                                                                           Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                y1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               y1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               y2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ma
                                                                                                                                                            Ap



                                                                                                                                                                            Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ap



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ap
                                                                                     Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ju



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ju



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ma



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ma



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ma
                                                                                                                          2:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5:
                                                                                                        1:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1:
                                                                                                                                                           3:



                                                                                                                                                                         4:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3:
                                                                                                                     k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    k1
                                                                                   0:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0:
                                                                                                      k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           7:
                                                                                                                                                      k1



                                                                                                                                                                       k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 9:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          9:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                                                                              k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k1
                                                                                                                      e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                        e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    We
                                                                                                   e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                                   We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We
                                                                                                                                                       e



                                                                                                                                                                     e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                     We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  We
                                                                                                We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              We
                                                                                                                                                    We



                                                                                                                                                                  We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          We
                                                                               e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                            We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Year                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Year



                                                                                                                                                     Weekly Coefficients of Initial Unemployment Claims and County PPPE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Weekly Coefficients of Small Business Revenue and County PPPE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  State Fixed Effects                                                                                                                 .1                                                                                                                                                                                            State-Industry Fixed Effects
                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                     PPP Runs out of Funds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PPP 2nd Round begins
                                                                                                                                       PPP Launch
                                                                                    .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PPP Runs out of Funds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PPP 2nd Round begins
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PPP Launch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .05
                                                                                    .1
                                                                             Beta




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Beta
                                                                                    .05




cal bands represent +/- 1.96 * St. Error of each point estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                    0
                                                                                    -.1 -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Vertical bands represent +/- 1.96 * St. Error of each point estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.05
                                                                                                    8



                                                                                                                    pr4



                                                                                                                                                           r11




                                                                                                                                                                                           8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 16



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   23



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    30



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  8


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               pr4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r11



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                16



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                23



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   27
                                                                                                ar2




                                                                                                                                                                          pr1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  pr2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ar2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pr1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    pr2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 un
                                                                                                                                                      Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ap
                                                                                                                   -A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -Ju
                                                                                               -M




                                                                                                                                                                        -A



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -A



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            7-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4-M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4-M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4-J




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1-J
                                                                                                               r29




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r29
                                                                                                                                                     r5-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r26



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        y3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r26



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y3
                                                                                                                                                                      r12



                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       r12



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  r19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                y3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            y3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n7
                                                                                        r22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          r22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  n1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n2
                                                                                                                                                    Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ma
                                                                                                             Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           y1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        y1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ma
                                                                                                                                                                   Ap



                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ap



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ap
                                                                                     Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ju



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ma



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ma



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ma
                                                                                                                                         2:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   6:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5:
                                                                                                          1:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1:
                                                                                                                                                                  3:



                                                                                                                                                                                                     4:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           0:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3:
                                                                                                                               k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          k1
                                                                                   0:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0:
                                                                                                        k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7:
                                                                                                                                                                 k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                    k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    9:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k2
                                                                              k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k1
                                                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                       e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e
                                                                                                                        We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We
                                                                                                                                                              e



                                                                                                                                                                                          e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We
                                                                                                    We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                We
                                                                                                                                                           We



                                                                                                                                                                                       We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             We
                                                                               e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e
                                                                            We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Year                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Year
                                                                                                    57




                                                                                                                                                                                 Patterns.
               We
                  e  k1                                                 % Businesses Shutdown
                          :J
                              an                           0               .1                                         .2   .3
                  We               19
                     e   k2             -J
                                             an
                              :J                  25
                  We              an
                     e                 26
                         k3                 -Fe
                              :F                 b1
                  We               eb
                     e                 02
                         k4                 -Fe
                              :F                  b8
                We                 eb
                   e  k5               9-F
                          :F                 eb
                We             eb                 15
                   e                16
                      k6                -Fe
                          :F                   b2
                               eb                 2
                   We               23
                      e   k7
                                        -Fe
                                               b2
                 We            :M            9
                    e               ar1




                                                                                  Week 16 PPP
                                                                                                    Week 12 PPP
                        k8             -M
               We         : M             ar7
                  e k9
                                ar8
                                     -M
                        : M              ar1
             We               ar1            4
                 ek               5-M
                    10
                        : M              ar2
              We              ar2            1
                   ek             2-M
                       11                ar2
                We
                           : M
                                ar2          8
                    ek               9-A
                         12               pr4
              We             :A
                  ek            pr5
                      13              -Ap
              We          :A               r11
                               pr1
                  ek               2-A
                      14                 pr1
                          :A                 8
               We              pr1
                   ek              9-A




Event Time
                       15                pr2
                            :A               5
               We              pr2
                    ek              6-M
                        16                ay
             We
                ek
                            :M               2
                                ay
                    17              3 -M
                        :M                ay
             We
                ek           ay
                                10           9
                   18               -M
                      :M                 ay
             We             ay              16
                ek              17
                   19               -M
                      :M                 ay
                                                                                                                                % Businesses Shutdown by PPP Week group




              We            ay              23
                  ek            24
                     20             -M
                          :M             ay
                                            30
               We              ay
                   ek              31
                        21              -Ju
              We            :J              n6
                  ek           un
                                   7-J
                     22                  un
                          :J                13
              We              un
                  ek             1 4-J
                     23                  un
                          :J                20
              We              un
                  ek             21
                     24              -Ju
                          :J              n2
                              un             7
                                 28
                                     -Ju
                                          n3
                                             0




                  We
                     e   k1                                    % Decline in Hours Worked relative to January
                             :J
                                  an                       .4               .6                                        .8   1
                     We              19
                        e   k2              -J
                                               an
                                :J                  25
                    We               an
                       e                 26
                           k3                 -Fe
                                :F                  b1
                    We               eb
                       e                  02
                           k4                  -Fe
                                :F                  b8
                   We                eb
                      e  k5               9-F
                               :F                eb
                   We              eb               15
                      e                 16
                         k6                 -Fe
                               :F                 b2
                                   eb                  2
                      We                23
                         e    k7
                                            -Fe
                                                  b2
                   We              :M         9
                      e                 ar1
                                                                                      Week 16 PPP
                                                                                                        Week 12 PPP




                          k8            -M
                  We        : M            ar7
                     ek9
                                  ar8
                                      -M
                          : M            ar1
               We               ar1           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Figure 11: PPPE and Individual Outcomes




                   ek               5-M
                      10
                          : M            ar2
                We              ar2           1
                     ek             2-M
                         11              ar2
                  We
                             : M
                                  ar2         8
                      ek              9-A
                           12              pr4
                We             :A
                    ek            pr5
                        13             -A
                            :A            pr1
                We               pr1          1
                    ek               2-A
                        14               pr1
                            :A               8
                 We              pr1
                     ek              9-A
Event Time




                         15              pr2
                              :A             5
                 We              pr2
                      ek             6-M
                          16               ay
               We
                  ek
                              :M              2
                                  ay
                      17             3-M
                          :M               ay
               We
                  ek           ay
                                  10          9
                     18              -M
                        :M               ay
               We             ay            16
                  ek              17
                     19              -M
                        :M               ay
                We            ay            23
                    ek            24
                                     -M
                                                                                                                                Ratio Hours Worked over Time by PPP Week group




                       20                ay
                            :M              30
                 We              ay
                     ek             3 1-J
                          21              un
                We            :J
                                 u            6
                    ek             n7
                       22             -Ju
                            :J            n1
                We              un           3
                    ek             14
                       23             -Ju
                            :J            n2
                We              un           0
                    ek             21
                       24             -Ju
                            :J            n2
                                un           7
                                   28
                                      -Ju
                                          n3
                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                 firms that received PPP approval in week 12 or earlier and the green line represents firms that received PPP approval in week 16 or later. Data is from SBA, Homebase, and. County Business
                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 11 shows the percent of businesses shut down and the ratio of hours worked over time for firms in the Homebase sample that are name-matched to the PPP dataset. The red line represents
                                                                                                                                               Figure 12: Weekly Elasticities of Employment and Firm Outcomes to PPPE
     Figure 12 plots coefficients and respective standard errors of regression analyses using the sample of firms in Homebase that we name-matched to the PPP data set. The regressions investigate the
     impact of delays in receiving PPP on differences in employment and firm outcomes defined as the difference between these outcomes in each week relative to the average of these variables in the
     two weeks that preceded the launch of PPP. The top left figure repeats the specification of column (1) of Table 7 Panel A for every week in the sample. The top right figure repeats the specification
     of column (1) of Table 7 Panel B for every week in the sample. The bottom left figure repeats the specification of column (3) of Table 7 Panel A for every week in the sample. The bottom right
     figure repeats the specification of column (3) of Table 7 Panel B for every week in the sample. Data is from SBA and Homebase

                                                                                        Weekly Coefficients of Business Shutdowns and Week PPP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Weekly Coefficients of Decline in Hours Worked and Week PPP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Industry Fixed Effects                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Industry Fixed Effects
                            .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .03
                            .03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.01
                     Beta




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Beta
                            .01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PPP Runs out of Funds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PPP 2nd Round begins
                            -.01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.03



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PPP Launch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Vertical bands represent +/- 1.96 * St. Error of each point estimate
                            -.03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.05
                                      r28



                                                    pr4



                                                                              1



                                                                                            8



                                                                                                                                                    5



                                                                                                                                                                   2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     23



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             27


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ul4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r28



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pr4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         23



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 27


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ul4
58




                                                                           pr1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pr1
                                                                                        pr1



                                                                                                                                                pr2



                                                                                                                                                                ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     pr1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pr2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8-J




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8-J
                                      a


                                                 9-A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9-A
                                                                                                                                                             6-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -Ju
                                                                          -A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -A
                                   -M




                                                                                       -A



                                                                                                                                               -A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -A



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4-M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4-M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1-J




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1-J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y3
                                                                  r5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               r5
                                               r2




                                                                                      r12



                                                                                                                                    r19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r12



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              y3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  y3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n7
                                r22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r22
                                                                                                                                                           r2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n2
                                                               Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ju
                                            Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               y1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              y1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  y1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 y2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ju
                                                                                                                                                        Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ma
                                                                                  Ap



                                                                                                  Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ap



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ap
                            Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ju



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ju



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ma



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ma



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ma
                                                            2:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2:
                                                                                                                                                                                                              6:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1:
                                                                                                                                                        5:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5:
                                            1:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1:
                                                                                  3:



                                                                                               4:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3:
                                                         k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k1
                                                                                                                                                                        k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k2
                                                                                                                                                      k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k1
                           0:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0:
                                          k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7:
                                                                                 k1



                                                                                              k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                      k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k1
                                                       e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k1
                                                                                                                                                                   e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k1
                                                                                                                                                   e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We
                                       e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                    We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We
                                                                              e



                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                                                We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We
                                    We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We
                                                                           We



                                                                                        We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     We
                       e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e
                    We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Year                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Year



                                                                                      Weekly Coefficients of Business Shutdowns and Week PPP (IV)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Weekly Coefficients of Decline in Hours Worked and Week PPP (IV)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Industry Fixed Effects                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Industry Fixed Effects
                            .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Vertical bands represent +/- 1.96 * St. Error of each point estimate




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .05
                            .1
                            .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                     Beta




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Beta
                                                                                                  PPP Runs out of FundsPPP Runs out of Funds




                                                                                                                                                                   PPP 2nd Round beginsPPP 2nd Round begins




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.05
                                                            PPP Launch
                            0
                            -.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PPP Runs out of Funds




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PPP 2nd Round begins
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.1
                                                            PPP Launch




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PPP Launch




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Vertical bands represent +/- 1.96 * St. Error of each point estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.15
                            -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Vertical bands represent +/- 1.96 * St. Error of each point estimate
                                      r28



                                                       r4


                                                                            r11


                                                                                            r18



                                                                                                                                                 r25



                                                                                                                                                                 y2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     16



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     23



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             27


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ul4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r28



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    r4


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r11


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r18



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         r25



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         y2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         23



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 27


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ul4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                n1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n1
                                                     p




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  p
                                                                                                                                                                a




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            un




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ay



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   un



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                un
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8-J




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8-J
                                                                            Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ap
                                      a


                                                  -A




                                                                                          p



                                                                                                                                                  p




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       p



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          p
                                                                                                                                                             -M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -Ju
                                   -M




                                                                                       -A



                                                                                                                                               -A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -A



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4-M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7-M



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4-M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1-J




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4-J



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1-J
                                                 r29




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r29
                                                                         r5-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r5-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      n2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n2
                                                                                                                                                           r26



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r26



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       y3
                                                                                      r12



                                                                                                                                    r19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   r12



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                r19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              y3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  y3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               n7
                                r22




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             r22
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          n1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       n2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           n2
                                                               Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ju
                                            Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               y1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              y1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   y1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  y1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 y2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ju
                                                                                                                                                        Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ma
                                                                                  Ap



                                                                                                  Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ap



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ap
                            Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ju



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ju



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ju
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ma
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ma



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ma



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ma
                                                            2:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2:
                                                                                                                                                                                                              6:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1:
                                                                                                                                                        5:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5:
                                            1:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1:
                                                                                  3:



                                                                                               4:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            4:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3:
                                                         k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      k1
                                                                                                                                                                        k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k2
                                                                                                                                                      k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k1
                           0:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0:
                                          k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          7:




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7:
                                                                                 k1



                                                                                              k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           k1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         8:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8:



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            9:


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k2



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                      k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   k1
                                                       e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            k1
                                                                                                                                                                   e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     k1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         k1
                                                                                                                                                   e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We
                                       e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                    We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We
                                                                              e



                                                                                           e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e
                                                                                                                                                                We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         e


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                                                                We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We
                                    We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We
                                                                           We



                                                                                        We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     We
                       e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  e




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        e



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      e
                    We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               We




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     We



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   We
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Year                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Year
                                                                   Table 1: Top 20 Banks by Total Assets and PPPE
     Table 1 reports individual bank statistics and the PPPE index for the 20 largest financial institutions in the United States. Total Assets is computed using information from fourth quarter 2019 call
     reports. Share of total vol. PPP program is the total amount disbursed by each financial institution relative to the total amount disbursed under the first wave of the PPP. Share of SBL market is the
     share of the total outstanding amount of small business loans held by each financial institution relative to the total outstanding amount of small business loans as of 2019:Q4. PPPE (volume) is
     the volume-based bank PPP index. Total assets are in $ millions. Share of loans in PPP program is the total number of loans processed by each financial institution relative to the total number of
     loans processed in the first wave of the PPP. Share of loans in SBL market is the share of the total number of outstanding small business loans held by each financial institution relative to the total
     outstanding number of small business loans as of 2019:Q4. PPPE (Nbr. Loans) is the number-based bank PPP index.




                                                                                               (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)
                                  Financial Institution Name                                  Total        Share      Share        PPPE         Share       Share       PPPE
                                                                                              Assets      of total    of SBL       (vol.)     of loans    of loans      (Nbr.
                                                                                                            vol.      Market                   in PPP      in SBL      Loans)
                                                                                                            PPP                                           Market

                                  JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION                  2,337,707    3.892%      6.547%       -0.127     1.432%      10.47%       -0.380
                                  BANK OF AMERICA, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION                      1,866,841    1.199%      9.510%       -0.388     .5565%      11.86%       -0.455
                                  WELLS FARGO BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION                     1,736,928    .0362%      6.502%       -0.494     .0664%      4.308%       -0.485
59




                                  CITIBANK, N.A.                                             1,453,998    .3348%      2.121%       -0.364     .4431%      9.729%       -0.456
                                  U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION                             486,004      .6953%      3.327%       -0.327     1.120%      5.643%       -0.334
                                  TRUIST BANK                                                461,256      3.160%      2.011%        0.111     2.078%      1.732%        0.045
                                  CAPITAL ONE, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION                          453,626      .0212%      2.822%       -0.493     .0134%      10.38%       -0.499
                                  PNC BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION                             397,703      2.765%      1.124%        0.211     1.235%      1.373%       -0.027
                                  BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON, THE                               342,225        0%        .0024%       -0.500       0%        .0001%       -0.500
                                  TD BANK, N.A.                                              338,272      1.837%      .6876%        0.228     1.698%      .5698%        0.249
                                  STATE STREET BANK AND TRUST COMPANY                        242,148        0%          0%          0.000       0%        4.493%       -0.500
                                  CHARLES SCHWAB BANK                                        236,995        0%        .0745%       -0.500       0%        .0039%       -0.500
                                  MORGAN STANLEY BANK, N.A.                                  229,681        0%        .1445%       -0.500       0%        .0089%       -0.500
                                  GOLDMAN SACHS BANK USA                                     228,836        0%        .0032%       -0.500       0%        .0001%       -0.500
                                  HSBC BANK USA, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION                        172,888      .1411%      .0845%        0.125     .0697%      .0140%        0.332
                                  FIFTH THIRD BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION                     167,845      .9991%      .4589%       0.185      .5948%      .1920%        0.256
                                  ALLY BANK                                                  167,492      .2639%      2.118%       -0.389     .0631%      1.382%       -0.456
                                  CITIZENS BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION                        165,742      1.072%      .8077%        0.070     1.148%      .5274%        0.185
                                  KEYBANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION                               143,390      2.370%      .7295%        0.265     2.236%      .2743%        0.391
                                  BMO HARRIS BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION                       137,588      1.385%      1.959%       -0.086     .7133%      .5413%        0.069

                                  ALL OTHER BANKS                                            6,889,908 79.82%         58.96%       -0.048     86.52%      40.97%        0.218
                                           Table 2: Correlates of PPPE Exposure

Table 2 presents bivariate regressions of PPPE Exposure on ZIP-level observables. PPPE is residualized with respect to state dummies. Variables
have been normalized, so the coefficients can be interpreted as a one-standard deviation change in x produces a β-standard deviation change
in PPPE exposure, where β is the reported coefficient. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                                            LHS is Residual PPPE as of Week 14

                                                                            Coefficient     R2            N

                                 Exposure Correlates:
                                   Share of Top 4 Banks                     -0.061***     0.1712       35882
                                                                             (0.001)
                                   Number of Branches per Capita            -0.004***     0.0006       29545
                                                                             (0.000)
                                   Share of Small Banks Deposits            0.046***      0.0999       35830
                                                                             (0.001)
                                   Share of Approved SBA Lenders            -0.008***     0.0033       35882
                                                                             (0.001)
                                 Controls:
                                   Log(Population)                          -0.032***     0.0396       29545
                                                                              (0.001)
                                   Log(Population Density)                  -0.047***     0.0789       29545
                                                                              (0.001)
                                   Social Distancing                         0.027***     0.0263       35549
                                                                              (0.001)
                                   Covid Cases per Capita                   -0.025***     0.0318       35870
                                                                              (0.001)
                                   Deaths per Capita                        -0.018***     0.0152       35870
                                                                              (0.000)
                                   Unemployment Filing Ratios                  0.001      0.0000       24576
                                                                              (0.001)
                                   Revenue Change of Small Business         -0.028***     0.0347       35706
                                                                              (0.001)




                                                                       60
                                          Table 3: ZIP PPPE and PPP Allocation

Table 3 shows the correlation between PPPE and the fraction of businesses receiving PPP loans in the first and second rounds of the program.
The dependent variables, % Est. PPP (Round #1) and % Est. PPP (Round #1 +#2) are the ratios between the number of businesses within a zip
and 2-digit NAICS industry that received PPP in the first and in the first and second round, respectively, and the total number of establishments
in that same zip and 2-digit NAICS industry according to the County Business Patterns data. Zip PPPE (Round #1) is the weighted average
of bank PPPE during the first round at the zip-level. The weights are defined by the share of branches of each bank within 10 miles of the
center of the respective zip. Zip PPPE (Rounds #1 + #2) is the weighted average of bank PPPE during the entire program at the zip-level.
The weights are defined by the share of branches of each bank within 10 miles of the center of the respective zip. Standard errors are
presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%
levels, respectively.



                                              (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)                (5)             (6)
                                           % Est. PPP (Round #1)       % Est. PPP (Round #1 + #2)         % Est. PPP (Round #1 + #2)
        Zip PPPE (Round #1)                0.102∗∗∗     0.106∗∗∗        0.009          0.013
                                           (0.010)      (0.010)        (0.020)        (0.020)
        Zip PPPE (Rounds #1 + #2)                                                                         0.045∗           0.045∗
                                                                                                          (0.026)          (0.025)
        Observations                        251984        239872       251984           239872            251984           239872
        Adjusted R2                          0.241         0.355        0.330            0.510             0.330            0.510
        County Fixed Effects                  Yes           No           Yes              No                Yes              No
        Industry Fixed Effects                Yes           No           Yes              No                Yes              No
        County×Industry Fixed Effects         No            Yes          No               Yes               No               Yes




                                                                      61
                                                Table 4: ZIP PPPE in Round #1 and PPP Allocation by Source of Funding

     Table 4 shows the correlation between PPPE and the fraction of businesses receiving PPP loans from different sources in the first and second rounds of the program. The dependent variables
     in columns (1) of both Panels, % Est. PPP, represent the fraction of establishments within a zip and 2-digit NAICS industry that received PPP in the first round (Panel A) and the fraction of
     establishments within a zip and 2-digit NAICS industry that received PPP in the entire program (Panel B). The remaining dependent variables represent a decomposition of the dependent variable
     in colums (1) into the fraction of establishments within a zip and 2-digit NAICS industry that received PPP from local banks, non-local banks, credit unions, Fintech companies, and other non-banks.
     Zip PPPE (Round #1) is the weighted average of bank PPPE during the first round at the zip-level. The weights are defined by the share of branches of each bank within 10 miles of the center of
     the respective zip. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                                                     Panel A: Allocation during Round #1
                                                          (1)                  (2)                         (3)                      (4)                   (5)                       (6)
                                                      % Est. PPP     % Est. PPP - Local Bks     % Est. PPP Non-Local Bks      % Est. PPP CUs      % Est. PPP FinTech      % Est. PPP NonBanks
                  Zip PPPE (Round #1)                  0.106∗∗∗             0.141∗∗∗                    -0.022∗∗                -0.006∗∗∗             -0.005∗∗∗                   -0.002
                                                       (0.010)              (0.014)                      (0.008)                 (0.002)               (0.001)                   (0.001)
62




                  Observations                         239872               239872                       239872                  239872                239872                    239872
                  Adjusted R2                           0.355                0.306                        0.216                   0.236                  0.172                     0.159
                  County×Industry Fixed Effects           Yes                  Yes                         Yes                      Yes                   Yes                       Yes




                                                                                      Panel B: Allocation Entire Program
                                                         (1)                   (2)                         (3)                      (4)                   (5)                       (6)
                                                      % Est. PPP     % Est. PPP - Local Bks     % Est. PPP Non-Local Bks      % Est. PPP CUs      % Est. PPP FinTech      % Est. PPP NonBanks
                  Zip PPPE (Round #1)                   0.013               0.114∗∗∗                    -0.048∗∗                -0.018∗∗∗             -0.027∗∗∗                  -0.009∗∗
                                                       (0.020)              (0.030)                      (0.019)                 (0.004)               (0.005)                   (0.004)
                  Observations                         239872               239872                       239872                  239872                239872                    239872
                  Adjusted R2                           0.510                0.517                        0.257                   0.320                  0.183                    0.214
                  County×Industry Fixed Effects          Yes                   Yes                         Yes                      Yes                   Yes                       Yes
                                           Table 5: Evolution of Homebase Employment Outcomes and Exposure to PPP

     Table 5 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first round and the difference between a
     firm’s average employment outcomes in the two weeks prior to the launch of PPP and the firm’s outcomes in each of the following weeks. The dependent variable in Panel A, ∆ Bus. Shutdown,
     is the difference between the firm’s shutdown status in a week and its average shutdown status in weeks 10 and 11. Bus. Shutdown is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the
     business reported zero hours worked over the entire week. The dependent variable in Panel B, ∆ Hours Worked, is the difference in the ratio of hours worked in each establishment in a week and
     the average ratio of hours worked in that establishment in weeks 10 and 11. The ratio of hours worked in each establishment is measured as the hours worked in that week relative to the hours
     worked in that same establishment during the last two weeks of January. Zip PPPE (Round #1) is the weighted average of bank PPPE during the first round at the zip-level. The weights are defined
     by the share of branches of each bank within 10 miles of the center of the respective zip. I(Month=April) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of
     April starting with the week of April 5th to April 12th and ending in April 26th – May 2nd (inclusive), I(Month=May) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the
     month of May starting with the week of May 3rd to May 9th and ending in the week of May 24th to May 30th (inclusive), I(Month=June) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the
     weeks that span the month of June starting with the week of May 31st to June 6th and ending in the week of June 28th (inclusive); Other control variables include interactions between the social
     distance index, Covid cases per capita and Deaths per capita measured as of week 9 interacted with the indicator variables for the months of April, May, and June, Standard errors are presented
     in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                                                    Panel A: Business Shutdowns
                                                                                                       (1)      (2)       (3)               (4)
                                                                                                              ∆ Bus. Shutdown
                                                           Zip PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=April)      0.001     0.002    0.001               0.002
                                                                                                    (0.004)  (0.003)   (0.004)            (0.003)
63




                                                           Zip PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=May)        -0.000   -0.001    -0.000             -0.001
                                                                                                    (0.004)  (0.004)   (0.004)            (0.004)
                                                           Zip PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=June)       0.005     0.001    0.005               0.001
                                                                                                    (0.005)  (0.004)   (0.005)            (0.004)
                                                           Observations                             534690   534690    534690             534690
                                                           Adjusted R2                                0.062    0.062     0.513              0.513
                                                           State×Industry×Week Fixed Effects           Yes      Yes       Yes                Yes
                                                           Other Control Variables                     No       Yes       No                 Yes
                                                           Firm Fixed Effects                          No       No        Yes                Yes




                                                                                     Panel B: Ratio Hours Worked
                                                                                                      (1)        (2)        (3)              (4)
                                                                                                                ∆ Hours Worked
                                                          Zip PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=April)       0.002     0.003      0.002             0.003
                                                                                                    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)           (0.002)
                                                          Zip PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=May)       0.021∗∗∗   0.019∗∗∗   0.021∗∗∗          0.019∗∗∗
                                                                                                    (0.004)   (0.005)    (0.004)           (0.005)
                                                          Zip PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=June)      0.032∗∗∗   0.029∗∗∗   0.032∗∗∗          0.029∗∗∗
                                                                                                    (0.006)   (0.006)    (0.006)           (0.006)
                                                          Observations                              534690    534690     534690            534690
                                                          Adjusted R2                                0.158     0.159      0.569             0.570
                                                          State×Industry×Week Fixed Effects           Yes        Yes        Yes               Yes
                                                          Other Control Variables                     No         Yes        No                Yes
                                                          Firm Fixed Effects                          No         No         Yes               Yes
   Table 6: Evolution of County Unemployment, Small Business Revenues and Employment

Table 6 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds
during the first round and county level unemployment files, business revenue at the county by industry level and county-level employment.
The dependent variable in the top panel, ∆ County Initial UI Filings Ratio, is the difference between the initial county unemployment filings
during a week and the average initial unemployment filings in the county in weeks 10 and 11. The dependent variable in the middle panel is
∆ Employment, is the difference between county employment in a week and employment in weeks 10 and 11. The county-level employment
data is from Opportunity Insights. The dependent variable in the bottom panel, ∆ Y/Y Change in Total Consumer Spending, is the difference
between the average change in small business revenue of all establishments of a county operating within a 6-digit NAICS industry and the
average change in small business revenue in weeks 10 and 11. County PPPE (Round #1) is the weighted average of the PPPE based on the
number of outstanding loans, weighted by the share of branches of each bank in each county. I(Month=April) is an indicator variable that
takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of April starting with the week of April 5th to April 12th and ending in April 26th –
May 2nd (inclusive), I(Month=May) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of May starting with
the week of May 3rd to May 9th and ending in the week of May 24th to May 30th (inclusive), I(Month=June) is an indicator variable that
takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of June starting with the week of May 31st to June 6th and ending in the week of
June 28th (inclusive); Other control variables include interactions between the social distance index, Covid cases per capita and Deaths per
capita measured as of week 9 interacted with the indicator variables for the months of April, May, and June, Standard errors are presented in
parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                               (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)
                                                                                   ∆ County Initial UI Filings Ratio
                         County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=April)              0.015      0.020        0.013        0.020
                                                                             (0.023)    (0.021)      (0.023)      (0.021)
                         County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=May)                0.041      0.044        0.039        0.042
                                                                             (0.040)    (0.040)      (0.039)      (0.040)
                         County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=June)               0.083      0.085        0.070        0.071
                                                                             (0.056)    (0.057)      (0.050)      (0.052)
                         Observations                                         29567      28397        29566        28396
                         Adjusted R2                                          0.655      0.663        0.876        0.879
                         Other Control Variables                               No         Yes           No           Yes
                         State×Week Fixed Effects                              Yes        Yes           Yes          Yes
                         County Fixed Effects                                  No         No            Yes          Yes

                                                                                            ∆ Employment
                         County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=April)            0.012∗∗∗     0.007∗∗   0.006∗∗∗       0.005∗∗
                                                                            (0.003)      (0.004)    (0.002)       (0.002)
                         County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=May)              0.013∗∗∗     0.010∗∗∗  0.008∗∗∗       0.008∗∗∗
                                                                            (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.003)       (0.003)
                         County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=June)             0.011∗∗      0.010∗∗     0.006         0.007∗
                                                                            (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.004)       (0.004)
                         Observations                                        17584        17584      17584         17584
                         Adjusted R2                                         0.248        0.255      0.834         0.835
                         Other Control Variables                               No           Yes       No             Yes
                         State×Week Fixed Effects                              Yes          Yes       Yes            Yes
                         County Fixed Effects                                  No           No        Yes            Yes

                                                                            ∆ Y/Y Change in Total Consumer Spending
                         County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=April)            0.008∗∗    0.005       0.007∗    0.005
                                                                            (0.003)   (0.004)     (0.004)   (0.004)
                         County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=May)              0.031∗∗∗  0.018∗      0.030∗∗∗   0.017
                                                                            (0.009)   (0.011)     (0.009)   (0.011)
                         County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=June)             0.037∗∗∗  0.024∗      0.036∗∗∗   0.023∗
                                                                            (0.008)   (0.012)     (0.008)   (0.012)
                         Observations                                       191310    179019      191310    179019
                         Adjusted R2                                         0.162     0.171       0.472     0.462
                         Other Control Variables                               No       Yes          No        Yes
                         State×Week×Industry Fixed Effects                     Yes      Yes          Yes       Yes
                         County×Industry Fixed Effects                         No       No           Yes       Yes




                                                                        64
          Table 7: Evolution of Homebase Employment - Homebase-PPP matched sample

Table 7 presents the results from the individual matched sample. The dependent variable in Panel A, ∆ Bus. Shutdown, is the difference
between the firm’s shutdown status in week 16 (May 3rd–May 9th) and its average shutdown status in weeks 10 and 11. Bus. Shutdown is
an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the business reported zero hours worked over the entire week. The dependent variable
in Panel B, ∆ Hours Worked, is the change in hours worked in each establishment between the average of the last two weeks prior to the
launch of PPP and the hours worked in week 16 (May 3rd–May 9th). Week PPP is a variable representing the week in which the firm received
PPP approval. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                              Panel A: Business Shutdowns
                                                           (1)       (2)      (3)       (4)
                                                               OLS                 IV
                                                                     ∆ Shutdown
                         WeekPPP                        0.013∗∗∗    0.009   0.024     0.107
                                                        (0.005) (0.006) (0.027) (0.088)
                         Observations                     1176       840     1176      840
                         Adjusted R2                     0.021      0.034   -0.055    -0.249
                         F-Stat                                             89.286    8.554
                         Industry Fixed Effects            Yes       No       Yes       No
                         State×Industry Fixed Effects      No        Yes      No        Yes




                                              Panel B: Ratio Hours Worked
                                                          (1)         (2)        (3)                           (4)
                                                                OLS                   IV
                                                                     ∆ Hours Worked
                       WeekPPP                         -0.014∗∗∗ -0.012∗∗∗ -0.043∗∗∗                        -0.102∗
                                                        (0.003)     (0.004)   (0.015)                       (0.054)
                       Observations                      1176         840       1176                          840
                       Adjusted R2                       0.001       0.100     -0.091                        -0.390
                       F-Stat                                                 89.286                         8.554
                       Industry Fixed Effects             Yes         No         Yes                           No
                       State×Industry Fixed Effects       No          Yes        No                            Yes




                                                                     65
                                                        Table 8: % Receiving PPP, Missed Payments and Cash-on-Hand

     Table 8 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) and instrumental variables (IV) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first
     round and outcomes from the Census Small Business Pulse Survey. The dependent variable in the top panel is the percentage of firms reporting a missed scheduled loan payment. The dependent
     variable in the middle panel is the percentage of firms reporting a missed other scheduled payment such as rent, utilities, and payroll. The dependent variable in the bottom panel is the fraction of
     businesses with cash on hand to sustain operations for two months or more. % PPP Received is the percentage of businesses reporting having received PPP funds in a state-by-industry group. State
     PPPE (Nbr.) is the state average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans. Pre-PPP Decline Hours Worked is the average decline in hours worked in each state between January and
     the last week of March. Pre-PPP State Covid-19 Cases (per capita) are per capita number of reported Covid-19 cases in the state. Pre-PPP State Covid-19 Deaths (per capita) are the weekly per capita
     number of reported Covid-19 deaths in the state. Pre-PPP State Social Distancing Index is the change in average distance travelled in the state until the end of March using individuals’ GPS signals.
     All specifications include industry×week fixed-effects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at
     1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                        (1)                                 (2)                               (3)                            (4)
                                                                        OLS                             Reduced Form                                              IV
                                                                                                                                        First-Stage                Second-Stage
                 Dep. Variable:                           % Missing Loan Payments               % Missing Loan Payments               % PPP Received          % Missing Loan Payments
                 %PPP Received                                     -0.005                                                                                             -0.149∗∗
                                                                  (0.014)                                                                                             (0.045)
                 State PPPE (Nbr.)                                                                         -4.401∗∗∗                      34.402∗∗∗
66




                                                                                                            (1.380)                        (3.055)
                 Observations                                          2218                                  2487                           2218                            2218
                 Adjusted R2                                           0.573                                 0.554                          0.664                          -0.064
                 FStat                                                                                                                                                     17.386

                 Dep. Variable:                          % Missing Schd. Payments               % Missing Schd. Payments              % PPP Received          % Missing Schd. Payments
                 %PPP Received                                   -0.091∗∗∗                                                                                            -0.435∗∗∗
                                                                  (0.022)                                                                                              (0.067)
                 State PPPE (Nbr.)                                                                        -14.807∗∗∗                      34.662∗∗∗
                                                                                                           (2.651)                         (3.053)
                 Observations                                          2206                                 2448                            2206                            2206
                 Adjusted R2                                           0.708                                0.698                           0.663                          -0.028
                 FStat                                                                                                                                                    128.871

                 Dep. Variable:                                % Cash 3 months                        % Cash 3 months                 % PPP Received                % Cash 3 months
                 %PPP Received                                      -0.000                                                                                               0.270∗
                                                                   (0.035)                                                                                              (0.125)
                 State PPPE (Nbr.)                                                                          8.920∗∗                       32.502∗∗∗
                                                                                                            (3.768)                        (3.116)
                 Observations                                           903                                   918                            903                            903
                 Adjusted R2                                           0.629                                 0.640                          0.797                          -0.089
                 FStat                                                                                                                                                     19.527
                 Controls                                                Yes                                   Yes                            Yes                            Yes
                 Industry×Week Fixed Effects                             Yes                                   Yes                            Yes                            Yes
                       Figure A.1: Wells Fargo Exposure and PPP per Establishment
Figure A.1 is a scatterplot of the number of PPP loans per establishment and the share of Branches of Wells Fargo in a county. Data comes
from the SBA, Summary of Deposits, and County Business Patterns. Some counties show a ratio of PPP loans per establishment greater than
one. It means that there are more PPP loans than businesses in these counties. Receiving more than one PPP loan is against PPP rules. In
these cases we recode the ratio to one.




                                                                  67
                                                                               Figure A.2: Kaplan-Meier Survival Functions
Figure A.2 plots Kaplan-Meier survival functions. The blue line represents the survival function for the group of firms located in zip codes
exposed to banks with low PPPE and the red line plots the survival function for the group of firms located in zip codes exposed to banks with
high PPPE. Data is obtained from the SBA and call reports.
                                       1.00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Low PPPE Zip

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            High PPPE Zip
    Survival Function (Kaplan-Meier)

                                       0.75
                                       0.50
                                       0.25
                                       0.00
                                               20


                                                           0

                                                                      20


                                                                               20


                                                                                           0

                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                               20


                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                                                                              0


                                                                                                                                                                         0


                                                                                                                                                                                   0

                                                                                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                                                                                         0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                          02




                                                                                           02




                                                                                                                                                 02


                                                                                                                                                             02


                                                                                                                                                                      02


                                                                                                                                                                                  02




                                                                                                                                                                                                       2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                               20




                                                                      20


                                                                               20




                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                              20


                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                                                                                    20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                          ,2




                                                                                        t, 2




                                                                                                                                               ,2

                                                                                                                                                         t, 2


                                                                                                                                                                    ,2

                                                                                                                                                                              t, 2
                                           st,




                                                                 th,


                                                                             th,




                                                                                                  th,


                                                                                                             st,


                                                                                                                        st,


                                                                                                                                     ,




                                                                                                                                                                                          ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                   th,


                                                                                                                                                                                                              th,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         th,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    th,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               th,
                                                     6th




                                                                                                                                 1th


                                                                                                                                              6th




                                                                                                                                                                   6th




                                                                                                                                                                                      5th
                                                                                       s




                                                                                                                                                         1s




                                                                                                                                                                              1s
                                         l1




                                                                                    21




                                                                                                         y1


                                                                                                                    y6
                                                               l 11


                                                                           16




                                                                                                26




                                                                                                                                                                                               10


                                                                                                                                                                                                           15


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   25


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                                                               y1




                                                                                                                                                     y2




                                                                                                                                                                          y3
                                                                                                                                          y1




                                                                                                                                                               y2
                                                    ril




                                                                                                                                                                                   ne
                                          ri




                                                                                                        Ma


                                                                                                                   Ma
                                                                                  ril
                                                                         ril




                                                                                             ril




                                                                                                                                                                                              ne


                                                                                                                                                                                                         ne


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ne


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ne


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ne
                                                              ri
                                       Ap

                                                 Ap




                                                                                                                              Ma




                                                                                                                                                    Ma




                                                                                                                                                                         Ma
                                                                                                                                         Ma




                                                                                                                                                              Ma




                                                                                                                                                                                   Ju
                                                           Ap




                                                                                Ap
                                                                       Ap




                                                                                           Ap




                                                                                                                                                                                          Ju


                                                                                                                                                                                                     Ju


                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ju


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ju


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ju




                                                                                                                         Date PPP Received




                                                                                                                                   68
                                         Figure A.3: Map of Exposure to PPPE
Figure A.3 plots the average exposure of each county to the number-based PPPE. County exposure to PPPE is computed as the average of the
PPPE of each bank with a branch presence in the county. The PPPE of each bank is weighted by the share of deposits of the bank in the county
as of June 30th, 2019. Data is from the SBA, Call Reports, and FDIC’s Summary of Deposits.


                                                        Panel A: County PPPE




                                                                                                                                   0.320 − 0.500
                                                                                                                                   0.218 − 0.320
                                                                                                                                   0.091 − 0.218
                                                                                                                                   -0.500 − 0.091
                                                                                                                                   No data




           Panel B: ZIP PPPE in Chicago                                    Panel C: Zip PPPE in New York City
                                                                                                                 -0.123 − -0.045
                                                                                                                 -0.129 − -0.123
                                                                                                                 -0.142 − -0.129
                                                                                                                 -0.191 − -0.142




   -0.009 − 0.079
   -0.034 − -0.009
   -0.055 − -0.034
   -0.125 − -0.055

                                                                    69
                                                                              Figure A.4: State Exposure to PPPE and PPP per Establishment
Figure A.4 are scatterplots of state exposure to the volume-based PPPE at the end of Round #1 of the PPP and the amount of PPP per small
business at the end of the first round of PPP (Panel A) and of state exposure to the volume-based PPPE at the end of Round #1 of the PPP
and the difference between the percentage of businesses reporting having applied to PPP and the percentage of business that received PPP in
each state (Panel B). Data comes from the Census Bureau Small Business Pulse Survey, SBA, Call Reports, Summary of Deposits, and County
Business Patterns.

                  Panel A: State Exposure to Volume-based PPPE and Amount of PPP per Small Business during Round#1

                                                                                                                                  ND
                                                                              60000




                                                                                                                                                                               HI
                                                                                                              MN
                                                                                                                                            WI
                   Amount PPP per Small Business in Round #1




                                                                                                                                              MA
                                                                                                                                             KS
                                                                                                                NE                              OH
                                                                                                                                                                     NH
                                                                              50000




                                                                                                                        IA        SD
                                                                                                                                       MO           IN
                                                                                                                                                   PA
                                                                                                                                                  OK
                                                                                                        DC          IL                                                    VT
                                                                                                                          LA AL                       RI             ME
                                                                                                                             TN                            MI
                                                                                                                           CTTX MDKY
                                                                                                                   UT
                                                                                                                                    DE
                                                                                                                             CO      MS
                                                                              40000




                                                                                                                         VA  AK
                                                                                                                            AR
                                                                                                                   ID WY
                                                                                                                      NJ
                                                                                                                       GA        MT
                                                                                                                                        WV
                                                                                                               WA
                                                                                                              NY
                                                                                                              SC
                                                                                                 CA                      NC
                                                                                                  AZ                          NM
                                                                                                       OR
                                                                              30000




                                                                                                                         FL
                                                                                            NV
                                                                                      -.2




                                                                                                        -.1




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                                                                                               State Vol. PPPE (Round #1)


             Panel B: State Exposure to Volume-Based PPPE and Difference between % Businesses Applying and Receiving PPP

                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                     NJ
                                                                              50
                   Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP




                                                                                                        DC               FL
                                                                                            NV         OR                GA
                                                                                                 AZ
                                                                                                              NY
                                                                                                                             CT
                                                                              40




                                                                                                               WA
                                                                                                                         NC NM
                                                                                                                                       MD MA RI
                                                                                                                             VATX           PA MI
                                                                                                                                            OH
                                                                                                              SC                                                               HI
                                                                                                                    IL   TN CO
                                                                              30




                                                                                                                   UT LA

                                                                                                                                    AK WVDE           IN
                                                                                                                                                                     NH
                                                                                                                                                 MS                       VT
                                                                                                                                            KY
                                                                                                                                            WI
                                                                              20




                                                                                                              MN                  AL
                                                                                                                ID
                                                                                                                     IA           SD MO                              ME
                                                                                                                                         KS
                                                                                                                                  AR        OK
                                                                                                                     WY           ND
                                                                                                                                       MT
                                                                              10




                                                                                                               NE
                                                                                      -.2




                                                                                                        -.1




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                               State Vol. PPPE (Round #1)




                                                                                                                             70
                                                                                           Figure A.5: Business Shutdowns and PPP Allocation by State
     Figure A.5 presents four scatterplots of the share of businesses in each state that shutdown that in the week of March29th–April 4th and four alternative measures of allocation of PPP funds across
     states. The figure on the top left panel plots the amount of PPP loans received by small businesses in each state divided by the total number of small businesses in the state. The figure on the top
     right corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan. The figure on the bottom left corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP
     loan and the state exposure to the PPPE measured in terms of the total volume of loans. The figure on the bottom right corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a
     PPP loan and the state exposure to the PPPE measured in terms of the total number of loans.




                                                                                       (Date: 31/03/2020)                                                                                     (Date: 31/03/2020)
                    Share of Business Shutdowns (State)




                                                                                                                          Share of Business Shutdowns (State)
                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                                                .8
                                                          .6




                                                                                                                                                                .6
                                                                             NY         MI
                                                                                               PADC MA
                                                                                                            HI                                                                 NY MI                 HI
                                                                              WV           ME
                                                                                           VT                                                                                 DC        PA MA
                                                                     NVOR WA NJ          MD ILIN NH OH                                                                                 WV              ME
                                                                           CA        DE RI
                                                                                        CT
                                                                                        KY                MN                                                                 NV WA MDCTILOH
                                                                                                                                                                                                   VT
                                                                                                                                                                                           RIKY NHMN
                                                                                  GA CO LA
                                                          .4




                                                                       FLNMNC                            WI                                                                 CA NJOR  DE   IN
                                                                                                                                                                                           LA
                                                                                           TX  MO




                                                                                                                                                                .4
                                                                                    AKVA TN  AL    IA                                                                                 GATXCO AL WI
                                                                            SC MTMS                     KS                                                                       FL
                                                                                                                                                                                  NCNM
                                                                                                                                                                                     VA           MO MS IA
                                                                          AZ       AR
                                                                                IDWY          OK                                                                                      SCAKTN           MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                      KS
                                                                                                      NE                                                                     AZ                ID  AR WYOK
                                                                                                SD
                                                          .2




                                                                                       UT                      ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SDNEND




                                                                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     UT
71




                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                 0




                                                                                0




                                                                                               0




                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                     0
                                                               00




                                                                               00




                                                                                               00




                                                                                                            00




                                                                                                                    00
                                                               30




                                                                               40




                                                                                              50




                                                                                                            60




                                                                                                                    70




                                                                                                                                                                     .1




                                                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                          .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .5
                                                                          PPP Amount per Small Business in State                                                                Fraction of Businesses receiving PPP in State
                    Share of Business Shutdowns (State)




                                                                                                                          Share of Business Shutdowns (State)
                                                                                       (Date: 31/03/2020)                                                                                     (Date: 31/03/2020)
                                                          .8




                                                                                                                                                                .8
                                                          .6




                                                                                                                                                                .6


                                                                                     NY           MI             HI                                                                       NY              MI                           HI
                                                                                  DC             PA MA     WV    ME                                                                    DC               PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MAWV     ME
                                                                                                                  VT
                                                                          NV
                                                                                   CAORWAMD
                                                                                          NJ
                                                                                          DE  IL
                                                                                            MNLACT RI OHNH
                                                                                                         IN
                                                                                                        KY                                                                 NV           MN
                                                                                                                                                                                       OR   CT
                                                                                                                                                                                        CA WADEMDIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                 LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         RI KYINOH VT
                                                                                                                                                                                                               NH
                                                          .4




                                                                                                                                                                .4




                                                                                      FL NC CO
                                                                                           GA
                                                                                            TX
                                                                                             NM   AL WI
                                                                                                    MO                                                                                     FLGA
                                                                                                                                                                                           NMTX CO MOWI
                                                                                                                                                                                               NC
                                                                                         VASC
                                                                                            AK             IA MS                                                                           VA       IA AL   MS
                                                                                 AZ                   TN MT  KS                                                                            AK
                                                                                                                                                                                            SC          MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                        TNKS
                                                                                              ID            AROK                                                                        AZ
                                                                                                     NE
                                                                                                          WY                                                                                  ID      WYAR     OK
                                                                                        SD                                                                                                     NE
                                                          .2




                                                                                                               ND                                                                 UT SD
                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                               UT                                                                                                                          ND
                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                               -.4




                                                                               -.2




                                                                                               0




                                                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                                     -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                   -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                               -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .2
                                                                                     State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)                                                                                  State PPPE (Volume)
                                                                                                     Figure A.6: Decline in Hours Worked and PPP Allocation by State
     Figure A.6 presents four scatterplots of the decline in hours worked relative to a January baseline and four alternative measures of allocation of PPP funds across states. The figure on the top left
     panel plots the amount of PPP loans received by small businesses in each state divided by the total number of small businesses in the state. The figure on the top right corner plots the fraction of
     small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan. The figure on the bottom left corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan and the state exposure to
     the PPPE measured in terms of the total volume of loans. The figure on the bottom right corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan and the state exposure
     to the PPPE measured in terms of the total number of loans.
                    Ratio of Hours Worked relative to January Baseline




                                                                                                    (Date: 31/03/2020)                                                                                                       (Date: 31/03/2020)




                                                                                                                                                 Ratio of Hours Worked relative to January Baseline
                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                           1
                                                   .75




                                                                                                                    SD




                                                                                                                                                                                 .75
                                                                                                          UT   NE                                                                                                                                SD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                UT                NE
                                                                                                         OK       KS     ND
                                                                                   AZSC  ID   MS                                                                                                                                              OK    ND
                                                                                              AKVARI TXALMO IA     WI                                                                                                                    KS
                                         .5




                                                                                          MTGA
                                                                                             AR                                                                                                                                  ID MO MS
                                                                                 ORNC WVWY DE
                                                                                 FL             COKYTN                                                                                                       AZ       SCAK          WI     IA




                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                                                                                                     ME IN          MN                                                                                                      RIKYAL
                                                                               NV NMCAWA   NJ      MD
                                                                                                  CTLA
                                                                                                           NH OH
                                                                                                        ILPA                                                                                                CA ORFL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NCNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GATXCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DE    TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IN       MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AR MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            WY
                                                                                      NY          MI            MA                                                                                           NVNJWA MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CTWV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IL OHLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NH
                                 .25




                                                                                                     VT     DC        HI                                                                                                PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                               NY MI         MA




                                                                                                                                                             .25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VTHI
72




                                                                                                                                                                                                              DC
                         0




                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                                          0




                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                0




                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                         00




                                                                                           00




                                                                                                               00




                                                                                                                         00




                                                                                                                                       00
                                                                         30




                                                                                           40




                                                                                                               50




                                                                                                                         60




                                                                                                                                       70




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .5
                                                                                    PPP Amount per Small Business in State                                                                                       Fraction of Businesses receiving PPP




                                                                                                                                                 Ratio of Hours Worked relative to January Baseline
                    Ratio of Hours Worked relative to January Baseline




                                                                                                    (Date: 31/03/2020)                                                                                                       (Date: 31/03/2020)

                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                           1




                                                                                                                                                                               .75
                                                  .75




                                                                                           SD                                                                                                                                    SD
                                                                                    UT                  NE                                                                                                          UT                         NE
                                                                                                                     ND   OK                                                                                                                            KSND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OK
                                                                                                       ID            KSMS                                                                                                 AZ        SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AKID    MO      IA  MS
                                                                                                     SC
                                                                                                 AZ AK       IAMOAL                                                                                                                            WI
                                                                                                                                                                      .5




                                                                                                                 WI                                                                                                                         AL
                                         .5




                                                                                                    VAGA
                                                                                                      TX        WY RI
                                                                                                                   AR
                                                                                                                  MT                                                                                                              VAGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DETX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CO      RI     WYAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MT
                                                                                                OR
                                                                                                 MN
                                                                                                 CA WADE
                                                                                                    FL MDCO
                                                                                                        NC        TNWV KY
                                                                                                                        INOHME                                                                                              CAORFL NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MDMN LA      TNKY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   INWV     ME
                                                                               NV                   NM
                                                                                                     CT NJLA
                                                                                                          IL             NH                                                                                    NV                WA NJ NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ILCT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OHNH
                                                                                                                  PA                                                                                                          NY            MIMA
                                                                                                                     MI
                                                                                                                                                               .25




                                                                                                   NY              MA
                                  .25




                                                                                                DC                           VT             HI                                                                             DC                               HIVT
                                                                                                                                                        0
                           0




                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .4
                                                                         -.3




                                                                                     -.2




                                                                                                    -.1




                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                         .1




                                                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                   State PPPE (Volume)                                                                                                     State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)
                                                           Figure A.7: Business Shutdowns and PPP Allocation by County
Figure A.7 presents four scatterplots of the share of businesses in each county that shutdown in the week of March 22nd to March 28th and
four alternative measures of allocation of PPP funds. The figure on the top left panel plots plots the fraction of establishments in each county
that received a PPP loan during the first round. The figure on the top right corner the amount of PPP loans received by establishments in
each county divided by the total number of small businesses in the state during the first round. The figure on the bottom right corner plots
the county PPPE measured in terms of the total amount of PPP loans originated. The figure on the bottom left corner plots the county PPPE
measured in terms of the total number of loans originated by banks in those counties. We restrict the analysis to counties with at least 20
firms covered in the Homebase sample. Data is from SBA, Homebase, and County Business Patterns.


                                                                  Week 10: March 22nd - March 28th                                                                                             Week 10: March 22nd - March 28th
                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                      .8
  Share of Business Shutdowns (County)




                                                                                                                               Share of Business Shutdowns (County)
                                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                      .6
                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                                      .4
                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                      .2
                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                              -2




                                                      -1




                                                                        0




                                                                                           1




                                                                                                             2




                                                                                                                          3




                                                                                                                                                                            -1




                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3
                                                    Fraction of Businesses receiving PPP (Round #1) (Standardized)                                                                     Amount per Establishment (Round #1) (Standardized)



                                                                  Week 10: March 22nd - March 28th                                                                                             Week 10: March 22nd - March 28th
                                         .8




                                                                                                                                                                      .8
  Share of Business Shutdowns (County)




                                                                                                                               Share of Business Shutdowns (County)
                                         .6




                                                                                                                                                                      .6
                                         .4




                                                                                                                                                                      .4
                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                      .2
                                         0




                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                              -.5




                                                     -.3




                                                                        -.1




                                                                                          .1




                                                                                                             .3




                                                                                                                          .5




                                                                                                                                                                           -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                 -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .5




                                                                    County Nbr. PPPE (Round #1)                                                                                                   County Vol PPPE (Round #1)




                                                                                                                     73
                                                                        Figure A.8: Decline in Hours Worked and PPP Allocation by County
Figure A.8 presents four scatterplots of the decline in hours worked in each county relative to a January Baseline and four alternative measures
of allocation of PPP funds. The figure on the top left panel plots plots the fraction of establishments in each county that received a PPP loan
during the first round. The figure on the top right corner the amount of PPP loans received by establishments in each county divided by the
total number of small businesses in the state during the first round. The figure on the bottom right corner plots the county PPPE measured in
terms of the total amount of PPP loans originated. The figure on the bottom left corner plots the county PPPE measured in terms of the total
number of loans originated by banks in those counties. We restrict the analysis to counties with at least 20 firms covered in the Homebase
sample. Data is from SBA, Homebase, and County Business Patterns.


                                                                                      Week 10: March 22nd - March 28th                                                                                                                 Week 10: March 22nd - March 28th
                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
  Ratio of Hours Worked Relative to Jan. Basline (County)




                                                                                                                                                   Ratio of Hours Worked Relative to Jan. Basline (County)
                                                            .75




                                                                                                                                                                                                             .75
                                                            .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                             .5
                                                            .25




                                                                                                                                                                                                             .25
                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                  -2




                                                                          -1




                                                                                            0




                                                                                                               1




                                                                                                                                 2




                                                                                                                                              3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
                                                                        Fraction of Businesses receiving PPP (Round #1) (Standardized)                                                                                         Amount per Establishment (Round #1) (Standardized)



                                                                                      Week 10: March 22nd - March 28th                                                                                                                 Week 10: March 22nd - March 28th
                                                            1




                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
  Ratio of Hours Worked Relative to Jan. Basline (County)




                                                                                                                                                   Ratio of Hours Worked Relative to Jan. Basline (County)
                                                            .75




                                                                                                                                                                                                             .75
                                                            .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                             .5
                                                            .25




                                                                                                                                                                                                             .25
                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                  -.5




                                                                         -.3




                                                                                            -.1




                                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                 .3




                                                                                                                                              .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .5




                                                                                        County Nbr. PPPE (Round #1)                                                                                                                       County Vol PPPE (Round #1)




                                                                                                                                         74
                                                                                                              Figure A.9: State Unemployment Insurance and PPP Allocation by State
     Figure A.9 presents four scatterplots of the ratio of state unemployment insurance claims to employment covered by unemployment insurance and four alternative measures of allocation of PPP
     funds across states. State unemployment insurance claims are the sum of filed claims in the weeks ended March 21st, March 28th, and April 4th, 2020. The figure on the top left panel plots the
     amount of PPP loans received by small businesses in each state divided by the total number of small businesses in the state. The figure on the top right corner plots the fraction of small businesses
     in each state that received a PPP loan. The figure on the bottom left corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan and state exposure to the PPPE measured in
     terms of the total volume of loans. The figure on the bottom right corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan and the state exposure to the PPPE measured
     in terms of the total number of loans. Data comes from the Department of Labor, SBA, Call Reports, and FDIC Summary of Deposits.
                    State Unemployment Claims by State (% Cov. Employment)




                                                                                                                                                              State Unemployment Claims by State (% Cov. Employment)
                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                                   RI
                                                                                                                   MI                                                                                                                          MI         RI
                                                                                          NV                                 PA               HI                                                                                                     PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NV                                       HI
                                                                             .15




                                                                                                                      NH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .15
                                                                                                    WA      KYLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WA         KY NH
                                                                                                     NJ                                                                                                                                            LA
                                                                                              CA MT           ME         OHMA                                                                                                           NJ
                                                                                                     GAAK                                                                                                                                        OHMA           ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MT
                                                                                                               VT             MN                                                                                                    CA       GAAK
                                                                                                   ID DE         ALIN IA                                                                                                                                   MNVT
                                                                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DE IN       ID       IA
                                                                                                             MD              WI
                                                                                                                            KS                                                                                                                         AL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                                                            NMNC
                                                                                             AZSC
                                                                                                NY    AR VA       ILMO
                                                                                                                   OK                                                                                                                    NCMD              WI   KS
                                                                                                       MS                                          ND                                                                                AZNY  NMSC            MO
                                                                                           OR                 TN                                                                                                                            VAIL
75




                                                                                                                          NE                                                                                                                                 AR     OK                          ND
                                                                                                     WY        TX                                                                                                                       OR        TN           MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NE
                                                                             .05




                                                                                           FL             UTCT
                                                                                                  WV     CO                                                                                                                                     TX                WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CT      UT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .05
                                                                                                                     SD                                                                                                                 FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WV CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SD
                                                                                     0




                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                   00




                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                        00




                                                                                                                                      00




                                                                                                                                                         00
                                                                                   30




                                                                                                       40




                                                                                                                      50




                                                                                                                                     60




                                                                                                                                                        70




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .5
                                                                                               PPP volume per Small Business Establishment                                                                                          Fraction of Small Businesses Receiving PPP loan
                    State Unemployment Claims by State (% Cov. Employment)




                                                                                                                                                              State Unemployment Claims by State (% Cov. Employment)
                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                                                  RI MI                                                                                                                                       RI MI
                                                                                                                                  PA                    HI                                                                                                                    PA             HI
                                                                                          NV                                                                                                                                       NV
                                                                             .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .15

                                                                                                                            KY                NH                                                                                                                                   KY        NH
                                                                                                                  WA LA                                                                                                                                   WA             LA
                                                                                                                    NJ       MA                                                                                                                           NJ       MA
                                                                                                  CA                  GA AKMT OH              ME                                                                                        CA                     GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OH      MT   ME
                                                                                                                  MN                            VT                                                                                                           AK    MN         VT
                                                                                                                  IDIA AL    DE IN                                                                                                                          DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ID AL         INIA
                                                                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1




                                                                                                                      NMNC
                                                                                                                         SC WI
                                                                                                                             KS
                                                                                                                            MD                                                                                                                          NCMD NM     WI    KS
                                                                                                   AZ            NY IL VA MO OK
                                                                                                                         AR
                                                                                                                         ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AZ           NY VASC IL     MOAR OK
                                                                                                                             MS                                                                                                                                          MSND
                                                                                                     OR            NE TN                                                                                                                        OR              TN     NE
                                                                                                                   WY TX                                                                                                                                      TX WY
                                                                                                                  UTFL                                                                                                                             FLUT
                                                                             .05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .05




                                                                                                                      CT                                                                                                                                        CT
                                                                                                                      CO WV                                                                                                                               CO           WV
                                                                                                                        SD                                                                                                                                               SD
                                                                                    -.2




                                                                                                        -.1




                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                      .1




                                                                                                                                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                                                                                               State PPPE (Volume)                                                                                                                  State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)
                                                                                                    Figure A.10: COVID-19 Cases and PPP Allocation by State
     Figure A.10 presents four scatterplots of the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases per thousand as of April, 3rd 2020 and four alternative measures of allocation of PPP funds across states. The
     figure on the top left panel plots the amount of PPP loans received by small businesses in each state divided by the total number of small businesses in the state. The figure on the top right corner
     plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan. The figure on the bottom left corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan and the
     state exposure to the PPPE measured in terms of the total volume of loans. The figure on the bottom right corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan and
     the state exposure to the PPPE measured in terms of the total number of loans. Data comes from the Center for Disease Control, SBA, Call Reports, and FDIC Summary of Deposits.
                    Covid-19 Cases per Thousand (04/03/2020)




                                                                                                                                     Covid-19 Cases per Thousand (04/03/2020)
                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                          NJ                                                                                                   NJ

                                                                                 NY                                                                                                            NY
                                                                                                     LA                                                                                                         LA
                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                   MA
                                                                                                    CT
                                                                                                    MI                                                                                                           MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MICT
                                                               1




                                                                                 WA




                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                         CO VTILPA                                                                                              WA
                                                                                   ID GA   RIMD
                                                                          NVFL          DEUT
                                                                                       MS     TN IN NH                                                                                                IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                       PA CO ID      VT
76




                                                                                SC
                                                                               CA               ALMO       WI
                                                                              AZ
                                                                             NM
                                                                            OR NC WV WYAKVA KYME
                                                                                    MTAR           SDIAOH
                                                                                               TX OK    NEKSMNHI ND                                                                         NV FL MD GA IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                    DE     RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                          TNUT ALNHWI  MS
                                                                                                                                                                                           CAAZ      SC  OH        MO    MEWYOK SD ND
                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                                OR  VAAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                 NCNM   TX   KY          MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ARHIKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IA     NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                      WV           MN




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                     0




                                                                                      0




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                0
                                                                   00




                                                                                   00




                                                                                                         00




                                                                                                                    00




                                                                                                                                00
                                                                   30




                                                                                  40




                                                                                                         50




                                                                                                                   60




                                                                                                                               70




                                                                                                                                                                                    .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .5
                                                                            PPP volume per Small Business Establishment                                                                    Fraction of Small Businesses Receiving PPP loan
                    Covid-19 Cases per Thousand (04/03/2020)




                                                                                                                                     Covid-19 Cases per Thousand (04/03/2020)
                                                               3




                                                                                                                                                                                3
                                                                                                    NJ                                                                                                          NJ

                                                                                               NY                                                                                                               NY
                                                                                                     LA                                                                                                                    LA
                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                                2


                                                                                                              MA                                                                                                              MA
                                                                                                     CT            MI                                                                                                      CT MI
                                                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                1




                                                                                                WA                                                                                                              WA
                                                                                                  ILCO         PA         VT                                                                                    CO IL  PA             VT
                                                                                                ID FLGA                                                                                                        ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                         FLUT GA
                                                                          NV
                                                                                                UT TN      MDDERI IN
                                                                                                             MS          NH
                                                                                                                                                                                          NV                    MDDE TNRI    INMS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NH
                                                                               CA                     ALSC
                                                                                                         MOWI OK         ME                                                                    CA                  SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AL  WYWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MOARMT
                                                                                AZOR             WY
                                                                                                 NE
                                                                                                MN IANM AR
                                                                                                       VA
                                                                                                        ND
                                                                                                       SD
                                                                                                       NC
                                                                                                       TX MT
                                                                                                         AK
                                                                                                          WV KSOH
                                                                                                            KY                 HI                                                              AZ     OR      NC VAAKNMOH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TX    KY WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MN NEIAKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SD  ND ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HI
                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                    -.2




                                                                                   -.1




                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                    .1




                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                    -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .4
                                                                                           State PPPE (Volume)                                                                                            State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)
                                                                                                       Figure A.11: COVID-19 Deaths and PPP Allocation by State
     Figure A.11 presents four scatterplots of the number of COVID-19 deaths per thousand as of April, 3rd 2020 and four alternative measures of allocation of PPP funds across states. The figure on
     the top left panel plots the amount of PPP loans received by small businesses in each state divided by the total number of small businesses in the state. The figure on the top right corner plots the
     fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan. The figure on the bottom left corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan and the state
     exposure to the PPPE measured in terms of the total volume of loans. The figure on the bottom right corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan and the
     state exposure to the PPPE measured in terms of the total number of loans. Data comes from the Center for Disease Control, SBA, Call Reports, and FDIC Summary of Deposits.
                    Covid-19 Deaths per Thousand (04/03/2020)




                                                                                                                                          Covid-19 Deaths per Thousand (04/03/2020)
                                                                .08




                                                                                                                                                                                      .08
                                                                                                         LA                                                                                                            LA
                                                                                             NJ                                                                                                        NJ
                                                                .06




                                                                                                                                                                                      .06
                                                                                                       MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                            MI
                                                                .04




                                                                                                                                                                                      .04
                                                                                    WA                 CT                                                                                               WA CT
                                                                                                                      MA
                                                                                    NY
                                                                .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MA
                                                                                         GA CO                                                                                                         NY




                                                                                                                                                                                      .02
                                                                                           DE        IL
                                                                                                      IN
                                                                             NV                   VT OK                                                                                                      GA CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                            DEIL IN
77




                                                                               FL CA      MS  KY    AL PA OH KS WI                                                                                  NV
                                                                                               MDME MO
                                                                               ORAZSC ID
                                                                                NM     MTAR VARI TN
                                                                                                  TX SD  NH
                                                                                                          IA NE MN HI ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          WI MS    OK
                                                                                  NC WV WYAK UT                                                                                                               PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                        FL MDSC
                                                                                                                                                                                                   CAAZ OR      OHRIKYAL
                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                                           NM    TN    ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NHMO    ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC VA TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                              AK          MNAR  IA    SDNEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                              WV UT           HI WY




                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                        0




                                                                                         0




                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                      00




                                                                                      00




                                                                                                            00




                                                                                                                       00




                                                                                                                                     00
                                                                      30




                                                                                     40




                                                                                                         50




                                                                                                                      60




                                                                                                                                    70




                                                                                                                                                                                            .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .5
                                                                               PPP volume per Small Business Establishment                                                                         Fraction of Small Businesses Receiving PPP loan
                    Covid-19 Deaths per Thousand (04/03/2020)




                                                                                                                                          Covid-19 Deaths per Thousand (04/03/2020)
                                                                .08




                                                                                                                                                                                      .08
                                                                                                        LA                                                                                                                        LA
                                                                                                       NJ                                                                                                              NJ
                                                                .06




                                                                                                                                                                                      .06

                                                                                                                      MI                                                                                                               MI
                                                                .04




                                                                                                                                                                                      .04


                                                                                                   WA CT                                                                                                               WA         CT
                                                                                                                 MA                                                                                                             MA
                                                                                                  NY                                                                                                               NY
                                                                .02




                                                                                                                                                                                      .02




                                                                                                         CO
                                                                                                       ILGA                                                                                                          GACO IL
                                                                             NV                                DE IN                                                                              NV                     DE         IN
                                                                                                               MS              VT                                                                                                        OK VT
                                                                                   CA                 FLAL   WI
                                                                                                              KY
                                                                                                             MD
                                                                                                                 OK
                                                                                                                 PA
                                                                                                                 OH         ME                                                                         CA       FL     MD  AL  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OH  WI MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 KY    KS ME
                                                                                    AZOR           ID
                                                                                                   MN  TN
                                                                                                      NM
                                                                                                     IA
                                                                                                    NE
                                                                                                          SC
                                                                                                         VA
                                                                                                          ND
                                                                                                          AR
                                                                                                         TX MTKSRI
                                                                                                           MO
                                                                                                           AK               NH                                                                         AZ    OR          SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IDVA TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NMRI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TN MNMOARIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NE NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MT ND
                                                                                                   UT    SD
                                                                                                         NC WV                      HI                                                                            UT NC AK      WY WVSDHI
                                                                0




                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                                                                                    WY
                                                                       -.2




                                                                                      -.1




                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                       .1




                                                                                                                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                                                                              State PPPE (Volume)                                                                                                State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)
                                                                                                              Figure A.12: PPP Allocation and Pre-PPP Covid-19 spread
     Figure A.12 stratifies all counties in 10 bins based on the fraction of businesses receiving PPP (Panels A and C) and based on their exposure to PPPE in the county. In Panels (A) and (B) the y-axis
     represents the average number of Covid-19 cases per capita in a county and in Panels (C) and (D) it represents the average number of Covid-19 deaths per capita in a county. Data is from SBA,
     Homebase, and County Business Patterns.

       Panel A: Covid-19 Cases and % Receiving PPP (Round #1)                                                                                                                                       Panel B: Covid-19 Cases and PPPE (Round #1)
                                                  .00015




                                                                                                                                                                                      .00015
           Covid-19 Cases per capita through Week 10




                                                                                                                                               Covid-19 Cases per capita through Week 10
                             .0001




                                                                                                                                                                 .0001
        .00005




                                                                                                                                            .00005
                                                            .



                                                                 2



                                                                     3



                                                                             4



                                                                                      5



                                                                                                6



                                                                                                          7



                                                                                                                    8



                                                                                                                        9



                                                                                                                                      us.
                                                           Bus




                                                                                                                                      B
                                                per




                                                                                                                                  per




                                                                                                                                                                                               PE




                                                                                                                                                                                                       2



                                                                                                                                                                                                             3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
78



                                 PP




                                                                                                                                 PP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PP
                                                                                                                                                                                         t PP
          st P




                                                                                                                            st P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    st P
                                                                                                                                                                        s
       Lea




                                                                                                                            Mo




                                                                                                                                                                    Lea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mo
                                                                         % of Businesses receiving PPP (Round #1)                                                                                                        PPPE County (Round #1)



      Panel C: Covid-19 Deaths and % Receiving PPP (Round #1)                                                                                                                                   Panel D: Covid-19 Deaths and PPPE (Round #1)
                                                  .004
        Covid-19 Deaths per thousand through Week 10




                                                                                                                                                                                     .003
                                                                                                                                            Covid-19 Deaths per thousand through Week 10
                                                                                                                                                                             .0025
                                     .003




                                                                                                                                                                    .002
                       .002




                                                                                                                                                         .0015
         .001




                                                                                                                                                .001
                                                            .



                                                                 2



                                                                     3



                                                                             4



                                                                                      5



                                                                                                6



                                                                                                          7



                                                                                                                    8



                                                                                                                        9



                                                                                                                                        .




                                                                                                                                                                      .0005
                                                           Bus




                                                                                                                                      Bus
                                                per




                                                                                                                                  per




                                                                                                                                                                                               E



                                                                                                                                                                                                       2



                                                                                                                                                                                                             3



                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                9



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                 PP




                                                                                                                                 PP




                                                                                                                                                                                        PP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PP
                 st P




                                                                                                                            st P




                                                                                                                                                                                    st P




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    st P
       Lea




                                                                                                                            Mo




                                                                                                                                                                    Lea




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mo
                                                                         % of Businesses receiving PPP (Round #1)                                                                                                % of Businesses receiving PPP (Round #1)
                                                      Figure A.13: Shelter-in-Place Orders and PPP Allocation by State
     Figure A.13 presents four scatterplots of the timing of statewide shelter-in-place orders and four alternative measures of allocation of PPP funds across states. The figure on the top left panel
     plots the amount of PPP loans received by small businesses in each state divided by the total number of small businesses in the state. The figure on the top right corner plots the fraction of small
     businesses in each state that received a PPP loan. The figure on the bottom left corner plots volume based PPPE and the state exposure to the PPPE measured in terms of the total volume of loans.
     The figure on the bottom right corner plots number of loan based PPPE and the state exposure to the PPPE measured in terms of the total number of loans. Data comes from the New York Times,
     SBA, Call Reports, and FDIC Summary of Deposits.




                                                                                                                       Fraction of Small Businesses Receiving PPP Loans
                              PPP allocation per Small Business Establishment
                                 30000 40000 50000 60000 70000




                                                                                                                                                                .5
                                                                                                          ND                                                                                           ND
                                                      HI                                                                                                                                               NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SD
                                                      WI MN




                                                                                                                                                       .4
                                                   MA             KS                                                                                                                                   OK
                                                 OH                                                       NE                                                 MT   KS       MEMS                        WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                       IA
                                                         NH           DC                                  IA                                           HI
                                                                                                                                                       VT                                              AR
                                                                      PA                                  SD
                                                   IN                      AL MO                          OK                                           WI MN                       MO




                                                                                                                                               .3
                                              IL
                                                 LA   VT          MDTN TX
                                                                        ME                                                                             ID NH                  AL
                                                 CTMI KY RI                                               UT                                        MA    KY                                           UT
                                                   DE CO AK       VA     MS                                                                       OHWV CO RI
                                                                                                                                                  LAIN              TN TX
                                              NJ                         GA                               AR                                IL               AK     SCPA GA




                                                                                                                                      .2
                                                      ID   MT                                             WY                                      CTNM
                                                                                                                                                    DE
                                                                                                                                                    MI            VA
                                                 WAWV                                                                                                             MD
                                          CANY                      SC
                                                                  NCAZ                                                                     NYNJ   WA
                                                                                                                                                  OR              NC
                                                                                                                                                                      DC
                                                                                                                                                                         FL
                                                 ORNM                    FL                                                              CA                         AZNV
                                                                      NV




                                                                                                                              .1
79




                              20
                       ma 20
                              20
                       ma 20
                              20
                       ma 20
                              20
                       ma 20
                              20
                       ma 20
                              20
                       ma 20
                       ma 20
                               0
                               0
                               0
                               0
                               0
                       ap 020

                          r20 0
                              20



                                                                                                      r




                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                  ma 20
                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                  ma 20
                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                  ma 20
                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                  ma 20
                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                  ma 20
                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                  ma 20
                                                                                                                  ma 20
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                     r20 0
                                                                                                                        20



                                                                                                                                                                                                   r
                                                                                                 rde




                                                                                                                                                                                              rde
                    01 r202
                    02 r202
                    03 r202
                    04 r202
                    05 202

                    07 202




                                                                                                               01 r202
                                                                                                               02 r202
                                                                                                               03 202
                                                                                                               04 r202
                                                                                                               05 202
                                                                                                               06 r202
                                                                                                               07 202
                    19 r20
                    20 ar20
                    21 20
                    22 ar20
                    23 20
                    24 ar20
                    25 20
                    26 ar20
                    27 20
                    28 ar20
                    29 20
                    30 ar20
                    31 r20




                                                                                                               19 r20
                                                                                                               20 ar20
                                                                                                               21 20
                                                                                                               22 ar20
                                                                                                               23 20
                                                                                                               24 ar20
                                                                                                               25 20
                                                                                                               26 ar20
                                                                                                               27 r20
                                                                                                               28 ar20
                                                                                                               29 r20
                                                                                                               30 ar20
                                                                                                               31 r20
                            2




                                                                                                  O




                                                                                                                                                                                               O
                          r

                          r

                          r

                          r

                          r




                          r
                          r
                          r




                                                                                                                     r

                                                                                                                     r

                                                                                                                     r




                                                                                                                     r

                                                                                                                     r

                                                                                                                     r
                       ma




                       ap
                       ap
                       ap
                       ap
                       ap

                       ap




                                                                                                                  ma




                                                                                                                  ap
                                                                                                                  ap
                                                                                                                  ap
                                                                                                                  ap
                                                                                                                  ap
                                                                                                                  ap
                                                                                                                  ap
                                                                                               te




                                                                                                                                                                                            te
                       m

                       m

                       m

                       m

                       m

                       m




                                                                                                                  m

                                                                                                                  m

                                                                                                                  m

                                                                                                                  m

                                                                                                                  m

                                                                                                                  m
                                                                                           Sta




                                                                                                                                                                                        Sta
                    06
                    18




                                                                                                               18
                                                                                          No




                                                                                                                                                                                    No
                                                     Date Shelter Order                                                                               Date Shelter Order
                              .2




                                                                                                                           .4
                                                     HI                                                                                              VT             ME
                                                     VT                                                        State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)
                                                                                                                                                     HI NHMT KS                                        ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                       OK
                                                                           ME
                    State PPPE (Volume)




                                                          NH                                                                                                         MS                                IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SD
                                     .1




                                                                                                                                                  IN
                                                                                                                                                  WV                                                   NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                       AR
                                                   IN
                                                   MI                                                                                                                    MO
                                                                                                                               .2

                                                 OH       RI     PA                                       OK                                      MIWIKYMN
                                                                                                                                                  MA              PA                                   WY
                                                   MA
                                                   DEWIKY    KS      MS                                                                         OH
                                                                                                                                                CT         RI   TN
                                                             MD                                                                              IL LANM
                                                   WV     MT              MO                                                                               AK VASC TX AL
                             0




                                                          AK NC
                                                             VASC  TX                                     ND
                                                                                                          AR
                                                                                                          SD                                      DE
                                                 CT
                                                 LANM CO       TN    GAAL
                                                                     FL                                                                              ID CO    MD
                                                                                                                                                              NC     GA
                                              IL WA
                                              NJ      ID MN                                               IA
                                                                                                          WY
                                                                                                          NE
                                                                                                          UT                               NYNJ WA                                                     UT
                                                                                                                     0




                                            NY                                                                                                                       FL
                     -.1




                                                 OR              DC                                                                             OR
                                          CA                   AZ                                                                                                 DC
                                                                                                                                         CA                     AZ
                              -.2




                                                                                                                           -.2




                                                                        NV                                                                                        NV
                                         20
                                  ma 20
                                         20
                                  ma 20
                                         20
                                  ma 20
                                         20
                                  ma 20
                                         20
                                  ma 20
                                         20
                                  ma 20
                                  ma 20
                                          0
                                          0
                                          0
                                          0
                                          0
                                  ap 020

                                     r20 0
                                         20



                                                                                                      r




                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                               ma 20
                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                               ma 20
                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                               ma 20
                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                               ma 20
                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                               ma 20
                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                               ma 20
                                                                                                                               ma 20
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                  r20 0
                                                                                                                                     20



                                                                                                                                                                                                   r
                                                                                                    de




                                                                                                                                                                                               de
                               01 r202
                               02 r202
                               03 r202
                               04 r202
                               05 202

                               07 202




                                                                                                                            01 r202
                                                                                                                            02 r202
                                                                                                                            03 202
                                                                                                                            04 r202
                                                                                                                            05 202
                                                                                                                            06 r202
                                                                                                                            07 202
                               19 ar20
                               20 ar20
                               21 20
                               22 ar20
                               23 20
                               24 ar20
                               25 20
                               26 ar20
                               27 20
                               28 ar20
                               29 20
                               30 ar20
                               31 r20




                                                                                                                            19 ar20
                                                                                                                            20 ar20
                                                                                                                            21 20
                                                                                                                            22 ar20
                                                                                                                            23 20
                                                                                                                            24 ar20
                                                                                                                            25 20
                                                                                                                            26 ar20
                                                                                                                            27 r20
                                                                                                                            28 ar20
                                                                                                                            29 r20
                                                                                                                            30 ar20
                                                                                                                            31 r20
                                                                                                Or




                                                                                                                                                                                            Or
                                       2
                                     r

                                     r

                                     r

                                     r

                                     r




                                     r
                                     r
                                     r




                                                                                                                                  r

                                                                                                                                  r

                                                                                                                                  r




                                                                                                                                  r

                                                                                                                                  r

                                                                                                                                  r
                                  ap
                                  ap
                                  ap
                                  ap
                                  ap

                                  ap




                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                                                               ap
                                                                                               te




                                                                                                                                                                                          te
                                  m
                                  m

                                  m

                                  m

                                  m

                                  m

                                  m




                                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                               m

                                                                                                                               m
                                                                                           Sta




                                                                                                                                                                                        Sta
                               06
                               18




                                                                                                                            18
                                                                                          No




                                                                                                                                                                                    No
                                                     Date Shelter Order                                                                               Date Shelter Order
                                                                                             Figure A.14: Social Distancing Index and PPP Allocation by State
     Figure A.14 presents four scatterplots of and four alternative measures of allocation of PPP funds across states. The figure on the top left panel plots the amount of PPP loans received by small
     businesses in each state divided by the total number of small businesses in the state. The figure on the top right corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan.
     The figure on the bottom left corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan and the state exposure to the PPPE measured in terms of the total volume of loans.
     The figure on the bottom right corner plots the fraction of small businesses in each state that received a PPP loan and the state exposure to the PPPE measured in terms of the total number of loans.
     Data comes from the SBA, Call Reports, and FDIC Summary of Deposits.
                                                         -.2




                                                                                                                                                                            -.2
                                                                                        WY                                                                                                                                      WY
                    Social Distance Index (03/28/2020)




                                                                                                                                       Social Distance Index (03/28/2020)
                                                                                  AR        AL                                                                                                                    AR
                                                         -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                            AL




                                                                                                                                                                            -.3
                                                                           SC MTMS       TN                                                                                                       SC TN              MT
                                                                          NC           KY     OK IA                                                                                           NC          KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MSIA OK
                                                                       ORAZ WV
                                                                        NM
                                                                              ID GA UT          SD NE
                                                                                               MO                           ND                                                            AZ OR    WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                  GA         ID
                                                                                          TX IN                                                                                                 NM     INUT     MO          SDNEND
                                                         -.4




                                                                                     VA LAME        OH KS
                                                                                                        WI




                                                                                                                                                                            -.4
                                                                                   DE        IL
                                                                                       RIMD PA                                                                                                   VA TX          WI   KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ME
                                                                       FL CA                             MN                                                                                      DEIL OH
                                                                                       CT        NH                                                                                      CA FL MD  PA LARI      MN
                                                                            WA                                                                                                                   CT           NH
                                                                                          NJAKCO                                                                                             WA
                                                         -.5




                                                                                                                 MA                                                                                AK CO




                                                                                                                                                                            -.5
                                                                      NV                        MI                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                NY                   VT                                                                                                  MA
                                                                                                                                                                                          NVNY MI
80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VT
                                                         -.6




                                                                                                                       HI




                                                                                                                                                                            -.6
                                                                                                          DC                                                                                                               HI
                                                                                                                                                                                             DC
                                                                 0




                                                                                     0




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                  0
                                                               00




                                                                                   00




                                                                                                     00




                                                                                                                 00




                                                                                                                                  00
                                                               30




                                                                                   40




                                                                                                    50




                                                                                                                 60




                                                                                                                                 70




                                                                                                                                                                                  .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .5
                                                                           PPP volume per Small Business Establishment                                                                   Fraction of Small Businesses Receiving PPP loan
                                                         -.2




                                                                                                                                                                            -.2
                                                                                               WY                                                                                                                              WY
                    Social Distance Index (03/28/2020)




                                                                                                                                       Social Distance Index (03/28/2020)
                                                                                                    ALAR                                                                                                                AL AR
                                                         -.3




                                                                                                                                                                            -.3
                                                                                                   TN
                                                                                                 IA NCSCMTMS                                                                                                           SC TN  MT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MS
                                                                                                         KY OK                                                                                             NC           KY WV OK
                                                                               AZOR           ID  GA WV
                                                                                               NENM                                                                                          AZ     OR UT GAID              NE
                                                                                              UT      ND
                                                                                                     SD MO      IN                                                                                                NM         SD ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MO IN
                                                         -.4




                                                                                                                                                                            -.4


                                                                                                     TX WIKSOH
                                                                                                     VA                ME                                                                                      VA TX OH WI     KS ME
                                                                                                ILFL       DERI                                                                                                 DE
                                                                              CA              MN   LA    MD PA         NH
                                                                                                                                                                                             CA       FL     MD ILLA RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PAMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NH
                                                                                                   CT                                                                                                               CT
                                                                                              WA                                                                                                        WA
                                                                                                NJCO AK                                                                                                          AK
                                                         -.5




                                                                                                                                                                            -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                        NJ CO
                                                                                                           MA MI                                                                                                       MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MI
                                                                      NV                     NY                                                                                         NV               NY
                                                                                                                        VT                                                                                                         VT
                                                         -.6




                                                                                                                                                                            -.6




                                                                                                                                 HI                                                                                                      HI
                                                                                     DC                                                                                                       DC
                                                                -.2




                                                                                    -.1




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                  .1




                                                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                  -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                                                           State PPPE (Volume)                                                                                          State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)
             Figure A.15: Weekly Elasticities of PPPE and Employment Outcomes in the Opportunity Insights Employment Dataset
     Figure A.15 plots coefficients and respective standard errors of regression analyses investigating the impact of exposure to PPPE on differences on employment and county-week outcomes defined
     as the difference between these outcomes in each week relative to the average of these variables in the two weeks that preceded the launch of PPP. The figures plot the estimated coefficients, β,
     and respective standard errors of ∆Emplohment is j = αs j + β C ount y P P P Ei + Γ X ist + εist , where ∆Shut d ownis j is the difference between the shutdown indicator of firm i in each week and the
     average shutdown indicator of the same county during the two weeks prior to the launch of PPP, C ount y P P P Ei is the average exposure of the county to bank PPPE, αs j are state-by-industry fixed
     effects and X is j are additional control variables. The top left panel shows results for all workers, the top right panel shows results for works in the middle two earnings quartiles, the bottom left
     panel shows results for the lower earnings quartile of workers while the bottom right panel shows results for the top earnings quartile of workers. Data is from SBA and Earnin.
81
                                                                          Figure A.16: Unmet PPP Demand and Exposure to State PPPE (Industry×State)
Figure A.16 are scatterplots of state exposure to the number-based PPPE and the percentage of businesses in each industry within a state that
applied but did not receive PPP. The plots represent the evolution of the two variables for each survey week. Data comes from the Census
Bureau, SBA, Call Reports, Summary of Deposits, and County Business Patterns.


                                                                                                Week 15: April26 - May2nd                                                                                                                                 Week 16: May3rd - May9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                              CA
                                                                              CA
                                                                              CA           FL
                                                              60




                                                                              AZ              NJ     GA                                                                                                                                                  NJ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       50
                                                                                              NJ     NC
   Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP




                                                                                                                                                            Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP
                                                                              CA
                                                                              CA      OR   FL
                                                                                           FL            VA
                                                                                           FL NJ
                                                                                              NY
                                                              50




                                                                                           FL           MD                MI
                                                                              CA
                                                                              CA           FL NY     GA MD            OH                                                                                                               CA
                                                                                      OR      NY                TX                                                                                                                                       NY




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                                                              WA
                                                                                              WA                 NMCT
                                                                                                                   TN
                                                                                              UT
                                                                                              NJ
                                                                                              NY
                                                                                              NJ
                                                                                              NY     NC MD
                                                                                                             IL       OH MI                                                                                                                              NJ           VA
                                                                              CA
                                                                              AZ              NJ     GA
                                                                                                     GA
                                                                                                     NC     SC        OH
                                                                                                                       PA                                                                                                              CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZ
                                                                              CA      OR      WA     GA VA SC
                                                                                                     NC      IL                                                                                                                        CA                       GA
                                                                                      OR                        TX TN PA MI
                                                              40




                                                                                           FL WA                                                                                                                                  NV   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA           FL              VA
                                                                                           FL NY     GACO        LA OH PA                                                                                                                           FL   WA
                                                                                              NY
                                                                                           FL WA         VA ILTX
                                                                                                        MD      TX     PA
                                                                                                                      OHMAMI WI                                                                                                        AZ      OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FL          GA     SC            MI MO
                                                                                                     NCCO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                              CA
                                                                              AZ              NY
                                                                                              UT       COVA        TN PA
                                                                                                                TX TN  PA
                                                                                                                        MAMI
                                                                                                                          MI MO IN NH                                                                                                  CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZ           FL   NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA         VA ALLACT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA
                                                                                              WA
                                                                                              WA     GACO             OHMA                                                                                                                               UT        MD         CT
                                                                                              NY     NC MD ILILTXCT      MN
                                                                                                                        MA
                                                                                                                                 IN                                                                                               NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OR   FL   WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GA MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC            CT OHMA
                                                                         NV                   WA
                                                                                              NY     NCCO
                                                                                                       CO    IL LA TN MAKY          IA                                                                                                 AZ           FL   WA     NC                   MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI
                                                              30




                                                                                           FL UT     NC  VA ILTX
                                                                                                     NC MD      TX
                                                                                                                 LA OH       WI  IN MS
                                                                                                                                     NH                                                                                                AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA      OR   FL   NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY     GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GA MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA     TX                       IANH
                                                                                                             IL CT      MA   WI                                                                                                                OR   FL   NJ     NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GACO        NM       MI                KS
                                                                                              NY     GACOVA SC
                                                                                                             ILAL  TN PA MN
                                                                                                                        MA
                                                                                                                       PA        IN                                                                                                    CA                WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC  VA IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO    IL TX  TNOHMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LACT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                TX    OH MI      IN                                                                                                    AZ      OR   FL   WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA      ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC MD   ILAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA SC  TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LACT  PA MI WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PAMN  MO       IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IN
                                                                                                                                 IN                                                                                               NV                            NC  VA     TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ILTX  CT     MI WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MN                       ME
                                                                                                WA       VA
                                                                                                         VA SC AL
                                                                                                                TX
                                                                                                             ILAL     OH MN
                                                                                                                         MN
                                                                                                                       PAMNWI     NE KS
                                                                                                                                 IN
                                                                                                                                 IN
                                                                                                                             MO AR      OK
                                                                                                                                        OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZ      OR        WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GA MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA TNOH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IN MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IN MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NH
                                                                                                                             MO                                                                                                                          WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY      ID    SC  TX CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TXCT PA  MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MA KYWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MO       IN    KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NE NH
                                                              20




                                                                                                                TX    OH     WI
                                                                                                                             MO                                                                                                                OR        NY       CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ID     IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IL        PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MA   WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WI       IN    KS
                                                                                                       CO      ALLA OH MN    MO              ME                                                                                                          NY        MD SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO       TX TNOH  MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OHMAMI MO      AR      OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KS
                                                                                                         VA ILAL           KY       IA                                                                                                                   NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY     NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ID       AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ILAL          KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IA OK
                                                                                                                TX           WI
                                                                                                                             WI
                                                                                                                             MO AR KS                                                                                                                    UT     GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NCCO SC IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SC  TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ILALLACT   MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TN PA             IN IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AR           ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                UT                 TN    MN                                                                                                                              WA                TX  TN  MAMI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MN  MO       IN
                                                                                                                          MI WI
                                                                                                                         MN             OK                                                                                             AZ                UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT       CO    ILTX TN PA  MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MA KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MO          MS OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IN IA
                                                                                                                         MNKYWI      MT
                                                                                                                                    MSKS                                                                                                                         ID            TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TN   MNKYWI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MO              OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KS
                                                                                                                                AR IA OK                                                                                                                                  AL                      NEMTNHOK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OK
                                                              10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA                 LA TN PA KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA                  AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IN IANH     ME
                                                                                                      ID                              KSOK                                                                                                                                        PA MO                KS
                                                                                                                         MNMO IN IA OK  OK
                                                                                                                                  NE                                                                                                                             ID                 MNWI        ARNEMS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MTKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OK



                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                  NEIAKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MO
                                                              0
                                                                   -.2




                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                 State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)                                                                                                                                  State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)




                                                                                                 Week 17: May10 - May16                                                                                                                                   Week 18: May17 - May23
                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       50
                                                              50
   Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP




                                                                                                                                                            Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                              40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                              30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                             SC
                                                                              CA
                                                                                              NJ     NC                                                                                                                                                             VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                              20




                                                                         NV           OR      NY
                                                                                              WA                                                                                                                                       AZ           FL NY                   LA
                                                                         NV                FL               SC                                                                                                                                                                   OH
                                                                                      OR                MD                                                                                                                             AZ              NY
                                                                              CA           FL NJ
                                                                                              NY     GA VA SCIL CT               IN                                                                                               NV           OR                           NM    PA MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KY
                                                                              CA
                                                                              CA DC
                                                                                           FL
                                                                                           FL WA
                                                                                              NY     NC
                                                                                                     NC
                                                                                                      ID                        AR
                                                                                                                                  NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ     GA MD IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC                      PR
                                                                              CA      OR   FL UT     GA     SCTX    TNOH
                                                                                                                       PA PR MO   NE                                                                                              NV   CA      OR               NCCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MD  SC
                                                                         NV   AZ
                                                                              CA           FL NY
                                                                                              NJ
                                                                                              UT        MD
                                                                                                     NCCOVA
                                                                                                         VA      LA
                                                                                                                TX           MO IN                                                                                                NV   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZ                WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY         VA      LA          MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10




                                                                                              WA                    TNOHMA   PR   NE                                                                                              NV   CA                NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA     NC         TX      MA
                                                              10




                                                                              CA
                                                                              AZ      OR   FL WA
                                                                                              NJ
                                                                                              NY     NC
                                                                                                     GACO
                                                                                                        MD
                                                                                                         VA ILALTX
                                                                                                                 LA    PA
                                                                                                                    TN PAMNKYMO              ME                                                                                        CA DC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZ      OR        NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT     NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GACOVA SC      TN PA    WI
                                                                                              NJ
                                                                                              WA
                                                                                              NY
                                                                                              NJ     NCCOVA     TX CT    MN  WI  IN                                                                                                    CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA           FL   NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY                        MA             NEIA
                                                                         NV   CA
                                                                              AZ
                                                                              CA
                                                                              AZ      OR   FL NY
                                                                                              UT
                                                                                              WA
                                                                                              NJ
                                                                                              NY
                                                                                                     GACO
                                                                                                     GA MD
                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                     GACOVA
                                                                                                        MD   IL
                                                                                                            SC   LA
                                                                                                                 NM
                                                                                                                TX
                                                                                                               AL   TN
                                                                                                                 LA OHOH
                                                                                                                      OHMA
                                                                                                                        MA
                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                          MI
                                                                                                                          MI WI
                                                                                                                             MO IN IAKS
                                                                                                                             WI                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA           FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ     GACO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO    IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA ILALTXCT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CT OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TNOHMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA    MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI PR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OK
                                                                         NV   AZ
                                                                              AZ      OR      UT
                                                                                              WA
                                                                                              NY        MD
                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                        MD   IL
                                                                                                            SC
                                                                                                             IL TX
                                                                                                                 NM
                                                                                                                 LA
                                                                                                                TX CT   MA
                                                                                                                       PA MI
                                                                                                                         MNKY
                                                                                                                          MI WI       KSOK                                                                                             AZ      OR   FL   WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY        MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GACO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC     SC  TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX     PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PAMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CT OH MN          AR  MSKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NH OK   VT
                                                                                              UT
                                                                                              NJ
                                                                                              WA
                                                                                              NY      ID
                                                                                                     NC     SC
                                                                                                             ILALLACT
                                                                                                                TX CT OH
                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                    TNOHMA
                                                                                                                        MA KYMO AR
                                                                                                                             WI
                                                                                                                             MO     MS
                                                                                                                                     NH
                                                                                                                                    MSKS
                                                                                                                                     MT
                                                                                                                                 IN IA
                                                                                                                                     NH      ME
                                                                                                                                             VT                                                                                   NV   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZ           FL   WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY     NC MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO    ILAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO    IL TX CT      KY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI WI      ARNEIA  OK
                                                                                                     GA                    KY   AR  MS
                                                                                                                                     NH OK                                                                                                          FL   WA     GACO                 MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PAMN           IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IN KS
                                                                              AZ      OR   FL NJ
                                                                                              UT
                                                                                              WA
                                                                                                      ID
                                                                                                     NCCOVA ILAL
                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                                TX
                                                                                                             ILTX
                                                                                                                 NM   OH
                                                                                                                      OH
                                                                                                                        MA
                                                                                                                       PAMN
                                                                                                                        MA
                                                                                                                       PA MI
                                                                                                                         MNWIWI  IN
                                                                                                                             MO IN
                                                                                                                             WI
                                                                                                                                  NEIAKS
                                                                                                                                        OK
                                                                                                                                        OK                                                                                                     OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OR   FL   NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY     GA VA SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ILAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IL TXCTTNOHMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OH MNKY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WI       IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KS
                                                                                      OR                                     WI                                                                                                                OR        WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY     GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IDMD   ILAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA SC   LACT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NM TNOHMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA MI WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MN  MO        NEIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AR  MSKS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MT OK   ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                         NV   AZ              UT      ID
                                                                                                     GA
                                                                                                     NCCOVA ILALNMTN MA
                                                                                                        MD               MNKY
                                                                                                                          MI PR
                                                                                                                             WI
                                                                                                                             MO   NEIA
                                                                                                                                    MSKS
                                                                                                                                     MT
                                                                                                                                     NH OK   ME                                                                                                                                    MA
                                                              0




                                                                                                                             WI
                                                                                                                         MN                                                                                                                              WA         VA      LA OH MN  KY         IN IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AR
                                                                                                      ID                                                                                                                                                                       TNOH MN               NH
                                                                   -.2




                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                 State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)                                                                                                                                  State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)




                                                                                                 Week 19: May24 - May30                                                                                                                                       Week 20: May31 - Jun6
                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       50
                                                              50
   Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP




                                                                                                                                                            Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       40
                                                              40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       30
                                                              30




                                                                                                UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                              20




                                                                                                                  NM                                                                                                                                     WA
                                                                         NV                                  SC                                                                                                                        CA                           VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC      IL
                                                                                      OR                                                                                                                                                                                    LA OH
                                                                                                UT   GA VA AL                    IN
                                                                                                                                 IN                                                                                                                               CO SCTX         PA MI
                                                                                                                             MO NE KS                                                                                                               FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10




                                                                              CA                     NC                                                                                                                                                         GA VA
                                                              10




                                                                                      OR        NJ
                                                                                                NJ
                                                                                                NY          SCTX LA TN    MI
                                                                                                                           KY                                                                                                                       FL   WA         VA      LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA       MI              MT
                                                                                           FL   NY
                                                                                                WA
                                                                                                WA
                                                                                                NY
                                                                                                     GA
                                                                                                     NC
                                                                                                     GA
                                                                                                     NCCOVA ILTXCT     PAMNKY       MS OK
                                                                                                                             MO AR IA                                                                                             NV   AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZ           FL   WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY     GA  VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MD SC      CT  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TNOH  MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PAMN  MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI WI          IA
                                                                              CA                                      OH                     VT                                                                                   NV           OR   FL          GACO      AL                    AR      OK
                                                                         NV
                                                                         NV   AZ
                                                                              CA
                                                                              AZ
                                                                              CA DC   OR
                                                                                      OR   FL
                                                                                           FL
                                                                                                NJ
                                                                                                WA
                                                                                                NY
                                                                                                NJ
                                                                                                WA   GA
                                                                                                     NC
                                                                                                      ID VA
                                                                                                      IDMD
                                                                                                     GA
                                                                                                     NC
                                                                                                     GA  VA SC
                                                                                                             IL
                                                                                                             ILAL
                                                                                                         VA IL  TX
                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                      OH
                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                      OH
                                                                                                                         MN
                                                                                                                        MA
                                                                                                                         MN
                                                                                                                        MA
                                                                                                                       PA    WI
                                                                                                                             PR
                                                                                                                          MI PR
                                                                                                                                      KSOK                                                                                        NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NV   AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA      OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OR   FL   WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA SC  TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ILALNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TNOH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA TNOH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PAMN  MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI PR      ARNE NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IN   KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OK
                                                                         NV   CA           FL   WA              TX        MI                                                                                                      NV   AZ                                  TX       MN           IN IAKS
                                                                              AZ
                                                                              CA
                                                                              AZ      OR
                                                                                      OR   FL   NY
                                                                                                WA   GA
                                                                                                      IDMD
                                                                                                       COVA  ILALLA
                                                                                                                TX    OH
                                                                                                                    TN PA  KY
                                                                                                                          MI
                                                                                                                         MNKYWI
                                                                                                                             PR  IN IAKS
                                                                                                                                 IN IA                                                                                                 CA      OR   FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FL   NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA        MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GACOVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MD   ILALLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA     MA   MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WI       IN
                                                                              AZ
                                                                              CA
                                                                              AZ      OR   FL   NJ
                                                                                                NY
                                                                                                NJ
                                                                                                WA   NCCOVA SC
                                                                                                        MD
                                                                                                        MD
                                                                                                       COVA  ILTX
                                                                                                                   CT
                                                                                                                 LACT
                                                                                                                TX  TN  MA
                                                                                                                        MA
                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                 LA OH MN
                                                                                                                          MI
                                                                                                                          MI WI
                                                                                                                             MO
                                                                                                                          MI WI
                                                                                                                                      KSOK                                                                                             CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA      OR   FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NCCOVA SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MD   ILTX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CT OHMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PAMN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MAMI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AZ DC   OR   FL   NJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NY     NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IDMD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO    ILAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VA SC   LACT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TX    OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TNOH MN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KYMO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WI      AR  MS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NEIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IN  NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      KSOK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HI    ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                              AZ      OR   FL   NJ
                                                                                                NY
                                                                                                WA
                                                                                                UT   NC
                                                                                                     NCCO
                                                                                                      ID
                                                                                                     GA MD   ILAL
                                                                                                         VA SC   NM
                                                                                                                 LACT  PA
                                                                                                                    TNOHMA
                                                                                                                         MNKY
                                                                                                                          MI WI
                                                                                                                             MO ARNEIA
                                                                                                                                 IN MSKS
                                                                                                                                     MT
                                                                                                                                     NH OK
                                                                                                                                       HI    ME
                                                                                                                                             VT
                                                              0




                                                                                                                        MA                                                                                                                                      GA            CT PA
                                                                                                       CO    IL                                                                                                                                          WA                      OH     PR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WI              OK
                                                                                      OR                       AL            MO AR
                                                                                                                             WI                                                                                                                                                    MA
                                                                                                        MD      TX                                                                                                                                                                              AR
                                                                   -.2




                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                            .2




                                                                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                 State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)                                                                                                                                  State PPPE (Nbr. Loans)




                                                                                                                                                       82
                                                                                                           Figure A.17: % Receiving PPP and Exposure to MSA PPPE
Figure A.17 are scatterplots of MSA exposure to the number-based PPPE and the percentage of businesses in each MSA that applied but did
not receive PPP in each week. The plots represent the evolution of the two variables for each survey week. Data comes from the Census
Bureau, SBA, Call Reports, Summary of Deposits, and County Business Patterns.


                                                                                                                    Week 15: April26 - May2nd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Week 16: May3rd - May9
                                             100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        100
                                             90




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        90
                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80
   % of Businesses reporting receiving PPP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              % of Businesses reporting receiving PPP
                                             70




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hartford-East Hartford-Middletown, CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Columbus, OH                                                    Oklahoma City, OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,    TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Oklahoma City, OK                                                                                                                                        Birmingham-Hoover, AL                          Memphis,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      St. Louis,  TN-MS-AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MO-IL              Buffalo-Cheektowaga, NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington,  MN-WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chicago-Naperville-Elgin, IL-IN-WI Cleveland-Elyria, OH
                                             60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Austin-Round
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Houston-The    Rock-Georgetown,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Woodlands-Sugar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 New Orleans-Metairie,    Land,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LATX          OH-KY-INIndianapolis-Carmel-Anderson,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TX TX Boston-Cambridge-Newton,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cincinnati,                             MA-NH      IN
                                                                                                                                                                               Milwaukee-Waukesha, WI                                                                                                                                                           Jacksonville, FL                             Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        San Antonio-New  Providence-Warwick,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Braunfels, TX       RI-MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, MD Kansas City, MO-KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Milwaukee-Waukesha,       PA-NJ-DE-MDCounty, KY-IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Louisville/Jefferson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pittsburgh,
                                                                                                                                               Birmingham-Hoover, AL                      St. Louis, MO-IL                                                                                                                                                         Salt Lake City, UT                                 Richmond,Virginia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Raleigh-Cary, NC           VA    Beach-Norfolk-Newport     News, PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VA-NC
                                                                                                                                                                                 Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington,   MN-WI                                                                                                                                     New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA                            Detroit-Warren-Dearborn, MI
                                             50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        50
                                                                                                                                                                      Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport
                                                                                                                                                                                                  KansasNews,
                                                                                                                                                                                                           City,VA-NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MO-KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson,   IN                                                                                                                                                              Denver-Aurora-Lakewood,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL             CO
                                                                                                                                                                                              Memphis, TN-MS-AR           Buffalo-Cheektowaga, NY                                                                                               Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Pompano  Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Atlanta-Sandy Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Springs-Alpharetta,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Beach, FL      GA          FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NC-SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Louisville/Jefferson County, KY-IN                                                                         Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NV                 AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sacramento-Roseville-Folsom,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Los Angeles-Long                   Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Beach-Anaheim, CACA                       WA
                                                                                                                                                            Richmond, VA                       Providence-Warwick, RI-MA                                                                                      Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA                                      Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV
                                                                                                                                                               Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, MD
                                                                                                                                                   Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington,  TX                                                                                                                                             San Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          San Diego-Chula  Vista-Carlsbad, CA CA
                                             40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                                 Chicago-Naperville-Elgin,
                                                                                                                                             Raleigh-Cary, NC               IL-IN-WI
                                                                                                                                                                                Columbus, Boston-Cambridge-Newton,
                                                                                                                                                                                             OH
                                                                                                                                  Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia,
                                                                                                                                                                                 Cincinnati, OH-KY-IN OH
                                                                                                                                                                                       Cleveland-Elyria,
                                                                                                                                                                    Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,
                                                                                                                                                       New Orleans-Metairie,
                                                                                                                                                               NC-SC           LA                                  TN MA-NH
                                                                                                          Salt Lake City, UT                                                  San Antonio-New      Pittsburgh,
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Braunfels, TXPA                                                                                                      San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA
                                                                                                                                                 Austin-Round Rock-Georgetown,     TX
                                                                                                                                                                     Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington,     PA-NJ-DE-MD
                                                                                                                                                Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar
                                                                                                                                          Denver-Aurora-Lakewood,    CO          Land, TX
                                             30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30
                                                                              Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler, AZ Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue,
                                                                                                  Jacksonville, FLAtlanta-Sandy Springs-Alpharetta,
                                                                                                                                    WA              GA            Detroit-Warren-Dearborn,Hartford-East
                                                                                                                                                                                           MI           Hartford-Middletown, CT
                                                                                                   Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Pompano
                                                                                    Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA              Beach, FL
                                                                                                                            Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV
                                                                             Sacramento-Roseville-Folsom, CA
                                                                                                                                  Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL
                                                   Las   Vegas-Henderson-Paradise, NV              New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA
                                                                 San Diego-Chula Vista-Carlsbad, CA CA
                                                                      San Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley,               Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                         Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim, CA
                                                   Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA
                                                            San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa  Clara, CA
                                             10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                           -.2




                                                                                             -.1




                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .3
                                                                                                                      MSA PPPE (Nbr. Loans)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MSA PPPE (Nbr. Loans)




                                                                                                                     Week 17: May10 - May16                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Week 18: May17 - May23
                                             100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        100
                                             90




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        90




                                                                                                                                               Birmingham-Hoover, AL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Buffalo-Cheektowaga, NY

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Richmond, VA
                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Austin-Round Rock-Georgetown, TX
                                                                                                                                                                               Columbus, OH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hartford-East Hartford-Middletown, CT
                                                                                                                                                                                          Memphis, TN-MS-AR                                                                                                                                                                                             Birmingham-Hoover, AL             Columbus,   OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Cleveland-Elyria,  OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Milwaukee-Waukesha, News,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport     WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,  VA-NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TN                         Oklahoma City, OK
                                                                                                                                                Austin-Round Rock-Georgetown, TX                 Kansas City, MO-KS                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Minneapolis-St.   Paul-Bloomington,   MN-WI
   % of Businesses reporting receiving PPP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              % of Businesses reporting receiving PPP




                                                                                                                                            Raleigh-Cary,
                                                                                                                                                      NewNC
                                                                                                                                                          Orleans-Metairie, LA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         St. Louis, MO-IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Boston-Cambridge-Newton,
                                                                                                                                                                               Cincinnati, St.     Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson,
                                                                                                                                                                                               Louis, MO-IL
                                                                                                                                                                  Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,
                                                                                                                                                                                           OH-KY-IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                Hartford-East
                                                                                                                                                                              Milwaukee-Waukesha,      WI         TN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Hartford-Middletown, IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CT                                                                                                                                                         Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL                                  Pittsburgh,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kansas        MO-KS MA-NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City,PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson,    IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Oklahoma City, OK
                                             70




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70




                                                   Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise, NV                                                            Houston-TheRichmond,
                                                                                                                                                           Woodlands-Sugar     Land,Cleveland-Elyria,
                                                                                                                                                                                     TX MD Paul-Bloomington,
                                                                                                                                                             Baltimore-Columbia-Towson,
                                                                                                                                                                               Minneapolis-St.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Chicago-Naperville-Elgin,                    Memphis,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Cincinnati, OH-KY-IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Detroit-Warren-Dearborn,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IL-IN-WI               MI    TN-MS-AR
                                                                              Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler, AZ                                                               VA                                OH PA MN-WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pittsburgh,                                                                                                 Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise,   NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Alpharetta, GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dallas-Fort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Washington-Arlington-Alexandria,       Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Worth-Arlington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DC-VA-MD-WV      TX                       PA-NJ-DE-MD
                                                                                                                    Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater,
                                                                                                    New York-Newark-Jersey    City, NY-NJ-PA         FL             Detroit-Warren-Dearborn, MI                                                                                                                                                                NewSalt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sacramento-Roseville-Folsom,York-Newark-Jersey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CALake            City, NY-NJ-PARaleigh-Cary, NCWoodlands-Sugar
                                                                                                                                                                   Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington,
                                                                                                                                                Chicago-Naperville-Elgin, IL-IN-WI
                                                                                                                                                                            San Antonio-New             PA-NJ-DE-MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                Braunfels, TX            Buffalo-Cheektowaga, NY                                                                                   Los Angeles-Long           Jacksonville,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Beach-Anaheim,  CA    FLCity, UT                    Houston-The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Denver-Aurora-Lakewood,    CO       SanLand,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Antonio-New
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TX         Braunfels, TX
                                                                                                                   Atlanta-Sandy Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia,
                                                                                                                                 Springs-Alpharetta,
                                                                                                           Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue,                  GA
                                                                                                                                     WA Denver-Aurora-Lakewood,    CO                     Boston-Cambridge-Newton,     MA-NH                                                                                           San San  San Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Diego-Chula       Clara, CA CA CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Vista-Carlsbad,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa                                             Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia, NC-SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA
                                                                     San Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley, CASalt
                                                                                     Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro,
                                                                                                    Miami-FortLake OR-WA
                                                                                                                   City, UT
                                                                                                                Lauderdale-Pompano    Beach, FL Dallas-Fort NC-SC
                                                                                                                                                             Worth-Arlington,  TX
                                                                                                                                                                    Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC                                                                                                                                                 Miami-Fort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lauderdale-PompanoWA  Beach, FL               Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, MD
                                                   Riverside-SanSan Diego-Chula Vista-Carlsbad,
                                                                 Bernardino-Ontario, CA         CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Providence-Warwick, RI-MA
                                             60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60




                                                                        Los Angeles-Long
                                                            San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa       Beach-Anaheim,
                                                                                      Clara, CA            CA FL
                                                                                                   Jacksonville,             Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV                         Louisville/Jefferson County, KY-IN                                                                          Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA                                                               New Orleans-Metairie, LA                      Louisville/Jefferson County, KY-IN
                                                                                                                                    Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL                             Providence-Warwick, RI-MA                                                                                                                  Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler, AZ

                                                                              Sacramento-Roseville-Folsom, CA
                                             50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        50
                                             40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                             30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30
                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                             10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                           -.2




                                                                                             -.1




                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .3
                                                                                                                      MSA PPPE (Nbr. Loans)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MSA PPPE (Nbr. Loans)




                                                                                                                     Week 19: May24 - May30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Week 20: May31 - Jun6
                                             100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        100
                                             90




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        90




                                                                                                                                                                                           Memphis, TN-MS-AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hartford-East Hartford-Middletown, CT
                                                                                                                                                                              San Antonio-New Braunfels, TX
                                             80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        80




                                                                                                                                               Birmingham-Hoover, AL            Cincinnati, OH-KY-IN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Pittsburgh, PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson, IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hartford-East
                                                                                                                                                                               Milwaukee-Waukesha,      WI     Hartford-Middletown,  CT                                                                                                                                                                 Birmingham-Hoover,   AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 New Orleans-Metairie,  LA      Cleveland-Elyria,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Milwaukee-Waukesha,      OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     St. Louis, MO-IL       TN County, KY-IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Buffalo-Cheektowaga, NY                                                                                                                                                                                                           Louisville/Jefferson
                                                                                                                                    Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford,       Detroit-Warren-Dearborn,
                                                                                                                                                Chicago-Naperville-Elgin,  IL-IN-WI               MI MO-IL
                                                                                                                                                                 FLNashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,
                                                                                                                                                                                            St. Louis,             TN                                                                                                                                                                          Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford,  FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington, Cincinnati,Boston-Cambridge-Newton,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TX          OH-KY-IN                   MA-NH             Oklahoma City, OK
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kansas   City, MO-KS                         Oklahoma City, OK                                                                                              Jacksonville, FL                                                                             Kansas City, MO-KS Buffalo-Cheektowaga, NY
   % of Businesses reporting receiving PPP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              % of Businesses reporting receiving PPP




                                                                                                                                                                    Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington,      PA-NJ-DE-MD
                                                                                                                                                                               Columbus, OHProvidence-Warwick,                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Detroit-Warren-Dearborn,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Chicago-Naperville-Elgin, IL-IN-WI              MI
                                                                                                                    Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
                                                                                                                                                      New            Virginia
                                                                                                                                                           Orleans-Metairie,  Beach-Norfolk-Newport
                                                                                                                                                                              LA                        News,  VA-NCRI-MA                                                                                                                                      Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Pompano     Beach, FLAustin-Round   Rock-Georgetown,Columbus,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TX       OH Braunfels,
                                                                                                   Jacksonville, FL                      Denver-Aurora-Lakewood,
                                                                                                                                               Houston-The          CO
                                                                                                                                                            Woodlands-Sugar     Land, TX Boston-Cambridge-Newton,       MA-NHKY-IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Louisville/Jefferson County,                                                                                                                                               Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Alpharetta,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SanMinneapolis-St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Antonio-New   Paul-Bloomington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TX       MN-WI
                                             70




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70




                                                   Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise,   NV
                                                                              Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler,  AZ CA
                                                                             Sacramento-Roseville-Folsom,                                         Dallas-Fort
                                                                                                                   Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Alpharetta,
                                                                                                                                                Austin-Round  Worth-Arlington,
                                                                                                                                                     GA Richmond,      VA
                                                                                                                                                              Rock-Georgetown,  TXTX                Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson,   IN                                                                                          San Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise,   NV                CASalt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               New  York-Newark-Jersey      Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         City, NY-NJ-PA                  NC-SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Richmond,  VA
                                                                     San Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley,
                                                                San Diego-Chula Vista-Carlsbad,      CASalt
                                                                                     Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro,
                                                                                                CA New             OR-WA                                                                           Pittsburgh, PA                                                                                                                  Los Angeles-Long   Beach-Anaheim,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sacramento-Roseville-Folsom,  CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CALake City, UT                                        Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Baltimore-Columbia-Towson,                PA-NJ-DE-MD
                                                   Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario,
                                                            San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa CA
                                                                                      Clara,
                                                                        Los Angeles-Long     CA
                                                                                           Beach-Anaheim,
                                                                                                         York-Newark-Jersey
                                                                                                    Miami-FortLake City, UT   City, NY-NJ-PA
                                                                                                                Lauderdale-Pompano
                                                                                                           Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue,
                                                                                                           CA                         Beach, FL
                                                                                                                                     WA                                               Cleveland-Elyria,
                                                                                                                                                              Baltimore-Columbia-Towson,     MD          OH                                                                                                                                                                                               Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar     Land, TX MD
                                                                                                                                 Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia,
                                                                                                                                            Raleigh-Cary, NC NC-SC
                                                                                                                             Washington-Arlington-Alexandria,  DC-VA-MD-WV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Providence-Warwick,   RI-MA
                                                                                                                                                                                Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI                                                                                                                  Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA               AZ   Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue,  WA     Raleigh-Cary, NC DC-VA-MD-WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Denver-Aurora-Lakewood,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Washington-Arlington-Alexandria,      CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       San San Diego-Chula Vista-Carlsbad,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa  Clara, CA CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC
                                             60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Memphis, TN-MS-AR
                                             50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        50
                                             40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        40
                                             30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        30
                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                             10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                           -.2




                                                                                             -.1




                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .3




                                                                                                                      MSA PPPE (Nbr. Loans)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MSA PPPE (Nbr. Loans)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    83
                                                                                                                   Figure A.18: Unmet PPP Demand and Exposure to MSA PPPE
Figure A.18 are scatterplots of MSA exposure to the number-based PPPE and the percentage of businesses in each MSA that applied but did
not receive PPP in each week. The plots represent the evolution of the two variables for each survey week. Data comes from the Census
Bureau, SBA, Call Reports, Summary of Deposits, and County Business Patterns.


                                                                                                                                    Week 15: April26 - May2nd                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Week 16: May3rd - May9
                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                   Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA


                                                                           San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA
                                                                                        Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim, CA
                                                                                San Diego-Chula Vista-Carlsbad, CA
                                                                                                                   Jacksonville,
                                                                                     San Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley, CA CA FLTampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL
                                                                                             Sacramento-Roseville-Folsom,
                                                                                                                    New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA
   Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP
                                                              50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                                                                                                                Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL
                                                                   Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise, NV                             Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Alpharetta, GA                                       Hartford-East
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Pittsburgh, Hartford-Middletown,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PA                   CT
                                                                                                  Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA
                                                                                                                 Miami-Fort Lauderdale-Pompano Beach, FL
                                                                                                                                          Washington-Arlington-Alexandria,
                                                                                           Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler, AZ Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue,     WA                       DC-VA-MD-WV Land, TX
                                                                                                                                                            Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar
                                                                                                                                                                                 Detroit-Warren-Dearborn,   MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Cleveland-Elyria, OH
                                                                                                                                              Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia, NC-SCNashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,   TN
                                                              40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                             Austin-Round Rock-Georgetown,
                                                                                                                                                      Denver-Aurora-Lakewood,   CO            TX
                                                                                                                                                               Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington,Columbus,
                                                                                                                                                                                            TX          OH
                                                                                                                                                                                Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington,     PA-NJ-DE-MD
                                                                                                                     Salt Lake City, UT                                                                Boston-Cambridge-Newton, MA-NH
                                                                                                                                                         Raleigh-Cary, NC
                                                                                                                                                                   New Orleans-Metairie, San  Antonio-New Braunfels, TX
                                                                                                                                                                                          LACincinnati,
                                                                                                                                                             Chicago-Naperville-Elgin, IL-IN-WI         OH-KY-IN
                                                                                                                                                                          Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, MD                                                                                                                                                    San Diego-Chula Vista-Carlsbad, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Providence-Warwick, RI-MA                                                                                                                           San Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley,Miami-Fort
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Memphis, TN-MS-AR                                                                                                                                            Sacramento-Roseville-Folsom, CA Lauderdale-Pompano Beach, FL
                                                              30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                            Richmond, VA                                                                                                                                                      Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise, NV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Buffalo-Cheektowaga, NY                                                                                                     Los Angeles-Long
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA Beach-Anaheim, CA                                              Richmond, VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Washington-Arlington-Alexandria, DC-VA-MD-WV
                                                                                                                                                                                      Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport
                                                                                                                                                                                                          St. Louis,  News, VA-NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MO-IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson,   IN                                                                                                                                                        Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Alpharetta, GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                Milwaukee-Waukesha, WI                                                                                                                                                                              Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue, WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler, AZ           Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL            Detroit-Warren-Dearborn, MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Louisville/Jefferson County, KY-IN                                                                                                                                                                         Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford, FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA
                                                                                                                                                               Birmingham-Hoover, AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro,                Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia,  NC-SCPhiladelphia-Camden-Wilmington, PA-NJ-DE-MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Salt Lake OR-WA
                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                                                               Minneapolis-St. Paul-Bloomington, MN-WI                                                                                                                                                                        City, UT                            New Orleans-Metairie,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Virginia LACincinnati, OH-KY-IN News, VA-NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Beach-Norfolk-Newport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Baltimore-Columbia-Towson,     MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Denver-Aurora-Lakewood, CO                  Cleveland-Elyria, OH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Oklahoma City, OK                                                                                                                                                         Raleigh-Cary, NC                  Milwaukee-Waukesha,      WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Hartford-East
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jacksonville, FL                              Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Birmingham-Hoover,   AL           TX                 Pittsburgh, Hartford-Middletown,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Boston-Cambridge-Newton,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PA       MA-NH        CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar  SanLand, TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Antonio-New    Braunfels,  TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Minneapolis-St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Chicago-Naperville-Elgin, IL-IN-WI               Paul-Bloomington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       St. Louis, MO-IL          MN-WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Louisville/Jefferson County, KY-IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson,    IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kansas City, MO-KS                                                                                                                                                                                                          Austin-Round Rock-Georgetown, TX                  Kansas  City, MO-KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Memphis,   TN-MS-AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,      TNRI-MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Providence-Warwick,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Buffalo-Cheektowaga, NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Columbus, OH                                                     Oklahoma City, OK
                                                              10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                          -.2




                                                                                                             -.1




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .3
                                                                                                                                      MSA PPPE (Nbr. Loans)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MSA PPPE (Nbr. Loans)




                                                                                                                                     Week 17: May10 - May16                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Week 18: May17 - May23
                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
   Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP
                                                              50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                              40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30
                                                              30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                              20




                                                                                              Sacramento-Roseville-Folsom, CA
                                                                                        Los Angeles-Long Beach-Anaheim,    CA Lauderdale-Pompano Beach, FL                                                                                                                                                                                    Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA                                                                                                  Memphis, TN-MS-AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Baltimore-Columbia-Towson, MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10




                                                                                                                    Miami-Fort
                                                                   Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario, CA                                                                    Richmond,
                                                                                                                                             Washington-Arlington-Alexandria,         VA
                                                                                                                                                                               DC-VA-MD-WV                                                                                                                                                               San Diego-Chula Vista-Carlsbad, CA New
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise, NV                AZ York-Newark-Jersey   City, NY-NJ-PARaleigh-Cary, NC NC-SC
                                                              10




                                                                                San Diego-Chula Vista-Carlsbad, CA                                                    New Orleans-Metairie,  LA                                                                                                                                                                  Los Angeles-Long  Beach-Anaheim,  CA                    Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia,
                                                                   Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise,   NV                              Atlanta-Sandy    Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford,
                                                                                                                                                 Springs-Alpharetta, GA
                                                                                                                                                 Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia,    FL Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington, PA-NJ-DE-MD
                                                                                                                                                                              NC-SC
                                                                                                     Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro,
                                                                                                                    New York-Newark-Jersey
                                                                                                                                   OR-WA      City, NY-NJ-PA Houston-The
                                                                                                                                    Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL     Woodlands-Sugar    Land, TX                                                                                                                                                               Sacramento-Roseville-Folsom,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa  Clara, CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              San Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley, CA CA Lauderdale-Pompano Beach, FL
                                                                            San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa Clara, CA             Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue,  WA                                       Columbus, OH                               Buffalo-Cheektowaga, NY                                                                                                                            Miami-Fort                                        New Orleans-Metairie,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Washington-Arlington-Alexandria,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Houston-The    DC-VA-MD-WV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Woodlands-Sugar  LALand,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     San Antonio-New
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TX            Louisville/Jefferson
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Braunfels,  TXPA        County, KY-IN
                                                                                                                   Jacksonville, FL                                                                  Cleveland-Elyria,  OH PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Pittsburgh,                                                                                                                                                                              Atlanta-Sandy Springs-Alpharetta, GA            Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington,       PA-NJ-DE-MD
                                                                                     San Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley, CA                                           Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington,
                                                                                                                                                                Chicago-Naperville-Elgin,      TX
                                                                                                                                                                                               Cincinnati,
                                                                                                                                                                                          IL-IN-WI         OH-KY-IN
                                                                                                                                                                                    Detroit-Warren-Dearborn,     MI                                                                                                                                                                                Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro, OR-WA             WA Denver-Aurora-Lakewood,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford,  FLCOD etroit-Warren-Dearborn,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Dallas-Fort Worth-Arlington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Virginia   TX                MIPittsburgh,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Beach-Norfolk-Newport      News, VA-NC
                                                                                              Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler, AZSalt Lake City, UT                       Austin-Round Rock-Georgetown,    TX           Providence-Warwick,   RI-MA
                                                                                                                                                         Denver-Aurora-Lakewood,   CO       San Antonio-NewSt. Louis, MO-ILTX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Braunfels,
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Boston-Cambridge-Newton,                                                                                                                                                                                                      Chicago-Naperville-Elgin,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL                   IL-IN-WI Cleveland-Elyria,     OH Hartford-Middletown,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Providence-Warwick,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Hartford-East        RI-MA           CT
                                                                                                                                                            Raleigh-Cary, NC Baltimore-Columbia-Towson,     MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Memphis,   TN-MS-ARTN MA-NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson,
                                                                                                                                                                                  Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,                      IN                                                                                                                                           Salt Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jacksonville, FLCity, UT                                Richmond, VA        Cincinnati, St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Minneapolis-St.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Louis,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OH-KY-IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         KansasMO-IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City, MO-KS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson,    IN            Oklahoma City, OK
                                                                                                                                                                                               Minneapolis-St.Hartford-East
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Paul-Bloomington,
                                                                                                                                                                                    Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport            VA-NCMN-WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       News, Hartford-Middletown,                                                                                                                                                                                    Birmingham-Hoover, AL            Columbus,   OH Paul-Bloomington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Boston-Cambridge-Newton,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MN-WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Louisville/Jefferson County, KY-INCT                                                                                                                                                                                                    Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,      TN MA-NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Austin-Round Rock-Georgetown,    TX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Milwaukee-Waukesha,       WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0




                                                                                                                                                               Birmingham-Hoover, AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kansas                                          Oklahoma City, OK
                                                                                                                                                                                               Milwaukee-Waukesha, WICity, MO-KS
                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Buffalo-Cheektowaga, NY
                                                                          -.2




                                                                                                             -.1




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .3
                                                                                                                                      MSA PPPE (Nbr. Loans)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MSA PPPE (Nbr. Loans)




                                                                                                                                     Week 19: May24 - May30                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Week 20: May31 - Jun6
                                                              60




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         60
   Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Diff. between % of businesses applying and receiving PPP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                              50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                              40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30
                                                              30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20
                                                              20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                              10




                                                                                                                                                  Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia, NC-SC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC
                                                                            San Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa
                                                                   Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise,   NV Clara, CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Las Vegas-Henderson-Paradise, NV                 Jacksonville, FL                                  New Orleans-Metairie, San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LA Cincinnati,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Columbus,    OH-KY-IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OH
                                                                                                                                                                  Dallas-Fort
                                                                                                                                    Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL       Worth-Arlington,
                                                                                                                                                                      New Orleans-Metairie,     TX                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Antonio-New    Braunfels, TX
                                                                   Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario,
                                                                                     SanLos
                                                                                San Diego-Chula
                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                          Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley,
                                                                                            Angeles-Long              CA York-Newark-Jersey
                                                                                                           Beach-Anaheim,
                                                                                                     Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro,
                                                                                                 Vista-Carlsbad, CA New
                                                                                              Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler,Miami-Fort     Atlanta-Sandy
                                                                                                                      AZ CA Lauderdale-Pompano
                                                                                                                                   OR-WA         Springs-Alpharetta,
                                                                                                                                              City, NY-NJ-PA
                                                                                                                                                      Beach, FL      GA              Virginia LA
                                                                                                                                                                                              Beach-Norfolk-Newport News, VA-NC                                                                                                                                         Sacramento-Roseville-Folsom,   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue,  WA              FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Charlotte-Concord-Gastonia,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dallas-Fort NC-SCPhiladelphia-Camden-Wilmington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Detroit-Warren-Dearborn,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Worth-Arlington, TX           Memphis,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MI     PA-NJ-DE-MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TN-MS-AR
                                                                                                                                                           Raleigh-Cary,
                                                                                                                                                                Austin-Round         Detroit-Warren-Dearborn,
                                                                                                                                                                         NC Rock-Georgetown,      TX TX           MILouisville/Jefferson
                                                                                                                                                                                    Philadelphia-Camden-Wilmington,      PA-NJ-DE-MDCounty, KY-IN                                                                                                      San San
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jose-Sunnyvale-Santa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Diego-Chula        Clara, CA CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Vista-Carlsbad,                                                             Baltimore-Columbia-Towson,     MD
                                                                                                                           Seattle-Tacoma-Bellevue,            Houston-The Woodlands-Sugar
                                                                                                                                             Washington-Arlington-Alexandria,
                                                                                                                                                     WA                        DC-VA-MD-WV Land,                                                                                                                                                                         Phoenix-Mesa-Chandler,   AZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Portland-Vancouver-Hillsboro,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                New           OR-WA     Washington-Arlington-Alexandria,  DC-VA-MD-WV
                                                                                                                                                                          Richmond, VA                Cleveland-Elyria, OH                                                                                                                    Riverside-San Bernardino-Ontario,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SanLos          CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Francisco-Oakland-Berkeley,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Angeles-Long              CA York-Newark-Jersey
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Beach-Anaheim,                     City,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CA Lauderdale-Pompano
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Miami-Fort    Atlanta-Sandy    NY-NJ-PA Houston-The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Springs-Alpharetta, GA Richmond,  COVA IL-IN-WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Woodlands-Sugar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FL Chicago-Naperville-Elgin,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Denver-Aurora-Lakewood,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Beach,                                   Land, TX
                                                                                                                                                                Chicago-Naperville-Elgin,      Columbus,
                                                                                                                                                                                                Cincinnati, OH
                                                                                                                                                                                               Milwaukee-Waukesha,
                                                                                                                                                                                                Minneapolis-St.
                                                                                                                                                                                           IL-IN-WI                Pittsburgh,
                                                                                                                                                                                                            OH-KY-IN    WI      PA MN-WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Paul-Bloomington,                                                                                                                                                                                            Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford,  FL            Milwaukee-Waukesha,      WI
                                                                                                                                                    Orlando-Kissimmee-Sanford,Baltimore-Columbia-Towson,
                                                                                                                                                                                 FLCO                        MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                            St.     Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson,
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Memphis,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Louis, MO-IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TN-MS-AR                    IN                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Minneapolis-St.  Hartford-East
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Paul-Bloomington,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      St. Louis, MO-IL    Hartford-Middletown,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MN-WI           CT
                                                                                             Sacramento-Roseville-Folsom,
                                                                                                                        SaltCALake City, UT              Denver-Aurora-Lakewood,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Austin-Round
                                                                                                                   Jacksonville, FL                                                                        Boston-Cambridge-Newton,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kansas City, MO-KS MA-NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Hartford-East Hartford-Middletown,
                                                                                                                                                                                   Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,      TN               CT        Oklahoma City, OK                                                                                                                                                       Raleigh-Cary, NC Rock-Georgetown,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Birmingham-Hoover,   AL             TX               Kansas  City,PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MO-KS MA-NH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Boston-Cambridge-Newton,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Pittsburgh,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Cleveland-Elyria,  OH                Buffalo-Cheektowaga, NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Providence-Warwick,  TNRI-MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Indianapolis-Carmel-Anderson,    IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                             Birmingham-Hoover, AL           San Antonio-New   Providence-Warwick,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Braunfels, TX            Buffalo-Cheektowaga, NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RI-MA                                                                                                                                                        Salt Lake City, UT                                        Nashville-Davidson--Murfreesboro--Franklin,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Louisville/Jefferson County, KY-IN          Oklahoma City, OK
                                                                          -.2




                                                                                                             -.1




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .3




                                                                                                                                      MSA PPPE (Nbr. Loans)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MSA PPPE (Nbr. Loans)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   84
                                                    Figure A.19: UCC Filings Over Time
Figure A.19 shows the number of UCC filings between January and July 2020. Data comes from California UCC filings. These UCC laws are
set at the state-level, although the National Conference of Commissioners has sought to make them fairly uniform across states. We are able
to observe the names and addresses of the debtor and the secured property, together with the description of the property that has a security
interest. We subsequently match the UCC data with firm-level information from HomeBase. We refer readers to Edgerton (2012) for further
details about the UCC data and its features.
                                         60000
    Number of UCC filings (California)
                                         40000
                                         20000
                                         0
                                                                              25

                                                                              b1

                                                                                8

                                                                  6-F 5
                                                                              22

                                                                              29

                                                                              r7

                                                                                4

                                                                                1

                                                                                8
                                                                           pr4

                                                                            r11

                                                                           r18

                                                                                5

                                                                                2

                                                                                9

                                                                                6
                                                                              23

                                                                              30

                                                                                6
                                                                              13

                                                                                0

                                                                                7
                                                                            ul4

                                                                            l11

                                                                              18

                                                                               5

                                                                               1
                                                                          eb

                                                                              1




                                                                         ar1

                                                                         ar2

                                                        : M Mar2




                                                                         pr2

                                                                           ay

                                                                           ay

                                                                              1




                                                                          un



                                                                          n2

                                                                              2




                                                                          ul2

                                                                          ul3
                                                                           a
                                                                         an
                                                                       -Fe



                                                                          b
                                                                         eb

                                                                          b




                                                                         ay

                                                                         ay

                                                                         ay



                                                                         un



                                                                          n




                                                                            l
                                                                       -Ju
                                                                       8-J



                                                                       -Ju
                                                                          p
                                                                        -M




                                                                        -A



                                                                         p


                                                                       -M
                                                                    3-M
                                                                    2-F

                                                                    -Fe



                                                                    -Fe




                                                                     1-J



                                                                     -Ju

                                                                     -Ju




                                                                    9-J

                                                                    6-J
                                                                      -A
                                                                     -M

                                                                     -M




                                                                     -A

                                                                     -A




                                                                    -M

                                                                    -M

                                                                    -M
                                                                    -J




                                                                   7-J
                                                                  r29
                                                                  26




                                                                 ar1




                                                                 ul5
                                                                  n2



                                                                 l12
                                                                r26
                                                                     -


                                                                pr5

                                                               r12

                                                               r19




                                                                y3



                                                                14

                                                                21
                                                                b0

                                                                b9



                                                                23


                                                               ar8

                                                               r15

                                                               r22




                                                              ul1

                                                              ul2
                                                                ay

                                                               10

                                                               17

                                                               24
                                                              19




                                                              un
                                                                n




                                                              b1




                                                             Ju
                                                               a




                                                             :J
                                                           :M




                                                              u
                                                            un

                                                            un
                                            We 5: Ap
                                                           Ja

                                                           Fe

                                                           Fe



                                                              b




                                                           :A




                                                          :M




                                                          Ma
                                                          Ap

                                                          Ap




                                                           ay
                                                           M
                                                         Ma

                                                             a




                                                          :J

                                                          :J

                                                          :J
                                                          an




                                                          ay

                                                          ay



                                                          :J
                                                         Fe

                                                         Fe




                                                        25
                                                     : M




                                                           :
                                                       :J

                                                       :J
                                                         7




                                                      24
                                                     :M
                                                      12
                                                      2:




                                                     26

                                                     27

                                                     28
                                                      3:

                                                      4:




                                                     16



                                                    :M

                                                    :M



                                                     21
                                         :J




                                                        :

                                                        :
                                                     8:




                                                       :
                                                    11



                                                   13

                                                   14
                                                   ek
                                                    5:

                                                    6:




                                                   20



                                                   22

                                                   23



                                                   ek
                                                    1
                                                   9:
                                                  ek




                                                 10
                                                  ek

                                                  ek




                                                  ek
                                                 17
                      k1




                                                 ek




                                                 ek

                                                 ek

                                                 ek
                                                 ek




                                                 ek



                                                18

                                                19



                                                ek
                                               We




                                                ek
                                                ek

                                                ek




                                                ek




                                               We
                                               ek

                                               ek
                                               ek




                                               ek



                                               ek

                                               ek
                                              We

                                             We

                                             We




                                             We
                                             We




                                             We

                                             We

                                             We
                                            We



                                              ek
      e




                                            We
                                             ek
                                            We
                                           We

                                           We




                                           We




                                             ek

                                             ek
                                           We

                                           We
                                           We
   We




                                           We



                                           We

                                           We
                                          We




                                          We
                                          We

                                          We




                                                                         Week




                                                                    85
                                                       Figure A.20: UCC Filings and PPPE
Figure A.20 are scatterplots of the the ratio of UCC filings per establishment and the county exposure to the number-based PPPE. Data comes
from SBA, Call Reports, Summary of Deposits, County Business Patterns and California UCC filings.
    Ratio UCC filings/Establishments
      .1        .2   0    .3




                                       -.5                              0                                                            .5
                                                                   PPPE Week 13

                                             Week 10     Week 14       Week 18              Week 22                Week 26




                                                                      86
                                        Cummulative Loan Count
                  04            0   1000000 2000000 3000000 4000000
                    /01
                          /20
                  04
                    /08
                          /20
                  04
                    /15
                          /20
                  04
                    /22
                          /20
                  04
                    /29
                          /20
                  05
                    /06
                          /20
                  05
                    /13




87
                          /20




     PPP Loans
                  05
                    /20
                          /20
                  05
                    /27
                          /20
                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure A.21: EIDL and PPP




                  06
                    /03
                          /20
                  06
                    /10




     EIDL Loans
                          /20
                                                                      Figure A.21 shows cumulative PPP and EIDL lending between April and July, 2020. Data comes from the SBA.




                  06
                    /17
                          /20
                  06
                    /24
                          /20
                  07
                    /01
                          /20
                                                                                               Figure A.22: EIDL and PPPE
Figure A.22 are scatterplots of the average fraction of small business establishment that received an EIDL loan in each percentile bin based
on the county exposure to the number-based PPPE. PPP fraction and county PPPE are demeaned using their respective state averages. Data
comes from SBA, Call Reports, Summary of Deposits, and County Business Patterns.
                                                                   .02
             Fraction of Small Businesses receiving EIDL as of Week 16




                                                                                NV

                                                                                                                         LA
                                                                   .015




                                                                                     CA                                       CT
                                                                                                                                   RI
                                                                                          DC            WA GA                                   NH
                                                                                                    FL
                                                                                                                                                     ME
                                                                                                         NJ             CO
                                                                   .01




                                                                                                         NC        MD              MA          ND
                                                                                                                   VA           OH
                                                                                     AZ                  SC
                                                                                                         UT                                          VT
                                                                                                                        IL TXAL MN MI       HI
                                                                                               OR        NY                 NM    PA         SD OK
                                                                                                                                            IA
                                                                                                                                    KY IN    KS
                                                                                                                        DE     TN     WI  NEMT
                                                                                                                                   WY        MS
                                                                                                                                         AR
                                                                                                               ID                     MO
                                                                   .005




                                                                                                                                           WV

                                                                                                                        AK
                                                                   0
                                                                          -.2




                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                          .4
                                                                                                         State PPPE (Round #1)



                                                                                                                                           HI
                                                                   .4




                                                                                                    FL
             Fraction of Small Businesses receiving EIDL as of Week 24




                                                                                     CA                       GA
                                                                                                                         LA
                                                                                NV



                                                                                                         NJ
                                                                                                         NY                  TX
                                                                   .3




                                                                                                                                            MS
                                                                                     AZ                                 AK
                                                                                                         SC        MD   CT
                                                                                                                     IL AL
                                                                                          DC   OR        NC
                                                                                                        WA       VA CO NM TN RI
                                                                                                                             MI            OK        VT
                                                                                                                    DE       MA           NH
                                                                                                         UT
                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                            PA          SD
                                                                                                                           OH       AR MT
                                                                                                               ID           MN                       ME
                                                                                                                             WY
                                                                                                                              KYWI    NE
                                                                                                                                MO      KSND
                                                                                                                                   IN
                                                                                                                                      WV
                                                                                                                                       IA
                                                                   .1
                                                                          -.2




                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                          .4




                                                                                                         State PPPE (Round #1)




                                                                                                                   88
                                      Figure A.23: PPP Lending and Commercial & Industrial Loans
Figure A.23 are scatterplots of the ratio of Commercial and Industrial Loans in Q2 2020 and Commercial and Industrial Loans in Q1 2020
 C&I Loans                                                                                   P P P Loans
( C&I LoansQ2 ) and the ratio of PPP loans and Commercial and Industrial Loans in Q1 2020   C&I LoansQ1 .   Data comes from Federal Reserve Call
           Q1
Reports.
                  1.08
    C&I Loans Q2 / C&I Loans Q1
    1.02       1.04
                  1        1.06




                                  0            .02          .04            .06                                     .08                     .1
                                                         PPP Loans / C&I Loans Q1




                                                                   89
  Figure A.24: PPPE in Round #1 with and without Self-Employed and Sole-Proprietorships
Figure A.24 plots the PPPE at the bank-, county-, and zip- level computed with and without counts of PPP loans to self-employed individuals
and sole-proprietorships. Data comes from SBA and Summary of Deposits.

         Panel A: The Comparison of Number-Based Bank PPPE Round #1 Measures with and without Self-Employed Individuals




        Panel B: The Comparison of Number-Based County PPPE Round #1 Measures with and without Self-Employed Individuals




          Panel C: The Comparison of Number-Based Zip PPPE Round #1 Measures with and without Self-Employed Individuals




                                                                   90
                              Table A.1: PPP in Bank Websites and PPP performance

Table A.1 reports results of OLS regressions examining the relation between bank PPPE and the availability of information about applications
to the PPP program in each bank’s internet websites as of April 10th, 2020. The dependent variables are PPP info, Receiving PPP applications,
and Online Application. PPP info is an indicator variables that takes the value of one if the bank provides any information about the PPP
program in its internet website. Receiving PPP applications is an indicator variables that takes the value of one if the bank states in its website
that is receiving applications to the PPP program as of April 10th. Online Application is an indicator variables that takes the value of one if the
bank receives online applications through its internet website. Bank PPPE (Round #1) is the bank PPPE measured as of the end of round one
of the PPP. Data about the PPP offerings in bank’s websites was hand-collected from banks’ websites during April 9th and April 10th, 2020.
Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at
1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                               (1)        (2)               (3)           (4)                      (5)       (6)
                                                  PPP info               Receiving PPP applications             Online Application
         Bank PPPE (Round #1)               0.186∗∗∗ 0.170∗∗∗            0.177∗∗∗      0.162∗∗∗                 0.047∗∗    0.036∗
                                            (0.028)     (0.029)          (0.027)       (0.027)                  (0.020)   (0.020)
         ln(Assets)                         0.121∗∗∗ 0.118∗∗∗            0.103∗∗∗      0.101∗∗∗                 0.056∗∗∗ 0.056∗∗∗
                                            (0.007)     (0.008)          (0.007)       (0.007)                  (0.004)   (0.005)
         Observations                         4857       4856              4857          4856                     4857      4856
         Adjusted R2                         0.167       0.182            0.137         0.147                    0.059     0.066
         State Fixed Effects                   No         Yes               No            Yes                      No        Yes




                                                                       91
                                                                Table A.2: Business Shutdowns and PPP Targeting

     Table A.2 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions examining the relation between the allocation of PPP funds and the share of businesses that shutdown operations in the
     last week of March. The dependent variable, Share of Firms Shutdown during Week 10, is the share of businesses within a zip code and industry group that did not operate in the week of March
     22nd to March 28th. Fraction Receiving PPP (Round #1) is the percentage of establishments in the zip code that received PPP funding during the first round. Amount PPP per establishment (Round
     #1) is the amount of PPP lending per establishment in the zip code during the first round. ZIP PPPE (Round #1) is the weighted average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans,
     weighted by the share of branches of each bank in within 10 miles of the center of each zip. ZIP Vol. PPPE (Round #1) is the weighted average of the PPPE based on the total amount of lending,
     weighted by the share of branches of each bank in within 10 miles of the center of each zip. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and
     *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
92




                                                                                   (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)             (7)         (8)
                                                                                                         Share of Firms Shutdown during Week 10
                                 Fraction Receiving PPP (Round #1)              -0.023∗∗∗     -0.009
                                                                                 (0.004)     (0.006)
                                 Amount PPP per establishment (Round #1)                                  0.004      0.002
                                                                                                         (0.003)    (0.003)
                                 ZIP PPPE (Round #1)                                                                           -0.182∗∗∗     -0.068
                                                                                                                                (0.027)     (0.069)
                                 ZIP Vol. PPPE (Round #1)                                                                                               -0.133∗∗∗     -0.042
                                                                                                                                                         (0.038)     (0.094)
                                 Observations                                     20821       20270      20821       20270       20608       20056        20608       20056
                                 Adjusted R2                                      0.062       0.067      0.060       0.067       0.062       0.067        0.061       0.067
                                 Industry Fixed Effects                            Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
                                 State Fixed Effects                               Yes         No         Yes         No          Yes         No           Yes          No
                                 County Fixed Effects                              No          Yes        No          Yes         No          Yes          No           Yes
                                                            Table A.3: Decline in Hours Worked and PPP Targeting

     Table A.3 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions examining the relation between the allocation of PPP funds and the share of businesses that shutdown operations in the
     last week of March. The dependent variable, Decline in Hours Worked in Week 10 relative to Jan., is the average decline in hours worked within a zip code and industry group between the last two
     weeks of January and the week of March 22nd to March 28th. Fraction Receiving PPP (Round #1) is the percentage of establishments in the zip code that received PPP funding during the first
     round. Amount PPP per establishment (Round #1) is the amount of PPP lending per establishment in the zip code during the first round. ZIP PPPE (Round #1) is the weighted average of the PPPE
     based on the number of outstanding loans, weighted by the share of branches of each bank in within 10 miles of the center of each zip. ZIP Vol. PPPE (Round #1) is the weighted average of the
     PPPE based on the total amount of lending, weighted by the share of branches of each bank in within 10 miles of the center of each zip. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are
     clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
93




                                                                                   (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)       (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                                                                                                   Decline in Hours Worked in Week 10 relative to Jan.
                                  Fraction Receiving PPP (Round #1)             0.016∗∗∗     -0.008
                                                                                (0.005)     (0.006)
                                  Amount PPP per establishment (Round #1)                               -0.010∗∗     -0.006
                                                                                                        (0.004)     (0.004)
                                  ZIP PPPE (Round #1)                                                                         0.197∗∗∗    0.085
                                                                                                                              (0.029)    (0.065)
                                  ZIP Vol. PPPE (Round #1)                                                                                           0.128∗∗      0.095
                                                                                                                                                     (0.051)     (0.109)
                                  Observations                                   20821       20270       20821       20270     20608      20056       20608       20056
                                  Adjusted R2                                    0.090       0.116       0.090       0.116     0.091      0.115        0.089      0.115
                                  Industry Fixed Effects                          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes       Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes
                                  State Fixed Effects                             Yes          No          Yes         No        Yes        No          Yes        No
                                  County Fixed Effects                            No           Yes         No          Yes       No         Yes         No         Yes
Table A.4: Evolution of Other Employment Outcomes in the Opportunity Insights Employment
Dataset

Table A.4 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP
funds during the first round and county-level employment. The dependent variable ∆ Empl is the difference in employment in a week and
its average shutdown status in weeks 10 and 11. The first column shows results for all workers, the second column shows results for the
first earnings quartile of workers, the third column shows results for workers in the middle two earnings quartiles while the last column
shows results for the top earnings quartile of workers. County PPPE (Round #1) is the weighted average of the PPPE based on the number
of outstanding loans, weighted by the share of branches of each bank in each county. I(Month=April) is an indicator variable that takes the
value of one in the weeks that span the month of April starting with the week of April 5th to April 12th and ending in April 26th – May 2nd
(inclusive), I(Month=May) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of May starting with the
week of May 3rd to May 9th and ending in the week of May 24th to May 30th (inclusive), I(Month=June) is an indicator variable that takes
the value of one in the weeks that span the month of June starting with the week of May 31st to June 6th and ending in the week of June
28th (inclusive); Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical
significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                    (1)           (2)                (3)                (4)
                                                                 ∆ Empl       ∆ Empl (Q1)      ∆ Empl (Q2&3)        ∆ Empl (Q4)
               County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=April)           0.006∗∗∗       0.009∗∗           0.010∗∗∗            0.008∗∗
                                                                 (0.002)        (0.004)           (0.002)             (0.003)
               County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=May)             0.008∗∗∗       0.011∗∗           0.014∗∗∗            0.012∗∗
                                                                 (0.003)        (0.005)           (0.004)             (0.005)
               County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=June)             0.006          0.007            0.014∗∗             0.013∗∗
                                                                 (0.004)        (0.008)           (0.006)             (0.005)
               Observations                                       17584          11886             13524               8176
               Adjusted R2                                        0.703          0.744             0.710               0.741
               Other Control Variables                              No            No                 No                 No
               State×Week Fixed Effects                             Yes           Yes                Yes                Yes
               County×Industry Fixed Effects                        No            No                 No                 No




                                                                       94
                                                           Table A.5: Unmet Demand for Loans and Exposure to PPP

     Table A.5 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first round and the percentage of
     businesses reporting applying but not receiving PPP funds at the state-by-industry level. The dependent variable is the difference between the percentage of businesses that applied for PPP funds
     and the percentage of businesses that received PPP funds at the state-by-industry level. State PPPE (Nbr.) is the state average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans. All specifications
     include industry×week fixed-effects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%
     levels, respectively.
95




                                                                  (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)                     (6)               (7)
                                                                                                      % PPP Requested - % PPP Received
                            State PPPE (Nbr.)                  -24.564∗∗∗     -78.463∗∗∗      -42.087∗∗∗      -16.478∗∗∗       -15.676∗∗∗              -8.184∗∗∗         -6.107∗∗∗
                                                                 (2.525)        (7.743)         (3.943)         (2.851)          (1.975)                (1.789)           (1.333)
                            Observations                          2229            277             386             390              390                    393               393
                            Adjusted R2                           0.757          0.562           0.421           0.247            0.170                  0.074             0.096
                            Industry Fixed Effects                 No             Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes                    Yes               Yes
                            Industry×Week Fixed Effects            Yes            No              No              No               No                     No                No
                            Week:                             Full Sample    Apr26–May2       May3–May9     May10–May16      May17–May23             May24–May30        May31–Jun6
                                                       Table A.6: Unmet Demand for PPP and Missed Loan Payments

     Table A.6 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) and instrumental variables (IV) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first
     round and the percentage of businesses reporting missing scheduled payments at the state-by-industry level. The dependent variable is the percentage of firms reporting a missed scheduled loan
     payment. % PPP Requested - % PPP Received is the difference between the percentage of businesses that applied for PPP funds and the percentage of businesses that received PPP funds at a
     state-by-industry level. State PPPE (Nbr.) is the state average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans. Pre-PPP Decline Hours Worked is the average decline in hours worked in each
     state between January and the last week of March. Pre-PPP State Covid-19 Cases (per capita) are per capita number of reported Covid-19 cases in the state. Pre-PPP State Covid-19 Deaths (per
     capita) are the weekly per capita number of reported Covid-19 deaths in the state. Pre-PPP State Social Distancing Index is the change in average distance travelled in the state until the end of
     March using individuals’ GPS signals. All specifications include industry×week fixed-effects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and
     *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
96




                                                                    (1)                               (2)                                         (3)                                      (4)
                                                                    OLS                           Reduced Form                                                       IV
                                                                                                                                         First-Stage                              Second-Stage
      Dep. Variable:                                   % Missing Loan Payments             % Missing Loan Payments              % PPP Request - % PPP Received               % Missing Loan Payments
      % PPP Requested - % PPP Received                         0.056∗∗∗                                                                                                              0.219∗∗∗
                                                               (0.020)                                                                                                               (0.043)
      State PPPE (Nbr.)                                                                               -4.401∗∗∗                               -23.458∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (1.380)                                 (2.264)
      Observations                                                 2217                                 2487                                    2217                                      2217
      Adjusted R2                                                  0.576                                0.554                                   0.762                                    -0.060
      FStat                                                                                                                                                                             107.388
      Industry×Week Fixed Effects                                    Yes                                  Yes                                     Yes                                      Yes
                                                   Table A.7: Unmet Demand for PPP and Missed Non-Loan Payments

     Table A.7 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) and instrumental variables (IV) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first
     round and the percentage of businesses reporting missing scheduled payments at the state-by-industry level. The dependent variable is the percentage of firms reporting a missed other scheduled
     payment such as rent, utilities, and payroll. % PPP Requested - % PPP Received is the difference between the percentage of businesses that applied for PPP funds and the percentage of businesses
     that received PPP funds at a state-by-industry level. State PPPE (Nbr.) is the state average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans. Pre-PPP Decline Hours Worked is the average
     decline in hours worked in each state between January and the last week of March. Pre-PPP State Covid-19 Cases (per capita) are per capita number of reported Covid-19 cases in the state. Pre-PPP
     State Covid-19 Deaths (per capita) are the weekly per capita number of reported Covid-19 deaths in the state. Pre-PPP State Social Distancing Index is the change in average distance travelled in
     the state until the end of March using individuals’ GPS signals. All specifications include industry×week fixed-effects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level
     of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
97




                                                                     (1)                                (2)                                          (3)                                      (4)
                                                                     OLS                            Reduced Form                                                        IV
                                                                                                                                           First-Stage                              Second-Stage
      Dep. Variable:                                   % Missing Schd. Payments             % Missing Schd. Payments              % PPP Request - % PPP Received               % Missing Schd. Payments
      % PPP Requested - % PPP Received                         0.229∗∗∗                                                                                                                0.639∗∗∗
                                                               (0.029)                                                                                                                 (0.068)
      State PPPE (Nbr.)                                                                                -14.807∗∗∗                               -23.577∗∗∗
                                                                                                        (2.651)                                  (2.211)
      Observations                                                  2205                                 2448                                     2205                                      2205
      Adjusted R2                                                   0.718                                0.698                                    0.762                                     0.086
      FStat                                                                                                                                                                                113.656
      Industry×Week Fixed Effects                                     Yes                                  Yes                                       Yes                                     Yes
                                                            Table A.8: Unmet Demand for Loans and Cash-on-Hand

     Table A.8 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) and instrumental variables (IV) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first
     round and the percentage of businesses reporting at two months or more of cash-on-hand at the state-by-industry level. The dependent variable is the fraction of businesses with cash on hand to
     sustain operations for two months or more. % PPP Requested - % PPP Received is the difference between the percentage of businesses that applied for PPP funds and the percentage of businesses
     that received PPP funds at a state-by-industry level. State PPPE (Nbr.) is the state average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans. Pre-PPP Decline Hours Worked is the average
     decline in hours worked in each state between January and the last week of March. Pre-PPP State Covid-19 Cases (per capita) are per capita number of reported Covid-19 cases in the state. Pre-PPP
     State Covid-19 Deaths (per capita) are the weekly per capita number of reported Covid-19 deaths in the state. Pre-PPP State Social Distancing Index is the change in average distance travelled in
     the state until the end of March using individuals’ GPS signals. All specifications include industry×week fixed-effects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level
     of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                                 (1)                    (2)                                    (3)                                 (4)
                                                                                 OLS                Reduced Form                                             IV
                                                                                                                                     First-Stage                           Second-Stage
              Dep. Variable:                                             % Cash 3 months           % Cash 3 months          % PPP Request - % PPP Received                % Cash 3 months
              % PPP Requested - % PPP Received                              -0.172∗∗∗                                                                                        -0.411∗∗
98




                                                                             (0.047)                                                                                          (0.152)
              State PPPE (Nbr.)                                                                           8.920∗∗                          -21.380∗∗∗
                                                                                                         (3.768)                             (2.019)
              Pre-PPP Decline Hours Worked                                     10.973∗                  15.861∗∗∗                             -6.302                              9.596
                                                                               (5.868)                   (5.378)                             (4.006)                            (5.830)
              Pre-PPP State Covid-19 Cases (per capita)                       -1.912∗∗                   -2.003∗∗                              0.219                           -1.820∗∗
                                                                               (0.743)                   (0.818)                             (0.381)                            (0.756)
              Pre-PPP State Covid-19 Deaths (per capita)                      75.800∗∗                  76.722∗∗                             17.796                            76.570∗∗
                                                                              (29.392)                  (31.278)                            (17.170)                           (31.054)
              Pre-PPP Social Distancing Index                                   -6.618                   -12.334                              5.529                              -6.293
                                                                               (9.077)                  (11.326)                             (5.524)                            (9.132)
              Observations                                                        903                       918                                 903                                903
              Adjusted R2                                                        0.637                     0.640                              0.846                              -0.077
              FStat                                                                                                                                                            112.191
              Industry×Week Fixed Effects                                         Yes                       Yes                                Yes                                 Yes
                                                            Table A.9: % Receiving PPP and Exposure to State PPPE

     Table A.9 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first round and the percentage of firms
     reporting having received PPP funds at the state-by-industry level in each week of the survey collected from the Census Small Business Pulse Survey. The dependent variable is the percentage
     of businesses that received PPP funds in a state-by-industry group during each week of the survey. State PPPE (Nbr.) is the state average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans.
     Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are double-clustered at the level of the state and week. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
99




                                                          (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)           (5)                              (6)                  (7)
                                                                                                                % PPP Received
            State PPPE (Nbr.)                         35.865∗∗∗         89.549∗∗∗           51.603∗∗∗            23.899∗∗∗     28.381∗∗∗                      17.061∗∗∗            24.315∗∗∗
                                                       (3.201)           (8.169)             (4.298)              (3.594)       (5.024)                        (3.610)              (3.879)
            Observations                                2230               277                 386                  390           390                            393                  394
            Adjusted R2                                 0.653             0.629               0.529                0.397         0.416                          0.387                0.516
            Industry Fixed Effects                        No               Yes                 Yes                  Yes           Yes                            Yes                  Yes
            Industry×Week Fixed Effects                   Yes              No                  No                   No            No                             No                   No
            Week:                                    Full Sample       Apr26–May2          May3–May9           May10–May16 May17–May23                      May24–May30           May31–Jun6
                                                  Table A.10: % Receiving PPP and % Missing Payments: Week-by-Week

      Table A.10 reports the results of instrumental variables (IV) regressions split week by week examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first round and the
      percentage of businesses reporting missing scheduled payments at the state-by-industry level. In the top panel, the dependent variable is the percentage of firms reporting a missed scheduled loan
      payment. In the bottom panel, the dependent variable is the percentage of firms reporting a missed other scheduled payment such as rent, utilities, and payroll. % PPP Received is the percentage
      of businesses reporting having received PPP funds in a state-by-industry group. State PPPE (Nbr.) is the state average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans. All specifications
      include industry×week fixed-effects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10%
      levels, respectively.




                                                                                    Panel A: Missing Loan Payments
                                                           (1)                (2)                 (3)          (4)             (5)                                 (6)                   (7)
                                                                                                       % Missing Loan Payments
             %PPP Received                            -0.173∗∗∗           -0.068∗            -0.148∗∗∗     -0.278∗∗∗       -0.210∗∗∗                          -0.349∗∗∗            -0.208∗∗
                                                       (0.041)            (0.034)             (0.048)       (0.097)         (0.075)                            (0.122)              (0.091)
             Observations                                2229               277                 386           390              389                               393                  394
             Adjusted R2                                -0.154             -0.021              -0.076        -0.370          -0.336                             -0.665               -0.185
100




             FStat                                     126.358            120.162             144.125        44.222         30.384                             22.335               39.285
             Industry Fixed Effects                       No                 Yes                 Yes           Yes             Yes                                Yes                  Yes
             Industry×Week Fixed Effects                  Yes                No                  No            No              No                                 No                   No
             Week:                                   Full Sample        Apr26–May2          May3–May9 May10–May16 May17–May23                               May24–May30           May31–Jun6




                                                             Panel B: Missing Other Scheduled Payments (Rent, Utilities, Payroll)
                                                           (1)                (2)                 (3)           (4)             (5)                                (6)                   (7)
                                                                                                       % Missing Schd. Payments
             %PPP Received                            -0.555∗∗∗          -0.282∗∗∗           -0.468∗∗∗      -0.880∗∗∗       -0.651∗∗∗                         -0.998∗∗∗            -0.630∗∗∗
                                                       (0.110)            (0.060)             (0.092)        (0.187)         (0.226)                           (0.291)              (0.218)
             Observations                                2216               277                 385            387             388                               389                  390
             Adjusted R2                                -0.346             0.153               -0.067         -1.089          -0.687                            -1.932               -0.403
             FStat                                     131.427            120.162             144.126        44.423          29.598                            25.182               39.759
             Industry Fixed Effects                       No                Yes                  Yes            Yes             Yes                               Yes                  Yes
             Industry×Week Fixed Effects                  Yes               No                   No             No              No                                No                   No
             Week:                                   Full Sample        Apr26–May2          May3–May9 May10–May16 May17–May23                               May24–May30           May31–Jun6
                                                      Table A.11: % Receiving PPP and Cash-on-Hand: Week-by-Week

      Table A.11 reports the results of instrumental variables (IV) regressions split week-by-week examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first round and the
      percentage of businesses reporting at least two months or more of cash-on-hand at the state-by-industry level. The dependent variable is the difference between the percentage of businesses that
      applied for PPP fundings, minus the percentage of businesses that received PPP funds. % PPP Received is the percentage of businesses reporting having received PPP funds in a state-by-industry
      group. State PPPE (Nbr.) is the state average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans. All specifications include industry×week fixed-effects. Standard errors are presented in
      parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
101




                                                          (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)            (5)                            (6)                  (7)
                                                                                                              % Cash 3 months
             %PPP Received                            0.283∗∗              0.091             0.153              0.327∗          0.285                      0.619∗∗                  0.555
                                                      (0.121)            (0.079)           (0.105)             (0.188)        (0.310)                      (0.279)                (0.348)
             Observations                               903                  95               141                136             177                         180                     174
             Adjusted R2                               -0.247             -0.079            -0.166              -0.291         -0.280                       -0.678                 -0.480
             FStat                                   144.087             50.909             84.021              49.197        16.342                        32.496
             Industry Fixed Effects                      No                 Yes               Yes                 Yes            Yes                          Yes                 Yes
             Industry×Week Fixed Effects                 Yes                No                No                  No             No                           No                   No
             Week:                                  Full Sample        Apr26–May2         May3–May9          May10–May16 May17–May23                     May24–May30           May31–Jun6
                                                      Table A.12: % Receiving PPP and Exposure to PPP: MSA Level

      Table A.12 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first round and the percentage of
      businesses reporting applying but not receiving PPP funds at the MSA level. The dependent variable is the difference between the percentage of businesses that applied for PPP funds and the
      percentage of businesses that received PPP funds at the MSA level. MSA PPPE (Nbr.) is the MSA average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans. Standard errors are presented in
      parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the MSA. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
102




                                                   (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)           (5)                            (6)                 (7)
                                                                                                      % PPP Received
                   MSA PPPE (Nbr.)            32.714∗∗∗         68.793∗∗∗          47.107∗∗∗           19.004∗∗∗     24.207∗∗∗                    16.938∗∗∗           20.232∗∗∗
                                               (6.579)           (6.202)            (4.106)             (5.071)       (4.977)                      (3.356)             (4.363)
                   Observations                  300                50                 50                  50            50                           50                  50
                   Adjusted R2                  0.083             0.656              0.657               0.171         0.284                        0.242               0.241
                   Week Fixed Effects             Yes              No                 No                  No            No                           No                  No
                   Week:                     Full Sample       Apr26–May2         May3–May9          May10–May16 May17–May23                    May24–May30          May31–Jun6
                                                        Table A.13: % Receiving PPP and Missed Payments: MSA-Level

      Table A.13 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) and instrumental variables (IV) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first
      round and the percentage of firms reporting missing payments at the MSA level collected from the Census Small Business Pulse Survey. In the top panel, the dependent variable is the percentage
      of firms at the MSA reporting a missed scheduled loan payment. In the bottom panel, the dependent variable is the percentage of firms reporting a missed other scheduled payment such as rent,
      utilities, and payroll. % PPP Received is the percentage of businesses reporting having received PPP funds in a state-by-industry group. MSA PPPE (Nbr.) is the MSA average of the PPPE based on
      the number of outstanding loans. All specifications include week fixed-effects. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and
      10% levels, respectively.




                                                                                    Panel A: Missing Loan Payments
                                                                   (1)                               (2)                               (3)                           (4)
                                                                   OLS                           Reduced Form                                             IV
                                                                                                                                First-Stage                Second-Stage
                          Dep. Variable:             % Missing Loan Payments              % Missing Loan Payments             % PPP Received          % Missing Loan Payments
                          % PPP Received                     -0.154∗∗∗                                                                                        -0.181∗∗∗
                                                              (0.013)                                                                                          (0.042)
103




                          MSA PPPE (Nbr.)                                                            -5.902∗∗∗                    32.652∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (1.583)                      (6.579)
                          Observations                             298                                  298                          298                            298
                          Adjusted R2                             0.357                                0.039                        0.083                          0.347
                          FStat                                                                                                                                   24.635
                          Week Fixed Effects                        Yes                                 Yes                            Yes                          Yes




                                                             Panel B: Missing Other Scheduled Payments (Rent, Utilities, Payroll)
                                                                  (1)                                (2)                               (3)                            (4)
                                                                  OLS                            Reduced Form                                              IV
                                                                                                                                 First-Stage                Second-Stage
                        Dep. Variable:              % Missing Schd. Payments             % Missing Schd. Payments              % PPP Received          % Missing Schd. Payments
                        % PPP Received                      -0.235∗∗∗                                                                                          -0.451∗∗∗
                                                             (0.019)                                                                                            (0.085)
                        MSA PPPE (Nbr.)                                                             -14.753∗∗∗                     32.714∗∗∗
                                                                                                     (2.438)                        (6.579)
                        Observations                              300                                  300                            300                            300
                        Adjusted R2                              0.320                                0.099                          0.083                          0.046
                        FStat                                                                                                                                      24.728
                        Week Fixed Effects                         Yes                                  Yes                            Yes                           Yes
                                                        Table A.14: % Receiving PPP and Cash-on-Hand: MSA-Level

      Table A.14 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) and instrumental variables (IV) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first
      round and the percentage of businesses at the MSA level reporting at least two months of cash on hand to sustain operations as collected from the Census Small Business Pulse Survey. The
      dependent variable is the fraction of businesses in the MSA reporting cash on hand to sustain operations for two months or more. % PPP Received is the percentage of businesses reporting having
      received PPP funds at the MSA level. MSA PPPE (Nbr.) is the MSA average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans. All specifications include week fixed-effects. Robust standard
      errors are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                            (1)                    (2)                        (3)                     (4)
                                                                            OLS                Reduced Form                                IV
104




                                                                                                                        First-Stage           Second-Stage
                                         Dep. Variable:             % Cash 3 months          % Cash 3 months          % PPP Received         % Cash 3 months
                                         % PPP Received                0.172∗∗∗                                                                  -0.172∗
                                                                        (0.018)                                                                  (0.097)
                                         MSA PPPE (Nbr.)                                           -5.628∗∗               32.714∗∗∗
                                                                                                   (2.468)                 (6.579)
                                         Observations                       300                      300                     300                     300
                                         Adjusted R2                       0.194                    0.014                   0.083                   -0.595
                                         FStat                                                                                                      24.728
                                         Week Fixed Effects                  Yes                      Yes                     Yes                     Yes
                                                         Table A.15: Unmet Demand and Exposure to PPP: MSA Level

      Table A.15 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first round and the percentage of
      businesses reporting applying but not receiving PPP funds at the MSA level. The dependent variable is the difference between the percentage of businesses that applied for PPP funds and the
      percentage of businesses that received PPP funds at the MSA level. MSA PPPE (Nbr.) is the MSA average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans. Robust standard errors are
      presented in parentheses. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
105




                                                   (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)              (5)                               (6)                 (7)
                                                                                         % PPP Requested - % PPP Received
                   MSA PPPE (Nbr.)            -22.987∗∗∗        -60.564∗∗∗        -36.165∗∗∗     -13.531∗∗∗       -11.946∗∗∗                      -9.384∗∗∗           -6.331∗∗∗
                                               (6.526)           (7.053)           (3.150)        (2.527)          (2.570)                         (1.500)             (1.845)
                   Observations                  300                50                50             50               50                              50                  50
                   Adjusted R2                  0.043             0.585             0.643          0.360            0.270                           0.298               0.121
                   Week Fixed Effects             Yes               No                No             No               No                             No                  No
                   Week:                     Full Sample       Apr26–May2         May3–May9 May10–May16 May17–May23                             May24–May30          May31–Jun6
                                                        Table A.16: Unmet Demand and Missed Payments:MSA Level

      Table A.16 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) and instrumental variables (IV) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first
      round and the percentage of businesses reporting missing scheduled payments at the MSA level. In the top panel, the dependent variable is the percentage of firms reporting a missed scheduled
      loan payment. In the bottom panel, the dependent variable is the percentage of firms reporting a missed other scheduled payment such as rent, utilities, and payroll. % PPP Requested - % PPP
      Received is the difference between the percentage of businesses that applied for PPP funds and the percentage of businesses that received PPP funds at the MSA level. MSA PPPE (Nbr.) is the
      MSA average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans. All specifications include week fixed-effects. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and *, represent
      statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                                                  Panel A: Missing Loan Payments
                                                                    (1)                               (2)                                        (3)                                     (4)
                                                                    OLS                           Reduced Form                                                     IV
                                                                                                                                       First-Stage                              Second-Stage
       Dep. Variable:                                  % Missing Loan Payments            % Missing Loan Payments             % PPP Request - % PPP Received               % Missing Loan Payments
       % PPP Requested - % PPP Received                        0.166∗∗∗                                                                                                            0.258∗∗∗
                                                               (0.013)                                                                                                             (0.067)
106




       MSA PPPE (Nbr.)                                                                               -5.902∗∗∗                              -22.911∗∗∗
                                                                                                      (1.583)                                (6.526)
       Observations                                                 298                                 298                                    298                                      298
       Adjusted R2                                                 0.380                               0.039                                  0.043                                    0.265
       FStat                                                                                                                                                                          12.325
       Week Fixed Effects                                            Yes                                Yes                                      Yes                                    Yes




                                                            Panel B: Missing Other Scheduled Payments (Rent, Utilities, Payroll)
                                                                     (1)                               (2)                                         (3)                                     (4)
                                                                     OLS                           Reduced Form                                                       IV
                                                                                                                                         First-Stage                              Second-Stage
       Dep. Variable:                                  % Missing Schd. Payments            % Missing Schd. Payments             % PPP Request - % PPP Received               % Missing Schd. Payments
       % PPP Requested - % PPP Received                        0.258∗∗∗                                                                                                              0.642∗∗∗
                                                               (0.020)                                                                                                               (0.155)
       MSA PPPE (Nbr.)                                                                                -14.753∗∗∗                              -22.987∗∗∗
                                                                                                       (2.438)                                 (6.526)
       Observations                                                  300                                 300                                     300                                      300
       Adjusted R2                                                  0.355                               0.099                                   0.043                                    -0.434
       FStat                                                                                                                                                                             12.406
       Week Fixed Effects                                            Yes                                  Yes                                      Yes                                     Yes
                                                           Table A.17: Unmet Demand and Cash-on-Hand: MSA Level

      Table A.17 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) and instrumental variables (IV) regressions examining the relation between the geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first
      round and the percentage of businesses reporting at least two months or more of cash-on-hand at the MSA level. The dependent variable is the fraction of businesses with cash on hand to sustain
      operations for two months or more. % PPP Requested - % PPP Received is the difference between the percentage of businesses that applied for PPP funds and the percentage of businesses that
      received PPP funds at the MSA level. All specifications include week fixed-effects. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%,
      and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                              (1)                    (2)                                    (3)                                (4)
                                                                              OLS                Reduced Form                                            IV
107




                                                                                                                                  First-Stage                          Second-Stage
                    Dep. Variable:                                   % Cash 3 months           % Cash 3 months           % PPP Request - % PPP Received               % Cash 3 months
                    % PPP Requested - % PPP Received                    -0.203∗∗∗                                                                                          0.245
                                                                         (0.019)                                                                                          (0.156)
                    MSA PPPE (Nbr.)                                                                  -5.628∗∗                          -22.987∗∗∗
                                                                                                     (2.468)                            (6.526)
                    Observations                                              300                      300                                300                                 300
                    Adjusted R2                                              0.247                    0.014                              0.043                               -0.972
                    FStat                                                                                                                                                    12.406
                    Week Fixed Effects                                        Yes                       Yes                                 Yes                                Yes
                                                                        Table A.18: PPP Lending and Crowd-Out

      Table A.18 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) and instrumental variables (IV) regressions examining the relation between the ratio of Commercial and Industrial Loans in Q2 2020
                                                         C&I Loans                                                                                 P P P Loans
      and Commercial and Industrial Loans in Q1 2020 ( C&I LoansQ2 ) and the ratio of PPP loans and Commercial and Industrial Loans in Q1 2020 C&I     LoansQ1 . Column (2) instruments using lender PPPE.
                                                                Q1
      Data comes from Federal Reserve Call Reports. Robust standard errors are presented in parentheses. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.


                                                                                                       (1)               (2)
                                                                                                       OLS                IV
108




                                                                                                    C&I LoansQ2      C&I LoansQ2
                                                                              Dep. Variable:        C&I LoansQ1      C&I LoansQ1

                                                                               P P P Loans
                                                                              C&I LoansQ1            0.558∗∗∗        0.991∗∗∗
                                                                                                     (0.162)         (0.278)

                                                                              Constant               1.017∗∗∗        1.011∗∗∗
                                                                                                    (0.00255)       (0.00457)
                                                                              Observations             4845            4845
                                                                              Adjusted R2             0.010           0.004
           Table A.19: Evolution of Homebase Employment Outcomes and Exposure to PPP: Partition by State UI Replacement Rates

      Table A.19 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions examining how differences in the generosity of the state unemployment insurance shapes the relation between the
      geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first round and the difference between a firm’s average employment outcomes in the two weeks prior to the launch of PPP and the firm’s outcomes
      in each of the following weeks. The dependent variable in Panel A, ∆ Bus. Shutdown, is the difference between the firm’s shutdown status in a week and its average shutdown status in weeks
      10 and 11. Bus. Shutdown is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the business reported zero hours worked over the entire week. The dependent variable in Panel B, ∆ Hours
      Worked, is the difference in the ratio of hours worked in each establishment in a week and the average ratio of hours worked in that establishment in weeks 10 and 11. The ratio of hours worked
      in each establishment is measured as the hours worked in that week relative to the hours worked in that same establishment during the last two weeks of January. Zip PPPE (Round #1) is the
      weighted average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans, weighted by the share of branches of each bank in within 10 miles of the center of each zip. I(Month=April) is an indicator
      variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of April starting with the week of April 5th to April 12th and ending in April 26th – May 2nd (inclusive), I(Month=May)
      is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of May starting with the week of May 3rd to May 9th and ending in the week of May 24th to May 30th
      (inclusive), I(Month=June) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of June starting with the week of May 31st to June 6th and ending in the week
      of June 28th (inclusive); Other control variables include interactions between the social distance index, Covid cases per capita and Deaths per capita measured as of week 9 interacted with the
      indicator variables for the months of April, May, and June, Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance
      at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
109




                                                                                                   (1)              (2)                 (3)            (4)
                                                                                                     ∆ Bus. Shutdown                      ∆ Hours Worked
                                                Zip PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=April)              0.006           -0.003               0.001         0.005∗
                                                                                                 (0.004)         (0.004)              (0.003)        (0.002)
                                                Zip PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=May)                0.002           -0.004             0.021∗∗∗        0.017∗∗
                                                                                                 (0.007)         (0.003)              (0.006)        (0.007)
                                                Zip PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=June)               0.006           -0.004             0.033∗∗∗       0.024∗∗∗
                                                                                                 (0.006)         (0.003)              (0.009)        (0.007)
                                                Observations                                     291195          243495               291195         243495
                                                Adjusted R2                                       0.510           0.516                0.573          0.563
                                                Sample                                        Hi. Rep. Rate   Low Rep. Rate        Hi. Rep. Rate  Low Rep. Rate
                                                Other Control Variables                            Yes              Yes                 Yes            Yes
                                                State×Industry×Week Fixed Effects                  Yes              Yes                 Yes            Yes
                                                Firm Fixed Effects                                 Yes              Yes                 Yes            Yes
           Table A.20: Evolution of County Unemployment Outcomes and Exposure to PPP: Partition by State UI Replacement Rates

      Table A.20 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions examining how differences in the generosity of the state unemployment insurance shapes the relation between the
      geographic allocation of PPP funds during the first round and the difference between a county’s initial unemployment filings in the two weeks prior to the launch of PPP and the county’s initial
      unemployment filings in each of the following weeks. The dependent variable, ∆ County Initial UI Filings Ratio, is the difference between the initial county unemployment filings during a week
      and the average initial unemployment filings in the county in weeks 10 and 11. County PPPE (Round #1) is the weighted average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans, weighted
      by the share of branches of each bank in each county. I(Month=April) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of April starting with the week of April
      5th to April 12th and ending in April 26th – May 2nd (inclusive), I(Month=May) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of May starting with the week
      of May 3rd to May 9th and ending in the week of May 24th to May 30th (inclusive), I(Month=June) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of June
      starting with the week of May 31st to June 6th and ending in the week of June 28th (inclusive); Other control variables include interactions between the social distance index, Covid cases per
      capita and Deaths per capita measured as of week 9 interacted with the indicator variables for the months of April, May, and June, Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered
      at the level of the state. ***, **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
110




                                                                                                  (1)                (2)                (3)                       (4)
                                                                                                                ∆ County Initial UI Filings Ratio
                                County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=April)                          0.016              0.011             0.014                      0.021
                                                                                                (0.025)            (0.038)           (0.025)                    (0.037)
                                County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=May)                            0.021              0.055             0.018                      0.056
                                                                                                (0.038)            (0.062)           (0.039)                    (0.067)
                                County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=June)                           0.032              0.103             0.033                      0.097
                                                                                                (0.038)            (0.082)           (0.039)                    (0.090)
                                Observations                                                     15350              14216             15061                      13335
                                Adjusted R2                                                      0.893              0.832             0.894                      0.836

                                Sample                                                      Hi. Rep. Rate        Low Rep. Rate         Hi. Rep. Rate       Low Rep. Rate
                                Other Control Variables                                          No                   No                    Yes                 Yes
                                County Fixed Effects                                             Yes                  Yes                   Yes                 Yes
                                State×Week Fixed Effects                                         Yes                  Yes                   Yes                 Yes
                  Table A.21: Evolution of Small Business Revenues and Exposure to PPP: Partition by State UI Replacement Rates

      Table A.21 reports the results of ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions examining how differences in the generosity of the state unemployment insurance shapes the relation between the
      geographic allocation of PPPE funds during the first round and weekly small business revenues at the county×industry level between the second week of March until the last week of April collected
      from Womply, a company specializing in processing revenue for small businesses. The dependent variable, ∆ Y/Y Change in Total Consumer Spending, is the difference between the year-on-year
      average change in small business revenue of all establishments of a county operating in a 3-digit NAICS industry and the average year-on-year average change in small business revenue of the
      same county and industry in weeks 10 and 11. County PPPE (Round #1) is the weighted average of the PPPE based on the number of outstanding loans, weighted by the share of branches of each
      bank in each county. I(Month=April) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of April starting with the week of April 5th to April 12th and ending in
      April 26th – May 2nd (inclusive), I(Month=May) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of May starting with the week of May 3rd to May 9th and
      ending in the week of May 24th to May 30th (inclusive), I(Month=June) is an indicator variable that takes the value of one in the weeks that span the month of June starting with the week of
      May 31st to June 6th and ending in the week of June 28th (inclusive); Other control variables include interactions between the social distance index, Covid cases per capita and Deaths per capita
      measured as of week 9 interacted with the indicator variables for the months of April, May, and June, Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and are clustered at the level of the state. ***,
      **, and *, represent statistical significance at 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
111




                                                                                                   (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)
                                                                                                        ∆ Y/Y Change in Total Consumer Spending
                                 County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=April)                         0.013∗          0.003           0.012∗         0.001
                                                                                                (0.007)         (0.004)         (0.006)        (0.005)
                                 County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=May)                          0.028∗∗         0.031∗∗          0.026∗         0.009
                                                                                                (0.013)         (0.013)         (0.014)        (0.013)
                                 County PPPE (Round #1) × I(Month=June)                         0.041∗∗∗       0.033∗∗∗         0.040∗∗∗        0.009
                                                                                                (0.012)         (0.010)         (0.014)        (0.013)
                                 Observations                                                    99421           91848           92656          86322
                                 Adjusted R2                                                     0.481           0.460           0.471          0.451
                                 Sample                                                      Hi. Rep. Rate Low Rep. Rate Hi. Rep. Rate Low Rep. Rate
                                 Other Control Variables                                           No             No               Yes           Yes
                                 County×Industry Fixed Effects                                     Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
                                 State×Industry×Week Fixed Effects                                 Yes            Yes              Yes           Yes
