                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INCOME DISTRIBUTION, MARKET SIZE, AND INDUSTRIALIZATION




                               Kevin M. Murphy

                               Andrei Shleifer

                                Robert Vishny




                           Working Paper No. 2709




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                               September 1988




We are indebted to Avinash Dixit, Richard Eckaus, Albert 0. Hirshman,
D. Gale Johnson, Howard Pack, and Lawrence Summers for useful comments, to
David H. Romer for suggestions that led to significant improvements of the
paper, and to NSF for financial support. This research is part of NBER's
research program in Economic Fluctuations.  Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                            NBER   Working Paper #2709
                                            September 1988


             INCOME DISTRIBUTION,   MARKET SIZE, AND INDUSTRIALIZATION


                                      ABSTRACT


     When world trade is not free and costless, a less developed country can

profitably industrialize only if its domestic markets are large enough.        In

such a country, for increasing returns technologies to break even, sales must

be high enough to cover the set-up costs,      This paper studies some deter-

minants of the size of the domestic market, and focuses on two conditions

conducive   to industrialization.    First, agriculture or exports must provide

the source of autonomous demand for manufactures.       Such expansion of auto-

nomous demand usually results from increases in farm productivity or from

opening of new export markets.      Second, income generated in agriculture   or

exports must be broadly enough distributed       that it materializes as demand

for mass-produced domestic goods, and not just for luxuries.       We resort to

these two determinants   of the size of domestic markets to interpret several

historical development episodes.


Kevin M. Murphy                            Andrei Shleifer
Graduate School of Business                Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago                      University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637                          Chicago, IL 60637

Robert Vishny
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637
                                         I. Introduction

         We   present a model of industrialization caused by an increase in agricultural

productivity or by an export boom, that raise incomes and therefore demand for domestic
manufactures. As domestic markets become larger, increasing returns production

technologies that could not break even   n smaller markets come into profitable use and
industry expands. The key role of productive agriculture or exports for generating
domestic demand for manufactures has been emphasized in earlier work of Rosenstein-Rodan

[1943], Nurkse [1953], Lewis [1953, 1954], Ranis and Fei [19611, and especially Fleming

[1953]. Empirically, Ohkawa and Rosovsky [19601 document the great increases in

agricultural productivity in turn of the century Japan, and Johnston and Mellor [1961] note
the importance of the demand from farmers for growth of industry during that period.

Similarly, Thorbecke [1979] and Ranis [19791 present evidence for the dramatic progress of

agriculture in postwar Taiwan, and Ranis [1979] in particular stresses the role of demand by
farmers at the initial stages of Taiwan's industrialization. Lewis [1953] makes increases in
farm productivity and in cash crop exports a cornerstone of his proposed development

strategy for the Gold Coast, on the theory that increased rural purchasing power would
foster industrialization.
          The vibrancy   of domestic agriculture or   exports is not however always sufficient to

bring about any industrialization. In some cases, although farm or export income      is

generated, it does not go to potential customers of domestic industry, and the relevant
markets remain as narrow as ever. For industrial markets to expand, the composition of

demand must concentrate buying power in the hands of consumers of manufactures. Large

population, homogeneous tastes, and concentrated population all help to create large markets
for manufactures.     But also of great importance to industrialization is the distribution   of
income, since the middle class are the natural consumers of manufactured goods.        As has

been pointed out by Baldwin [1956] and North [1959], extreme concentration of wealth in
                                                    2

the hands of the very rich will manifest itself in the demand for hand-made and imported

luxuries rather than for domestic manufactures, even when farm or export income grows.

The necessity of a middle class as the source of the buying power for domestic

manufactures is the central message of our paper.
          The effects of income distribution on the extent of industrialization seem to be

important in a number of historical episodes. For example, in the first half of the nine-
teenth century the United States has greatly surpassed England in the range of consumer

products it manufactured using mass production techniques. In contrast to high quality hand
made creations of the English artisans, American producers offered standardized mass-

produced utilitarian items such as rifles, cutlery or balloon-frame houses (which an English
architect called bare, bald white cubes). This difference in production techniques seems to

be accounted for by the difference in the composition     of demand [Rosenberg, 19721.
Whereas in England manufactures were demanded by the quality-conscious upper class, that

could not have possibly generated a large market, the American demand came from a large
number of relatively well-off farmers. The large demand from this land—rich middle class

enabled American manufacturers to profitably sustain mass production.

          This difference in the composition of demand and of techniques of production in the

two countries has been described in the catalog for the    1851   London Crystal Palace

exhibition (cited in Rosenberg, 1972, p.50):

                The absence in the United States of those vast accumulations of wealth which
          favor the expenditure of large sums on articles of mere luxury, and the general
          distribution of the means of procuring the more substantial conveniences of life,
          impart to the productions of American industry a character distinct from that of
          many other countries. The expenditure of months or years of labour upon a single
          article, not to increase its intrinsic value, but solely to augment its cost and its
          estimation as the object of virtu, is not common in the United States. On the
          contrary, both manual and mechanical labour are applied with direct reference to
          increasing the number or the quantity of articles suited for the wants of a whole
          people, and adapted to promote the enjoyment of that moderate competency that
          prevails upon them.
In the   model presented below, the U.S. experience can   be understood    in terms   of
                                                         3

 distribution of returns from farming and the demand by farmers for industrial goods.

          Perhaps the best example of a country in which the distribution of rewards from a
                                                                                      -
 boom in a leading sector has led to first the failure and then the success of

 industrialization is Colombia in the second      half of the   19th century. In the l850s   and '60s
 Colombia experienced a large boom in tobacco exports, which however failed to lead to

 widespread economic development. From about 1880 to 1915, Colombia went through a boom
 in coffee exports, the effect of which on industrialization has been much more
                                                                                widely
 pronounced. Harbison [1970J explains the difference between the two episodes by the fact
 that, technologically, tobacco had to be grown on large plantations and hence the income
 from the boom went to      a very   small number of plantation owners who spent it on luxury

 imports, whereas coffee was grown on small family enterprises with the result that income
 accrued to a large number of people who then demanded domestic manufactures. Harbison's

 [19701 analysis   of Colombia illustrates precisely the point developed in our work:
             The lion's share of increased prosperity generated by coffee production was
         enjoyed by the large poor rural mestizo cam pesino class, not the small group of rich
         white urban landlords. These peasants, in turn, certainly did not buy for
         themselves and their children foreign travel and foreign education or other
                                                                                      luxury
         imports... Since such items could not be produced in Colombia, the use of tobacco-
         generated incomes to purchase these luxury imports had resulted in a long—term
         depression and decline in Colombian artisan manufacture without compensating
         growth in another domestic sector. But coffee generated incomes in the hands of
         Antioquerio farmers were spend precisely on those necessities... The
         of coffee production redistributed income toward that segment of therapid   expansion
                                                                                population
         most likely to spend that incremental income on items characterized by high
         potential for generating domestic incomes--i.e. on domestic goods whose large-scale
         production could utilize modern low-cost technology--and not on imports.
Colombia's experience with the two leading sector booms thus shows exactly how income

distribution affects the consequences of such booms.

         The central economic assumption underlying our interpretation of these
                                                                                examples is
the relevance of local demand composition, as opposed to the world
                                                                   markets,          for the choice
of techniques. If world trade    is costless   and free of barriers, this assumption is untenable.
In practice, however, transport costs, difficulties of penetrating foreign
                                                                           markets, and
                                                      4

especially protectionism make the sizes of local markets relevant for a wide range of goods
in many countries, in this paper, we first focus on the case        of a closed economy   with

agriculture serving as the source of high powered demand for manufactures, and then let
this role be played also by mineral or cash crop exports.

          This paper describes how a country that has already procured some resources from

an agricultural innovation or from a     boom in cash crop exports industrializes. In our model,

no normative significance is attached to industrialization:it is     a byproduct of wealth from
agriculture or cash crop exports rather than a source of wealth by itself, in practice,
however, industrialization seems to lead to the improvement of living standards. Rosenstein-
Rodan [1943] accordingly associates industrialization with a shift to a better equilibrium

growth path. This would be true if industrialization yielded technological spillovers that
become    a source of new wealth, or if it paid for an infrastructure that    improved the

opportunities to trade and to produce, While our model provides the building blocks for

analyzing the welfare effects of industrialization,we defer this analysis to our companion
paper [Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny,       198g1.

          Section II below outlines the model and equilibrium is characterized in section III.
In section IV, we compare the levels      of industrializationfor various levels of farm

productivity and income distributions. Section V presents the analysis of an economy that
exports   a cash crop and imports food.     Section Vi concludes.



                                            11.   The Model

          In this section,   we outline the microeconornic assumptions about the preferences,

technologies, market structure, and income distribution of the economy we propose to study.


hA. Commodities and Preferences
          There   is   a unique homogeneous agricultural good called food. In addition, the
                                                              5

consumption set includes a continuum (0,               )   of manufactured goods, labeled            by q. All

consumers have the same preferences, with the utility function given by:


           c for        c:
           z    +   e       -           +   f x(q)qJ       for c > z

where c is the food consumption,               is   the minimum amount of food required before

consumption of manufactures begins, x(q) is equal to                   1   if good q   is   consumed and 0 if it is

not, and       l/q is the marginal utility of good q so that low index goods are more desirable.
           Food is here assumed to be a necessity, characterized by the unit propensity to

spend on it at low levels of income, and zero propensity to spend after z units are
obtained.2 The assumption of well-ordering of goods in terms of their desirability, and the

assumption that goods come in discrete units that ensure satiation, have a strong
mplicatiorn Specifically, richer people consume all the same things that poorer people do,
plus some. Consumption increases take the form of increased diversity, and not of increased

consumption of the same goods. In the case where a consumer buys all the goods in the
interval (0,q)--which will be the case in our equilibrium--the contribution of such

consumption to his Utility is log(q). These preferences are thus a natural extension of Cobb-

Douglass       for the   case   of differentiated   goods. In particular, they ensure a tractable solution

for   the optimal pricing problem in our economy.

           This commodity space and preference structure yield the following simple demand

curves. Each consumer spends all of his income on food until he gets a units of it.                         If he
has income left over, he spends all of it on manufactures. He expands the menu of

manufactures he buys in order of marginal utility per unit price. Richer consumers end up
with a superset of manufactures bought by poorer consumers.
lIB. Technology and Property Rights           in Agriculture

            The production of food is governed by a unique decreasing returns technology

F(LF), where       F'> 0, F" < 0, and LF is the agricultural labor input.    We   are assuming that

land   is   a limiting factor of production so that application of more labor in agriculture

reduces marginal output, Agriculture is assumed to be perfectly competitive on the output

side, and in fact the price of food is taken to be numéraire,3
            The factor payments in agriculture consist of wages of agricultural laborers, WA,

and    rent ,r'.   Since the price   of food is num&aire, we   have as an identity that       ,r' = F(LF)
-                     tradition in development economics denies the assumption that                 =
    WALF. A long                                                                               WA


F'(LF). We only assume that the wage declines in LF: WA(LF) < 0, and that rents rise with

LF: dlrF/dLr > 0. This will always        be the   case if, for example, farm labor is paid its value

marginal product.
            Since these assumptions imply that, as agriculture contracts, income         is   redistributed

from landowners to wage earners, they capture the notion that poverty is manifested by
excessive size of farm employment. Wages of agricultural workers are low because of their
low productivity in cultivation of very marginal land. Expansion of agriculture without

increases in productivity reduces WA and therefore, if WA is the dominant or only source                  of
income      for workers, it also reduces their standard of living.    This is not a problem of

numéraire. If we take instead agricultural wage as numéraire, then expansion of agriculture

entails the rise of the food price. To the extent that wage earners are food consumers,
their welfare declines as agriculture expands.



Il.C. Technology and Market Structure in Manufacturing

             Each good q   is assumed   to be produced in a separate sector that   is   small relative to

the economy. Two technologies are assumed to be available for producing each good q.

First,   a > units of labor can be applied to produce I unit of output of any good
               1                                                                                    q uting
the constant returns to scale (CRS), or "backstop," technology. In addition, good q can be

produced with a fixed investment of C units of labor and a variable labor requirement of 1

per unit of output. The idea of two alternative technologies has been used by Shleifer
[19861 and Shleifer and Vishny [19881 to illustrate the importance       of market size in
promoting the switch to IRS technology. Here, since the size of the market for q is equal
to the number   of consumers whose menu includes q (customer base), income distribution              will

determine the profitability of producing q with increasing returns.

         Industrialization in this paper   is   taken to be the substitution of increasing returns

technologies for constant returns technologies in production of some goods. It seems very

plausible to associate increasing returns with events that are commonly linked to

industrialization, such as mass production, escape from the farm, concentration of labor in
the same location, etc. Our focus of industrialization as substitution of increasing returns

technologies for constant returns technologies ignores the expansion of the menu of
available goods in the process of industrialization. Judd [19851 presents one such a model of
labor absorbing rather than labor saving technological change.4

         Industrialization of a sector will in part be determined by its market structure. We
assume that the CRS technology for each g is         at the disposal of a competitive fringe. If
the manufacturing wage is taken to be wM, any good q demanded will be readily produced

and sold for aW by the fringe, which earnszero profit. In addition, we assume that the
sector producing each q has a unique   firm with      access to IRS technology,   This firm can

decide whether to enter with IRS production or to leave its sector to the fringe.        We

assume that, after entry, monopolists in different sectors set prices simultaneously.



LID. The Distribution   of Shares
        Since the levels of income and profits are determined endogenously in the model,

the distribution we take as given is that of shares of manufacturing profits and agricultural
                                                           8

rents. We make two further assumptions.           First, to the extent that there are many rather

than only one manufacturing sector, all shareholders are assumed to hold the market, i.e.,

identical shares in the profits of all firms. Secondly, and more importantly, we assume that
each property owner owns the same fraction of profits as of rents.            We do   not consider the

income distribution between capitalists and landowners, since they are assumed to             be the
same people. This assumption gives us a unique ordering             of people by wealth independent of
the exact sizes of agriculture and industry, and in this way greatly simplifies the

accounting. As we discuss in Section III, however, the distribution of shares of profits and
the distribution of shares of rents play very different roles in the model.

           Most people in the economy are assumed to own neither rents nor profits, with the

minimum share ownership for those owning something being               .   The distribution   of shares   is

given by   G(-y).    We   are chiefly interested in an economy with considerable inequality of

ownership, so that many people do not benefit from increases in profits or rents. We
denote by N    =    L (I - G()) the number of shareholders in this economy.


ILL. Labor Market Equilibrium

         So far we have spoken about the agricultural wage and the manufacturing wage

separately.   We now      discuss how they are related to each other in our model. Suppose that

each person    is   endowed with   I   unit of labor which he supplies completely inelastically.

Labor   is assumed    to flow between agriculture and manufacturing in response to wage

differentials, but the total quantity of labor supplied is fixed.        We assume    that these flows

occur until the rewards are equalized, i.e.,      wM   =   WA   w   in equilibrium.5 This wage

arbitrageconditionhas the importantimplicationthat the size of agriculture determines not
only the agricultural wage, but also the manufacturing wage. Knowing LF suffices to know
both w and    a.     We lean on this fact heavily in the exposition below.
                                                      9
         An agent's income, y, can now be written as        y     w+   'y(r' + a), where   '   E




         In the course   of this paper, we make several     assumptions about the actual income

distribution. The first of these—-the poverty assumption--states that wages are sufficiently

low that a consumer without property income never buys manufactures:


(Poverty)                                       w <


We   make this assumption about the equilibrium wage because it is plausible for a land-poor

country. Under the poverty assumption, consumers who own no property spend all their
income on food, and are not contributing to demand         for manufactures. Except for the
admittedly important exclusion of skilled labor from our model [Taylor and Bacha, 1976],

assuming that wage earners are too poor to buy manufactures seems natural.



                                          Ill. Eciuilibrium
lilA. The Extent of Industrialization
         In the equilibrium we propose, all Sectors producing goods 0 through Q            for some Q
industrialize. The entering monopolists displace the fringe in these sectors, but do not           cut
prices. The price of each manufacturing good is therefore ow,           regardless   of whether it is
produced in an industrialized or a backstop sector, The Appendix shows that, under a

plausible assumption on the distribution of shares G(7), the Nash equilibrium between

monopolists must in fact take the form of keeping prices at ow, and moreover, this
equilibrium is unique. In this section, we calculate the extent of industrialization, Q, that
obtains in this equilibrium.

         When all sectors (O.QJ industrialize, and prices in all      of them are kept at ow, the
sector Q for whose monopolist it   is   marginally profitable to enter is one where variable

profits just cover the fixed cost. Denote by N'       the sales   of that sector, equal to the
                                                    10

minimum efficient scale. For this sector, the break-even condition                is



(I)                                   (aw - w)N'       Cw,       or
(2)                                      N' = C/(a -       1).


Since the range of goods consumed declines with income, consumers of Q are the                   N' richest
people in the economy. Sales to them generate high enough variable profits to allow sector

Q to break even. But since fixed costs are the same in all industrializing sectors, the             N'
richest people can be thought of as paying the fixed cost in each of them. The poorer

customers then account for positive profits in inframarginal sectors (0,Q).

      The profit share of the N'th richest consumer is given by            ''   such that


(3)                                    L(l   - G(')) = N'.

Since Q is the good produced in the marginal sector, the consumer with share

goods (0,Q). His expenditure on manufactures then equals the cost
                                                                                            '
                                                                                 of buying them:
                                                                                                buys the




(4)                              Qaw     ['y'( +   )   +    (w   -

This yields the expression for the   equibrium Q:


(5)                                                 h(r +r') + (w -               z)1



The extent of industrialization, Q, is determined by income in the hands of the             Nth richest
person, and can be solved for once that income is known.
         The consumers of manufactures in this economy                an be divided into two distinct
classes. The upper class, consisting of the   N' richest consumers, buys all the manufactures
produced in the industrial sector, and then spends some of its resources on backstop-produced
items. The middle class, in contrast, consists of the N - Ne property owners below the                Nth
richest person, and consumes only the manufactures produced by industrialized sectors. In
                                                            1!

this model, the size of the upper class is independent of the income distribution, assuming
 that there are at least N' property owners. Wealth in the hands of the upper class, however,

does depend on the actual distribution of shares, as well as on the level of income.

           Figure   1   summarizes where expenditures of various consumers go. Some of the

profit (and rent)       income   of both upper and middle class      goes into bringing their food

expenditure up to z. After that, the manufacturing spending of the upper class goes to
cover the fixed costs of industrial sectors. All members of the upper class share equally in

this expenditure, which for each of them equals to the manufacturing spending of the

marginal upperclassman. All those richer than N' then buy goods with q                > Q   from the

backstopsector.
           Since the upper class pays the fixed cost, the spending by the middle class is a

source of pure profit for the industrializing sectors. As a result, sectors (O,Q) earn a posi-
tive   profit from their    sales to the middle class. Low index sectors, with large customer

bases, earn the highest profits, and high index industrial sectors the lowest. The total in-
dustrial profits in this economy depend on the share of wealth held by the middle class.



lII.B. Market Clearing in Manufacturing:The MM Equation

           Using the expression (4) for     ,   we can calculate the aggregate profits      of sectors
(O,Q1 as   a function of the expenditure by their customers. Because these profits are part of

the customers' incomes, industrial profits in this calculation are a function of themselves:


(6)

                                              - C((ir   +         + (iv   -


where T =           dG() is the share of profits in the          hands of the middle class. This expression
is obtained by adding up profits across sectors, taking account of the customer base of each

sector, and substituting for Q from (5) in the fixed coststerm. In calculating the share of
                                                         12

income materializing as demand for industrialized manufactures, we take account                    of the fact
that an upperclassman spends only the share       't of profits in this way,     while a member of

the middle class so spends all     of his profits. Expression (6) is easier to work with if we
substitute for the fixed cost using (2). This yields:



(7)                                   [(+)T+(N-N)(w-z)].
In this equilibrium expression for profits, all the terms involving the upper class disappear.

This   is   because the upper class pays for the fixed costs, and hence no profits are made

from selling to it. Aggregate profits are simply equal to the profit rate (o           —   I )/o   times the

total expenditures by the middle class on manufactures.

            To interpret (7), we eliminate industrial profits from the right hand side:


(8)
                                                         l-
                                                   (rF.T + (N - N*)(w       -


The numerator of this expression is the profit from the autonomous expenditure on

industrialized manufactures by the middle class. That is,         it is the variable profit of the
industrial sector realized from the spending out of rents and wages, but not our of profits.

Since these profits would be realized if all profits escaped the industrial sector and did not
themselves contribute to demand, we call them high-powered profits. High-powered profits

can actually be thought of as coming from rents, since the wage is assumed to be less than

             Expression (8) says that the total industrial profit is the high-powered profit times the

multiplier
                l-T      . This multiplier exceeds   I   since both   0    and T are smaller than I.


The idea behind the multiplier is that Out     of each dollar of high-powered profit that
industry distributes as a dividend, share T goes to the middle class.           As   these sharehoId-s

spend all of that dividend on manufactures (yielding the profit rate                       in total the

fraction            T of each dollar of high-powered profit comes         back to industry as additional
                                                          13

profit. Since the upper class takes care of the fixed cost, and the middle class is defined
as spending only on industrialized manufactures, all the profits distributed to the middle

class net of food spending come back as demand for the industrialized manufactures.6

          Recalling that both 1r and     w are   uniquely determined by      L, we can think of (8) as
a relation   between the size   of agriculture L5. and industrial profits    .   Whether this relation

is positive depends on what happens to demand for manufactures as agriculture expands.
The problem is that, as LF increases, wages fall but rents rise, so that in general the effect

on the income of the middle class is ambiguous.           •But since we   are thinking of wages     as

returns to labor in subsistence agriculture, and have put a lower bound             on the rent and

profit ownership stakes, it is natural    to assume that to the middle class profits are a more

important source of income than wages. This          is   our "lnequality assumption:



(Inequality)                               + (w   - :)(N - N)]> 0.
                                 dLF1
In the economy we are looking at, the income         of the    middle class as a whole is assumed to

rise with the size of agriculture.7

      Under the inequality assumption, the numerator of (8) rises as agriculture expands.

This implies that, as   Lr increases, so do agricultural rents and therefore high-powered and
total industrial profits. We denote this positive relation between LF and          a   that reflects
industrial market clearing as the MM curve, It describes the role of agriculture as the

source   of demand for industrial goods.


IlIC. Market Clearance in Agriculture: The FF Equation
          In equilibrium, factor payments in agriculture must        be equal to the    value   of sales:


(9)                                  wLy + 1r' =          - (w -
which can be rewritten    as
                                                             14

(10)                                       w(-LF)+(w-:
The left hand side of (10) consists of manufacturing wages spent on agriculture and so

represents the exogenous inflow of demand into agriculture. The right hand side, in turn,

represents the flow of resources out of agriculture, i.e., rents spent on manufactures. In

equilibrium, leakages into agriculture (LHS) must equal leakages out of it (RHS).
              In this model, the equilibrium employment and output in agriculture are independent

of profits in manufacturing.           This result is a consequence   of the assumption that the
propensity to spend on food is zero after z units are obtained, which implies that all profit
earners get      z   units of food independent of profits. The food output must provide w units

for each person without shares and z            Units   for each person    with shares. Since the wage is

determined in agriculture by assumption, the food output              is    independent of manufacturing
profits. In the       (LF,) space, equation (lO)--the FF curve--is vertical.
              We could make the alternative assumption that the marginal propensity to spend on

food is positive even after       z   units are obtained. In this case, some of the manufacturing

profits would be spent on food, and so contribute to demand for agriculture. The manu-

facturing profits required to absorb a higher food output are then higher, and so the FF
curve    is   upward sloping but not vertical. This change does not affect our results, with one

important exception:it causes the welfare of wage earners to be inversely related to the
level   of industrial profits,   since wages fall when the agricultural sector expands. Although

this change points to some possibly adverse welfare consequences of industrialization for the

poor, we do not believe that this         is   a serious problem in practice, mainly because large
increases in food imports and in farm productivity typically accompany industrialization.



hID. General Equilibrium
              The analysis has so far yielded two market clearing relations between the size of

agriculture and industrial profits (Figure 2). By having set               WA = WM   = w, we have
                                                         IS

 implicitly equilibrated the labor market. By Walras's law, we can omit one market, which in
 this context is the market for backstop produced manufactures. Qur analysis then involves

 studying the intersection of MM and FF curves.


                                               IV, Analysis

         Throughout the analysis of the model, we shall be principally concerned with the
 implications of any given change for industrialization. Our objective is to provide a positive

story on the relationship between income distribution and industrialization. No necessary
 normative significance is attached to industrialization itself. Nonetheless, we do note some
effects of industrialization on the poor.

         We measure   industrialization in two distinct ways. First, we look at the extent of

industrialization, Q, calculated in section lilA, that measures the variety of goods produced

using increasing returns. As equation (5) shows, the only aspect of income distribution that
determines the extent of industrialization is income in the hands of the        Nth richest
person. Although Q    measures       variety, it does not really capture the size of industry
relative to, say, backstop. Accordingly, our second measure of industrialization is total

employment in industry, consisting of people employed to cover both fixed and variable cost.

        Employment in industry can be shown to equal:


                                LI = f(T+N'i'Xi+tr1) +
                                                 aw


Unlike the extent of industrialization, employment is determined by the total share of

profits spent on industry, namely T       +   V'-,   This share rises both with the share   of profits
in the hands of the middle class, T, and with the share that the upper class spends on

industrial goods. Since   I   - T-   iV'' is the share of profits spent on backstop, employment
in industry is maximized when that share        is   the lowest, which occurs when there    is no
                                                  16


inequality within the upper class. The size of industry is the highest when the least
resources are spent on backstopproduced luxuries                     —




IV.A. Agriculture as the Leading Sector

        In his recommendationsfor the economic development of the Gold Coast, Lewis

[l953 stresses the need to raise agricultural productivity as a prerequisite for
industrialization. Our formal model elaborates his logic, since a boost in agricultural

productivity can substantially increase the size of the markets for manufactures, and so the
extent of industrialization and employment in industry. In this sense, agriculture is the

leading sector.
        Suppose that a technological innovation changes the production function for food to

kF(LF) with k > I, and suppose that wage and rent schedules as a function of Lr rise by
the same proportion. We claim that in this case employment in agriculture falls, farm
output rises, and so do wages. At the same time, labor flaws into industry as bath the

output of extant industrial sectors and the extent of industrialization increase. To see this,

suppose that farm employmentdoes not change, so that the supply of food rises by a factor
of k. Since the demand for food by    all the wage earners also rises by a factor of k, while

the demand for food from rents does not rise, there will be an excess supply of food.

Labor must then flow out of agriculture into industry and backstop, so its wage rises both

because farm employment shrinks and because the wage schedule has shifted up. As

industry absorbs the labor released by the farm sector, the extent of industrialization,
employment in industry, and the output in currently industrialized sectors all increase.
        The same result can be seen by examining the shifts in the MM and FF curves in

response to the technological change in agriculture (Figure 3). As the previous paragraph

illustrates, the FF curve shifts to the left, since demand in agriculture does not rise as fast
as productivity. The MM curve shifts    up, since each level of employment in agriculture    now
                                                        17

 yields greater rents and high powered profits. The overall effect             is   to reduce farm employ-

 rnent and to raise the extent of industrialization, Q, as well as industrial employment, L1.

          Technological change in agriculture in this model indeed precipitates industrial
development, as the autonomous demand for manufactured goods increases, but also raises
the living standards of the poor, as their food wages rise. In this sense, our model

confirms Lewis's idea that improvements in agricultural productivity can foster

industrialization. Our example also illustrates the frequent observation that labor moves                    Out

of the farm sector in the   course     of industrialization.   In Section V, we show that       a similar
analysis applies also to the case of improvements in the ability to export, coming either
from technological progress or from the lowering of trade barriers.


IVB. Failure of Industrialization

         Lucas [1988J finds the empirical observation that many countries with a low level                    of
income also fail to grow to be an important challenge to the theory of economic

development. While ours     is   not an explicitly dynamic model, it does have strong implications
as to when industrialization fails completely. As we show below, this happens both in the

case of too much equality and in that of too much inequality, although the latter case                  is

probably more realistic. These are the cases where the interior equilibrium analysis of the

previous section does not apply.
         Take first the case of extreme equality, where everyone holds the same share of

rents and profits. Excluding industrial profits, every consumer in this Situation has the

income   of F(L)/L. In a poor country this is likely to        fall short of   :,    in which case no

consumer will be interested in manufactures. With all consumers buying just food, obviously
no sector industrializes. Complete equality thus entails a total failure of industrialization,

as the farm output per capita     is   too low to get anyone interested in manufactures at all.
                                                      18

        Extreme inequality can also pose a problem for industrialization. Suppose that

fewer than N people own all of profits and rents. Then rio sector can industrialize and

cover its fixed costs, since only shareholders are interested in manufactures, and there are

too few of them for their demand to cover the fixed Cost. Under such an oligarchical
income distribution, no conversion to increasing returns ever takes place since no market         is


large enough for this to be profitable. This result also suggests that a more populous

country is easier to industrialize, since sales at the minimum efficient scale N are more
likely to be achieved.
        This may be the appropriate place to comment on the different roles of rent and

profit distributions in our analysis. The distribution of rents determines the level of high
powered profits. in particular, the previous result that     N wealth holders   are needed for

industrialization is really the result that N rent holders are needed. For then autonomous
demand would allow firms to cover the fixed cost. In Contrast, the distribution of owner-

ship claims to industrial profits determines the extent of spillovers and the multiplier. The

higher is the fraction of profits (not rents) in the hands of the middle class, the more of
these profits will return as additional demand      for manufactures. Ownership of profits in
exctss of those owned by the      N'uhl   richest person, in contrast, does nothing to promote

industrialization.
         The message of this analysis is that, in a poor country, income distribution could be

responsible for the lack of industrialization, even when the income to start it     is   available.

Extreme equality could mean equal distribution of misery, as no sectors industrialize for lack

of demand. Similarly, oligarchical        income distributions could pose problems for

industrialization, as the small number of property owners demand goods whose production
could not possibly be profitably industrialized. While the rich are served by the labor

intensive backstop sector (or imports), industry does not develop for lack of demand.

Perhaps it   is   the case, then, that the problem of lack of growth could be traced to the
                                                        19


smallness    of markets, which in turn    is   accounted for by the   absence    of a   middle class.



IV.C. Alternative Income Distributions

        Begin with     a   redistribution' of shares from the upper to         the middle class (Figure

4). Assume first that this redistribution is sufficiently minor         for the identities of the upper
class to remain unchanged, and       in particular   no shares are taken      from the   N' richest
person. This    redistribution'   can be thought of either as an actual transfer          of shares, or
better yet as a comparative static on income distributions.8 The effect of this

redistribution ott the manufacturing equilibrium is to shift the MM curve up. Any level of

LF will now yield     a greater share of high-powered        profits in the   hands   of the middle     class

as well as   a higher multiplier since T rises. In contrast,      the FF relation remains unchanged

since the demand     for food does not   change.

        The result    of this redistribution    is to keep the size   of agriculture     fixed, but to

raise the demand for industrial goods at the expense of backstop. As a result, the

equilibrium extent of industrialization, Q, rises since with his share                unchanged and

industrial profits rising, the    Nth richest consumer can       now afford a wider menu of goods.

Industrial employment also rises, because T +         N rises,     and employment in backstop

declines since the rich now have less to spend.         The wage and the welfare          of wage earners
do not change, since the food sector is not affected.9 Note that              if our redistribution     had

reduced the number        of shares of the .Vth richest   person, the extent      of industrialization,    Q,

would fallif profits did not rise enough in equilibrium for his income to end up higher.
However, even if Q fell, industrial employment would rise, since fewer resources are spent

on backstop.

        Consider next a redistribution from the upper class to the poor, which is however

not large enough to cause the poor to begin consuming manufactures (Figure 5). This

redistribution has   no    effect on the MM curve since neither the multiplier nor the share of
                                                        20

 rents owned by the middle class are affected. In contrast, since we shifted resources from

 people with marginal propensity to consume food of 0 to those with an MPC of I.                 th
 agricultural employment and output must rise. The FF curve shifts to the right. The effect
of this redistribution is    to shift labor from the backstop to agriculture as the demand for

 food rises. This in turn raises high-powered profits with the result that industrialization

becomes more extensive and industrial employment rises. In addition to the direct effect on

the poor of the redistribution, there     is an also   an indirect adverse effect of a decline in
wage as agriculture expands. The direct effect is however stronger as otherwise agriculture
could not expand in the first place. Similarly, the direct effect on the upper class of loss

of shares and reduction in income cannot       be offset by increased profits.



                              V.   Some Ascects of the Ooen Economy

             None of the issues addressed so far matter in a world of costless international

trade. In that world, producers of each good, face the world market, which in all likelihood
is   large enough to cover the fixed cost. In practice, however, trade      is   not costless.
Transportation, marketing, establishing a reputation in product markets and most importantly

overcoming trade barriers all take costs. As a result, some goods will be traded, but for
others the domestic market will remain the sole source of sales.

             Consistent with our emphasis on the closed economy, the evidence offered by

Chenery, Robinson and Syrquin [1987] shows that 80-90% of manufacturing output in

developing countries is sold domestically. At the same time, expansion of domestic markets
has often been a direct-result of the growth      of income from exports.        Although one might

expect   a   productive cash crop or mineral export sector to have the effect of causing the

country to import more manufactures and to produce fewer of them at home, the more
common consequence of exports is to foster domestic industrialization.
                                                         21

           In the analysis of the closed economy, we have shown how a productive agricultural

sector is necessary before consumers demand manufactures in sufficient quantities to render

domestic industrialization profitable. In this section, we argue that exports of cash crops,

minerals, or light manufacturing goods enable a country to substitute efficient export

production and food imports for inefficient domestic food production, so that food can be
obtained in a roundabout and cheaper way)0 The net result of this productive roundabout

means of obtaining food can often be more profits in the hands of the middle class and

even food wages that are high enough that wage earners begin to demand manufactures. In

this way, a productive export sector can raise the extent of domestic industrialization,
          To make this point, we consider the special case of no trade in manufactures, The

country exports a particular cash crop or mineral, and imports food, To keep the analysis
close to the previous sections, we add to the list of commodities one export good, R, that

can be produced from labor with a concave production function G(LR), and yields no utility

for domestic consumers.      We assume     that labor in the R-sector   is   paid its value marginal
product, and that export profits from R are held in the same proportion as manufacturing

profits and rents. The world price of food is taken as numeraire, and the world price of R
in terms of food   is   given by   E. We assume      that the production of R   is   sufficiently cost
effective that the optimal output of R       is   not zero. In this case, R will be produced until it

is   equally cheap to grow food domestically and to make R and exchange it for food in the
world market:

                                         E    G'(LR) = F'(LF).

          If trade is balanced, the value of food imports must equal E G(Lp,), in which case
the food market clearing condition becomes:

                              E    G(LR)   + WLF     +     =   wL - (w - z)N
                                                  22

which together with (12) defines the equilibrium employment in agriculture. The FF curve,

as   before, remains vertical. High powered profits now come_from both agriculture and

exports, so that the MM curve becomes



                        +   R)1 + (N - N)(w-z))
(14)




where   R     E   G(LR) - WLR denotes the export profits. Since higher farm employment
still yields higher farm profits. the MM curve in the open economy is still upward sloping.

           Opening up trade in this economy always raises wages, since labor is moved from
the farm into more efficient production of exports. This effect is very similar to

technological progress in agriculture, since labor is now used in efficient roundabout
production of food (via production of exports and exchange of those for food). If wages
rise above z, then wage earners will start to demand manufactures. This will increase the

employment in industry. At the same time, the amount of profits in the hands of middle-
class property owners can rise or fall when the country begins to export the cash crop,

since the output share of property owners may be lower in the export sector than in

agriculture. However, as long as the output share of property owners is not too much lower
in the export sector, then high-powered profits should rise and industrialization--measured

either by Q or by L1--shouldincrease.

          This analysis suggests that opening trade in some export good R can promote

industrialization in the same way as does technological progress in agriculture (the FF curve
shifts to the left and the MM curve shifts up). Both developments have the effect of

expanding the domestic market for manufactures, and so allowing some increasing returns
technologies to break even when they could not do so before. The idea that the wealth
effect from international trade can raise the size of domestic markets has been stressed by
                                                         23

Lewis [1953J in his recommendations for the economic development of the Gold Coast. This

effect   is   probably also important in countries like Korea and Taiwan. whose protected
domestic industries doubtless benefit from the demand generated by lower spending on food

and other imported necessities. The international trade literature, even when it has focused

on increasing returns [l-{elpman and Krugman, 19851, has not emphasized this wealth effect

from trade governed completely by forces of comparative advantage.

              The cases of East Asian NICs suggest another important way in which exports can

encourage domestic industrialization, namely by providing the resources to import foreign
technology. Cash crop exports encourage industrialization if their main effect is to lower
the cost      of obtaining intermediate capital goods.    In our framework, this can be modeled as

the ability to import the fixed cost C at a price below the cost       of providing it domestically.
Given the abundance of cheap labor in LDCs, they often import sophisticated foreign capital

goods, but protect final goods and manufacture them domestically.
              In sum, the exports   of domestic cash crops, minerals or light manufactures can
encourage domestic industrialization in two distinct ways. First, by importing food, the

country can free up labor to work in manufacturing while at the same time creating demand
from the combination of farm and export profits. This channel will be important as long as

not all gains from trade materialize in higher wages spent on food. Second, the country

can import capital goods to cut the cost of domestic production of final goods, and so
reduce the minimum size of a market that can be profitably industrialized. The latter effect

would be particularly important in a country that has a lot        of cheap labor, and that
protects its final goods industries.
              The analysis has so far assumed that each property owner owns the same share of

profits from agriculture      as   from exports. Differential shareholdings, however, can have

significant implications for the extent of industrialization,since the high powered demand
for manufactures depends on the total amount of profits in the hands of the middle class.
                                                     24

For example, if the profits from the export commodity are narrowly distributed while the
                                                                   middle class and the
profits from agriculture are broadly held, then the incomes of the
demand for domestic industry might actually decline in response to opening up of exports.

A similar effect arises   if a country substitutes exports of oil, with narrowly distributed
returns, for exports of a cash crop, with broadly distributed returns. Recent evidence from

Nigeria's oil boom [World Bank,     19861 suggests   that this is more than a theoretical

possibility. In Nigeria the expansion of oil exports led to a contraction of cash crop
exports, in part because of the appreciation of the teal exchange rate. Since the returns
from the exports of cash crops were more widely distributed than the returns from oil

exports, the increase in domestic wealth associated with the expansion of oil exports failed
to contribute to domestic industrialization.


                                   VI. Summary and Extensions

          The models presented above offered a tractable way to analyze industrialization

interpreted as introduction of increasing returns technologies. For both a closed economy
and art economy with some open markets, our analysis stressed        the role that composition   of

demand, as determined by the distribution of income, plays in industrialization. We
identified the role of the leading sectors, such as agriculture or exports, in driving

industrialization, but also showed that a boom in a leading sector might not suffice. For
industrialization to take place, benefits from such a boom must be equally enough distributed

to create large markets for domestic manufactures. Focusing on increasing returns and the
size   of domestic markets seems to offer   insights that would be hard to obtain otherwise.

          Several aspects of our models can be improved, and several additional questions can

be profitably addressed in future work. First, we have considered only a         simple theory of

wage determination, where the real wages in the industry and on the farm are the same.

If, as many observers (e.g.. Lewis [1967])    have noted, real industrial wages are higher,
                                                   25

several new results   could emerge. For example, if industrial workers are wealthy enough to

consume industrial goods, leakages from industry into agriculture would be smaller. In this

case, the balanced growth effects whereby income from industrial production turns into
demand for industrial goods will be stronger, which raises the possibility of a self-sustaining

industrialization without autonomous demand.       We explore such multiple equilibria in a

companion paper [Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny, 19881.
        Second, we have not considered the question of the distribution of wealth among

capitalists and landowners. This question gains particular significance in the open economy,
where foreign competition might reduce profits but raise rents as the export and farm

sectors expand, This question is also important in the context of the savings decision,

especially if because of imperfect capital markets capitalists have higher savings propensities
than landowners.

        Third, we have only focused on the income distribution as the determinant of
market size. One can also consider the more usual determinants of market size such as

population and average income, and ask various questions about industrialization in small
versus large Countries, as well as in poor vs rich countries. Chenery, Robinson and Syrquin

[19871 provide some evidence on these issues. One can also look at homogeneity             of tastes

and the concentration of population in one location, such    as   a city,   as   determinants of

market size.   For example, the US might have grown as fast as it did in the 1950's because

conformity imposed a great deal of homogeneity of tastes, and so allowed producers to take

advantage of increasing returns to a greater extent than they could if they had to produce

variety. A cultural or state-enforced homogeneity of tastes might have also helped the

growth of postwar Japan and socialist countries.

        Finally, this work can be integrated into a two-stage model of economic growth, in
which cash crop or mineral exports or domestic agriculture support domestic industriali-

zation, which then leads to manufacturing exports. As the examples of Korea and Taiwan
                                                 26

illustrate, domestic industrialization can teach companies the skills needed to become
effective manufacturing exporters. To the extent that large enough domestic markets allow

profitable domestic industrialization, which is necessary before manufactures can be
exported, the model in this paper explains how countries lay foundations for becoming

manufacturing exporters.
                                                       27

                                                 APPENDIX

                                  Nash Equilibrium among Sectors.



        This Appendix shows that, under a plausible assumption on            G(i), the unique Nash
equilibrium is for monopolists in some subset of sector (O,Q] to enter and to keep prices at
ow. To show this, suppose. that, for some Q, all sectors (O,Q1 convert to IRS technology.

In none of these sectors can the entering        monopolist raise the price above ow without

surrendering his sales to the competitive fringe. The question is whether he'll cut his
price, assuming, as   is   appropriate in the case of small Sectors, that he maximizes profits in
terms of numéraire, which is food.

        Suppose that all but one sector q do not cut prices, and consider the decision of
the monopolist in that one sector q E     (O.Q1. Aside      from good q, since all prices are the

same, any consumer of manufactures with income y buys a segment (O,q) of items.
Customers of sector q include all those for whom the marginal utility of buying good q
exceeds that of spending an extra dollar on food.        If the   monopolist in sector q charges

these are the people for whom:

                                             I   —
(Al)                                         c-zpq
Among buyers of manufactures, we know that


                                       (c-   :)(y- :)(l -9).
From (Al) then, the monopolist in sector q gets consumers with incomes




(A.3)
                                                                      28

or

(A.4)                                      +         +   (w -             >   f.
The last expression yields the ownership stake                     of the marginal customer for sector q at the
price p, namely


                                                              - (w - z)
(A.5)                                          =
                                                          r   +




Since we are assuming that all sectors other than q are charging ow, in equilibrium all

consumers with    -y   > y(,q) and nOne with 'y           <   -y(q) buy the good q.                   Selling to them brings
the variable profit of:


(A.6)                                          = [L(l -                                - w),


since each customer buys only one unit. For                       ,       ow to be optimal, it         is   sufficient that the
profit function   be nondecreasing in              for all prices             less   than ow, i.e.,

(A7)                   [L(l   - G(-y(.q)))]    -
                                                   g(-1(q))9(              F) ( -          w)   0

The last inequality is equivalent to

A 8)                   L(l -                                          <
                               G(y(p.q))           (x +

But from (A.5), we know that, under the poverty assumption, w <


(A.9)                                -y(q)>         9(+ F)
This implies that   a sufficient condition for (AS) to hold                           is
                                                                 29



(A 10)
                                            g(pg)                                  —   <
                                       L(l - G(-(p.q)))               p

Since   (   - v)/w   is   at most equal to (a      I). a, we have that a sufficient condition

for p = sw    to be the optimal price is

                                                    g('fl                 a-I
                                               >
                                                   L(l - G())             a

for all stakes -     held by the potential marginal customers. As we show in the next

subsection, these are stakes        - such that L(I - G('i)) < C/(a            -   1), We call     (All)   the

inelastic demand assumption, and make              it throughout.
       To interpret this assumption, note that g(i(.qfrs(p,q) is the number of new

customers the monopolist in sector q gets per 1% price cut, L(l - G((zq))) is his old
customer base, and (a         —   1)/a is his profit rate per customer. The assumption (A.l0) then

says that the percentage gain in the customer base, times the profit rate per customer,
cannot exceed I. In this model, each monopolist is competing with food for customer
dollars. As he cuts the price, the monopolist expands his customer base, but loses revenue

on old customers.         For the price cut to be unjustified, the monopolist cannot be gaining too

many new customers relative to the revenue he loses on old ones. Put differently, the
elasticity of his demand curve must be smaller than the inverse of his profit rate. In this
case, the firm wants to keep          its   price as high   as   possible, that        is at ow.   Although (A.ll)

seems to us to be a plausible assumption, we note that it fails when the distribution of

shareholdings has large peaks or discrete spikes. n which case our no price cutting analysis
does not apply.

            A similar but more tedious argument shows that                    (AJ 1)       also suffices to rule out

price-cutting equilibria. Our equilibrium with no price cutting is unique when (All) holds.
A   proof of this is available from the authors.

University    of Chicago
                                                           30

                                                   Footnotes


     1.    Chenery, Robinson and Syrquin [1987) report that industrialization usually begins at a
 much lower level of income in high-population Countries.

 2. All our results carry through, and have been carried through in the working paper

 version, under        the assumption that the   marginal propensity to spend on food falls below   1

 but not to 0 after z units are obtained. We shall mention the modifications of the analysis
 in this more general case throughout the paper.

 3. Although we do not consider the possibility of increasing returns in agriculture (or in

 section V In the export sector), it may be empirically relevant and interesting. For

 example, since production of sugar or tea is most economical on large plantations, benefits
 from such export crops are usually very unequally distributed. The effect of
                                                                              increasing
 returns in the leading sector on the income distribution is left for future work.

 4. Lewis [1967) discusses the empirical observation that in many countries industrialization

 has generated much investment and output without comparable gains in
                                                                      employment.
 5. In Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny [19881, we specify a model in which
                                                                           manufacturing wages
exceed those in agriculture, and show that this can lead to multiple
                                                                     equilibria.
6. A similar analysis of multipliers characterizes recent macroeconomic models of
                                                                                   imperfect
competition, including Weitzman [1982], •Hart [1982], Cooper and John [19851, and Shleifer
and Vishny [1988).

7. The inequality assumption is made because it is plausible and because it enables us to

sign the effects we are interested in.        Th odel can be      as easily analyzed without making

this assumption.

8. It can also be thought of as a labor income tax or a lump-sum tax,
                                                                      except in this case
the MM and FF equations must be appropriately modified.

9.        If the middle class had a significant marginal   propensity to spend on food (and
                                                  31

especially higher than the rich), this redistribution would increase the size of the food
sector and make wage earners worse off.                       —


10.   Mellor [19821 documents the importance of food imports for rapidly developing

countries.
                                      REFERENCES



Baldwin, Robert E. "Patterns   of Development in Newly Settled Regions," The   Manchester

        School 24 (May 1956), 161-179.

Chenery, Hollis B,, Robinson, Sherman, and Syrquin, Moshe. Industrialization and Growth:     A

        Comparative Study (New York: Oxford University Press, 1987).

Cooper, Russell, and John, Andrew. Coordinating Coordination Failures in Keynesian

        Models," New Haven, CT: Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper No, 745, 1985.

Fleming, J. Marcus. 'External Economies and the Doctrine of Balanced Growth," Economic
        Journal 65 (June 1955), 24 1-256.

Galenson, Walter. Economic Growth and Structural Change in Taiwan (Ithaca and London:
        Cornell University Press, 1979).

Harbison, Ralph W. "Colombia," in Tropical Development 1880-1913, W. A. Lewis, ed.

        (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1970), 64-99.
Hart, Oliver D.   'A Model of Imperfect Competition with Keynesian Features," Quarterly
        Journal of Economics 97 (February 1982), 109-138.

Helpman, Elhanan, and Krugman, Paul. Market Structure and Foreign Trade.' Increasing
        Returns, Imperfect Competition, and the International Economy (Cambridge, MA: MIT

        Press, 1985).

Johnston, Bruce F., and John W. Mellor, "The Role of Agriculture in Economic

        Development," American Economic Review 51 (September 1961), 566-593.
Judd, Kenneth L. "On the Performance of Patents,' Econometrica 53 (May 1985),     567—585.

Lewis, W. Arthur. Report on the Industrialization of the Gold Coast (Accra: Government

        Printing Office of the Gold Coast. 1953).

__________ "Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies     of Labor," The Manchester School
        22 (May 1954), 139-191.
                                                     33

 __________ 'Unemployment          in Developing Countries' (Stephenson Memorial Lecture), World

          Today 23    (1967), 13-22.                             —    -


 __________    Aspects of Tropical     Trade 1883-1965 (The Wicksell Lectures) (Stockholm: Almquist
          and Wicksell,   1969),


__________ ed, Tropical Development 1880-1913         (Evanston: Northwestern University Press,
          1970).

Lucas,   R. E., Jr.   'The Mechanics of Economic Development," forthcoming, Journal of
         MonetaryEconomics,988.

Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, "Industrialization and the Big
         Push," University of Chicago. mimeographed, 1988.
North, Douglass C. "Agriculture in Regional Economic Growth," Journal of Farm          Economics

         51   (December 1959), 943-951.
Nurkse, Ragnar. Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Countries         (Oxford:   Basil

         Blackwell, 1953).
Okhawa, Kazushi, and Henry Rosovsky. "The Role of Agriculture in Modern Japanese
         Economic Development," Economic Development and Cultural Change 9. part 2

         (October 1960), 43-68.

Rants, Gustav. 'Industrial Development,' in Eionomic Growth and Structural Change in

         Taiwan, Walter Galenson, ed. (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1979).
Ranis, G., and Fei, J. C.   H.     'A Theory of Economic Development," American    Economic

         Review 51    (September 1961), 533-565.

Rosenberg, Nathan. Technology         and the American Economic Growth (New York: M. E.

         Sharpe, 1972).

Shleifer, Andrei. 'Implementation Cycles," Journal of Political Economy 94 (December 1986),
         1163-1190.
                                               34

Shleifer, Andrei, and Vishny, Robert W.   The Efficiency of Investment in the   Presence   of
        Aggregate Demand Spillovers,' forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy,

Taylor, Lance, and Bacha, Edmar. 'The Unequalizing Spiral: A First Growth Model for
        Belindia,' Quarterly Journal of Economics   90 (November 1976), 187-219.

Thorbecke, Eric. 'Agricultural Development, in Economic Growth and Structural Change in
        Taiwan, Walter Galenson, ed. (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1979).

Weitzman, Martin L. 'Increasing Returns and the Foundations of UnemploymentTheory.'

        Economic Journal 92 (December 1982), 787-804.
       Figure I--Spending Patterns of the Population


                                            —    -




                                                  rofits from
                                                 ales to rich go
                          Profits from           o pay for ficed
                          sales to middle        osts
                          class




Food                              Food                  Food



                                                                       People
                 L-V                            L-N                L
    Figure 2--Market clearing in agriculture (FF)
                and industry(MM)




                        F




                                                    M




M




                               F
Figure 3--Effect of Technological Progress in Agriculture




             F'                         F




              F'                    F



                                                            LF
Figure   4--Effect of the redistribution from
          the rich to the middle class




               F




                                                M




                F



                                                    LF
Figure 5—-The effects of redistribution from
           the rich to the poor




      F




      F                      F'

                                               LF
