                        NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            BANKS AS SOCIAL ACCOUNTANTS AND SCREENING DEVICES
                       FOR THE ALLOCATION OF CREDIT




                            Joseph E. Stiglitz

                               Andrew Weiss




                          Working Paper No. 2710




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                               September 1988




This research is part of NBER's research program in Financial Markets and
Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #2710
                                             October 1988


                         BANKS AS SOCIAL ACCOUNTANTS
             AND SCREENING DEVICES FOR THE ALLOCATION OF CREDIT

                                        ABSTRACT




  This   paper presents and alternative perspective on the role of banks. We

emphasize the ways in which banks act as social accountants and screening

devices. In this view monetary disturbances have their effects through the

disturbances which they induce in society's accounting system and in the

mechanisms by which it is ascertained who is credit worthy. Because of

asymmetric information, giving rise to credit rationing, interest rates do

not play the simple allocative role ascribed by the conventional paradigm,

and as a result the equilibrating forces provided by market mechanisms may

be weak or virtually absent. The paper provides a critique of the

transactions based approach to monetary theory, and sketches a general

equilibrium formulation of the theory. The paper traces out some of the

policy implications of the theory. We show that certain financial

innovations, such as allowing for the more rapid recording of transactions,

may   actually   be welfare reducing.




Joseph E. Stiglitz                            Andrew Weiss
Department of Economics                       Department of Economics
Stanford University                           Boston University
Encina Hall, 4th Floor                        270 Bay State Road
Stanford, CA 94305                            Boston, MA 02215
             Banks as Social Accountants and Screening Devices

                                    for

                         The Allocation of Credi&

                        J. E. Stiglitz and A. Weiss2



1.   Introduction

     Perhaps no thinker has contributed as much to the understanding of

monetary economics during the past half century as       Sir John Hicks.   His

formulation of the IS-LM curves (Hicks, 1937), translating the Keynesian

model into a simple and manipulable form in which changes in the money

supply could be easily and directly related to changes in the level of

economic activity, provided not only a textbook paradigm, but a tool of


         Paper prepared for a volume on The Monetary Economics of John
Hicks, edited by A. Courakis and C. Goodhart, to be published by
Macmillan, 1988.

     2Department of Economics, Stanford University and the Nationa]. Bureau
of Economic Research; and Department of Economics, Boston University and the
National Bureau of Economic Research.    Financial support from the National
Science Foundation and the Olin Foundation are gratefully acknowledged.
Our thinking on the issues discussed here has been greatly influenced by
conversations with Bruce Greenwald. Some of the results reported below are
based on joint work with Bruce Greenwald.
     An earlier version of this paper was presented to the American Economic
Association at its meetings in Chicago. December 1987. We are greatly
indebted to Tony Courakis, Charles Goodhart, George Akerlof, and Axel
Leijonhuvud for their helpful and insightful comments.
      Both authors wish also to acknowledge a general intellectual
indebtedness to Sir John Hicks, an indebtedness which they share with
all those who work in the area of monetary economics.
     In addition to this general indebtedness, the first author wishes
to express a personal indebtedness to Professor Hicks for the many
insightful conversations over the past fifteen years, both during the
years which they spent together at All Souls College. and during the
subsequent years, at intermittent meetings, including those at Oxford,
Taipei, and Spoleto.


                                          1              -
analysis employed by policy makers. Moreover, it has served as a framework

in which those who disagreed with Keynesian prescriptions could recast their

arguments. The monetarist debate became a controversy over the shape of the

relevant curves'-an empirical debate about the magnitude of the relevant

elasticities3 and the Cambridge-Fisher identity was at last raised to the

level of a "theory."
                                                               -



     But Hicks went further, and was an important contributor to the general

equilibrium approach to the analysis of money (Hicks, 1933, 1935, 1938).

Money became an object, like peanuts, corn, and tobacco, for which there was

a demand and supply; the money rate of interest was the "price of money,"

the opportunity cost of holding money as opposed to other short term assets.

The ability to analyze monetary phenomenon within the same general
framework used to analyze other market phenomena not only lent stature to

the general theory, showing the power of these tools and concepts, but aLso

gave to monetary economics a sense of analytic rigor, precision, and

            which previously had been missing.     There were, to be sure,

"problems" remaining to be resolved, but these gave to the subject a

scientific aura: significant progress had been made, and there remained but

a few unresolved, yet precisely stated, issues to which ongoing research was

directed.


          Though it was seen this way by the Keynesians, the monetarists,
     such as Friedman, denied that the debate was just about magnitudes of
   elasticities.   Leijonhuvud (personal correspondence) interprets
Friedman to have meant that both the IS and 114 curves shift when the
money supply changes. See Friedman (1971) and Laidler (1971).

     4These included, for instance, the question of why money had value: in
a finitely-lived economy, no one would want to hold money in the final
period; and by backward induction, no one would ever want to hold it.
     Another question was why individuals held money when there seemed to be
dominating assets, assets which yielded higher returns and for which

                                        2
        Hicks was perfectly aware of the limitations of his approach5 (some of

which were discussed at great length by Leijonhuvud), and his later writings

have provided a much richer picture of monetary economics (Hicks, 1967,

    1.979, 1980. 1982, 1986).   Unfortunately, the forcefulness of his earlier

writings, and the ease with which those ideas could be cast in the formal

models which were to become so much the fashion in the half century

following, seemed (at least until recently) to have inhibited deeper

research by others in the profession into the mechanisms by which money and

monetary policy affect the economy, an enquiry which Hicks has continued to

pursue.

        This essay has four objectives: to present an alternative view of the

mechanisms by which money and monetary policy affect the economy; to explain

what is inadequate with the standard approach; to point out some of the new

    insights that may be gleaned from this alternative approach; and to suggest

how the new approach can be cast into a general equilibrida form, of no

    less rigor than that of the conventional formulation.       The essay is,


    transactions costs were no higher than with money, or at least not
sufficiently higher to offset the higher returns.
     The dictates of standard economic theory do not allow an open admission
of the prevalence of irrationalities.   The facts, for instance, that
numerous experiments suggest that even for a fairly limited number of
periods individuals do not perform the required backward induction, or that
there are numerous examples of individuals retaining funds in savings
accounts (with aggregate values in the billions of dollars) yielding
substantially lower returns than other bank accounts, with absolutely no
advantage in flexibility or safety, are either ignored, left as anomalies
eventually to be reconciled with rationality by some unexpected and
presumably quite deep insight, or explained         tautologically in terms of
    "psychological transactions costs."


-
        5lndeed, there is an often forgotten institutional part to Hicks'
classic 1931 paper concerning the structure of intermediaries, a theme which
he later elaborated in his "two Triads" (1967).


                                           3
accordingly, divided into four parts, with a concluding section in which the

major themes and results of the essay are summarized.




                                   Part I.

                         CREDIT AND THE BANKING SYSTEX



     Our basic hypothesis is that the central means by which the banking

system (and the monetary authorities) affect the level of economic activity

is through controL of the availability of credit, not through control of the

medium of exchange.     We maintain, moreover, that credit differs from

conventional commodities in several essential ways. For instance, at least

at certain critical junctures, the demand    and supply for credit are not
equilibrated by changes in the market rate of interest:      there is credit

rationing.6 Our theory provides insights into why the alleged equilibrating

mechanisms of the price system, which are supposed to ensure that resources



     6Earlier institutional literature stressed the importance of credit
rationing and credit availability. But the more recent literature dismissed
such discussions as being theoretically unsound, or, (as in the case of the
Loanable funds theories) as being simply equivalent, within a general
equilibrium model, to the standard monetary theory. The earlier work of
Modigliani and Jaffee (1969) is an important exception.
     In a series of earlier papers Stiglitz and Weiss (1981, 1983. 1986,
1987a, 198Th) showed that credit rationing could, in fact, occur in markets
with imperfect information. See also Keeton
(1980).
     For a partial survey of this literature, and how it relates to earlier
work, see Jaffee and Stiglitz (1988).     For a survey of the relationship
between these and other theories of credit rationing, and between these and
other models of markets with asymmetric information, see Stiglitz (1987).
     Other recent theoretical and empirical work stressing that it is
through the credit mechanism that monetary authorities affect the level of
economic activity can be found in Blinder and Stiglitz (1983). 8. Friedman
(1988), and Nakamura (1985).

                                        4
are fully arid efficiently used, so frequently seem to work so poorly, and

seem to have such difficulties in adjusting to disturbances.            We argue.

furthermore, that while for many purposes the alternative perspectives yield

similar predictions and policy prescriptions, there are some important

instances in which they differ. We detail three: the use of interest rates

as   targets   (though the view that we will put    forward   has some superficial

similarities to more conventional monetarists positions [Friedman (1968)1);

differences    in the   efficacy   of monetary policy in the short and long run;

and the desirability of certain financial innovations which increase the
speed with which transactions may be recorded.

      In our perspective banks provide several central informational roles:

they provide a systcm of accounts; they screen various potential borrowers,

to put them into the appropriate risk categories; and they undertake

(limited) monitoring of borrowers' actions.7             These are among their

principal functions. Banks are, from this perspective, agents specializing

in the acquisition and dissemination of information.             In the following

sections, we describe each of these roles in greater detail.

      The various information roles of lenders are features not only of

monetary econoLfites with less than full reserve requirements.          Consider a

barter economy. There would in general be a role for some institution that

collects resources and loans then to investors with the best opportunities.


      7This is a view that has also recently been stressed by Nakamura
(1985), Diamond (1984), Leland and Pyle (1977), Couralcis (1986) and Coodhart
(1987).  While we agree with Fama (1980) in emphasizing the role of
accounting services, we disagree on the importance attached to the
transactions services and portfolio management services provided by banks;
that is, while banks may perform those services, their performance     does
not distinguish them from other financial intermediaries, and does not
explain the special role that the banking system plays in economic
fluctuations.

                                             5
or certifies to other potential investors that the entrepreneur is "credit

worthy".   In this barter economy a bank loan or line of credit would also

increase the confidence of potential customers and suppliers that a firm was

likely to remain in business, thus encouraging customers and supplierE to

enter into long-term relationships with the firm.     Sank credit would also

encourage providers of complementary products and services to make

investments that depend for their profitability on the continued operation

of the firm.     For example, software developers are more likely to develop

software for equipment manufacturers that they believe will continue to sell

hardware in the future;      lines of bank credit or long-term bank loans

increase the likelihood of these continuing sales and thus encourage

networking externalities.

     If we allow for sorting and incentive effects of loan contracts (in

either a barter or monetary economy) the market equilibrium can be

characterized by credit rationing- -an excess demand for credit (see

Stiglitz-Weiss (1981. 1983, 1986, 1987]).       Our earlier analyses showed

further that the presence of sorting and incentive effects implies that even

if there is not credit rationing,       the allocation of credit both across

investors and over time may be inefficient.

     By screening and monitoring borrowers, banks facilitate non-bank

interactions among firms°, thus leading firms to make use of bank credit

even if incentive or sorting considerations make debt finance less desirable

than equity finance.    (Of course, recent research on the adverse selection

effects of equity finance and the older literature on the adverse effects of


       And between finns and households:  the fact that a bank has shown
itself willing  to extend credit to a firm may make it more likely that
individuals will be willing to do so.

                                         6
equity finance on managerial effort (Stiglitz [1914]) suggests that even in

the absence of these certifying and monitoring roles of banks, the adverse

selection and rnQral hazard problems associated with equity finance may be

sufficiently severe as to make equity finance undesirable. See Greenwald,

Stiglitz and Weiss [1984], Stiglitz [1982). and Myers and Majluf [1984)).)

    Now consider the case in which banks can create credit by printing

claims against assets that they hold in reserves.    Since these claims are

not likely to be redeemed all at once, banks can affect aggregate demand by

varying the quantity of claims (vouchers) they issue.    The terms at which

banks make credit available will be a function of their expectations of

default risks and these will depend on demand conditions in the economy.

These expectations may be self-fulfilling.    If banks think the economy is

likely to be in an inflationary period, so that loans at a given nominal

interest rate are more likely to be repaid, more loans will be made. This

will, in turn, cause inflation making it more likely that the loans indeed

are repaid. When each bank treats the vouchers of other banks as equivalent

to real assets, changes in the availability of bank credit have their

familiar multiplier effects on the levels of aggregate demand, and

consequently on the price level.

     An important question to be raised at this juncture is, what impedes

the standard equilibrating forces from working? In particular, why does not

the interest rate adjust to equilibrate the demand and supply for credit at

a full employment, non-inflationary level.       Our previous argument has

already provided the answer:        Considerations of imperfect information

impede the use of the interest rate as an equilibrating mechanism.




                                         7
     The main point to note, and one that we shall stress throughout this

paper, is that the information-providing roles of banks are extremely

diverse and are of major importance for the effective functioning of a

modern economy.    While allowing banks to have only partial reserves

amplifies the macro-economic impact of bank policies, the positive

externalities provided by the screening and monitoring actions of banks

suggest that allowing banks seigniorage rights (less than 100% reserve

requirements) may be justified as a third-best solution to the problem of

providing the proper incentives for bank financed investment in the presence

of important positive externalities generated by bank debt. We term this

third-best because political considerations may preclude direct subsidies to

banks.




                                       8
                        2.   Banks as Social Accountants

     It is imperative for any economy to have a system of accounts. Without

a system of accounts, some individuals would attempt to take out more than

they contribute--there would be rio incentives.            Without a system of
accounts, we would not be able to tell whether resources were being well

utilized, or which managers were good managers.        Systems of accounts are

thus necessary both for allocating resources efficiently and for providing

incentives.    A great deal of our society's resources are spent on making

sure that our accounting system works:         the check out clerks at grocery

stores and the transactions recorded by our banking systems are but two of

the most obvious examples.      There are a variety of ways by which accounts

may be kept.     Children's games typically use play money to keep accounts.

Rather than adding and subtracting points from a central "banker's" ledger,

an initial endowment of money is distributed, and the score, at the end of

the game, is taken by counting how much money each individual has, This is

the simplest accounting system, and a version of this is employed in simple

economies.     The fact that an individual has positive cash means that he has




                                           9
a positive "account" balance, and is therefore entitled to more resources.9



     But such systems are inadequate for more complex economies because they

do not allow for intertemporal trades, where some individuals wish to have

access to more resources than they have oreviously earned the right to, by

earlier sales. Credit is central to any economy in which investments play

an important role and in which there are intertemporal exchanges.



                 2a. The Imnortance of the Credit Function



      At least since Bobm-Bawerk economists have recognized the advancages

of roundabout means of production, the advantages, in other words, of using

capital in production. But there is no reason that those who are willing to

postpone consumption are necessarily those who are most able to make use of

the resources, the best resource managers. Even if all individuals were of


     9Elckehart Schlicht has drawn our attention to the fact the Schuapeter
had a very similar interpretation of money in primitive economies.     "Und
deshalb   1st   auch   die   Celdzirkulation    ihrea Wesen     under   ihrer
verkehrswirtschaftlichen     Haupefunkelon     nach--eine     andere,     die
kapitaligtische Function wird uns spater begegnen- -nichts anderes als em
erstens automacisches und zweitens sehr primitives und zahllosen Mangeln und
Missbrauchen unterworfenes Abrechnungssystemj' (The circulation of money is
therefore in its essence and with regard to its exchange function- -another,
its capitalistic function will be discussed later--nothing else than, first,
an automatic, and second, a very primitive system for clearing accounts with
numerous flaws and abuses.     )    (From J. A. Schumpeter, Aufsatze zur
olconomisehen Theorie, ed. Erich Schneider and Arthur Spiethoff, Tubigen:
J.C.B. Mohr, 1952, p. 39, reprinted from Archiv fur Sozialwissenschaft und
Sozialpolitik, 44 (1917/18), pp. 627-715.    Later, in his posthumous book
"Das Wesen des Celdes       (Cottingen: Vandenhoeck und Rprecht, 1970),
Schumpeter went further: 'In dieser t4ethode, eine--grundsatzlich beliebige-
Rechenund zugleich Anspruchseinhejt zu gewinner, leigt aber, wie wir sehen
werden, der Kern der Celdinstitution der £rwerbswistsvchaft." (This method
to devise a --fundamentally arbitrary--accounting and entitlement unit is,
as we shall see, the core of the institution of money in an economy based on
earnings.)

                                       10
equal ability, the returns to scalp associated with many capitalist

enterprises and the returns from specialization in identifying and managing

good investment pportunities imply that there are returns from some savers
                                                                         -

turning over their resources to othersJ°

        (The literature has emphasized, of course, the absence of the double
coincidence of wants, that the goods that the borrower will eventually be

able to deliver are not necessarily the goods that the lender would wish to

receive; accounting systems facilitate such multi-lateral trades. Credit is

essential because of the absence of the intertemDoral double coincidence of

wants, and it is this aspect which we emphasize here.)

       Thus, to gain access over current resources, one does not have to have

previously "earned" the right, through prior sales of, say, labor services;

one simply has to convince others that one will fulfill one's promise to

deliver goods (money) in the future in return for what one receives today- -

that   one is, in other words, credit worthy. And it is natural, given the

economic importance of ascertaining whether individuals or firms are credit

worthy, that institutions develop which specialize in ascertaining credit

worthiness.     Because banks are in a position to monitor so many of the

transactions of individuals or firms, they are a natural institution for

ascertaining credit worthiness.1'




     '°Credit exists, of course, in pre-capitalist economies.          Some
individuals may wish to consume more than their current income (as a result
of marriages, medical emergencies. etc.).

     1tThis argument suggests that there are "economies of scope' between
ascertaining credit worthiness and providing transactions services. See
also Nalcamura (1985).

                                         11
 The Corn Economy; An ELrample.

        To repeat, in the absence of economies of scale, if all individuals

were identical, with respect to tastes, endowments, and investment
 opportunities, there would be no need for credit.        The need for credit

arises from the discrepancy between individual's resource endowments and

 investment opportunities.'2      This can be seen most simply if we imagine a

primitive agricultural economy, where different individuals own different

plots of land and have different endowments of seed with which to plant the

land.         (For simplicity, we assume that seed is the        input.)   The

marginal return to additional seed on different plots of land may differ

markedly.       National output can be increased enormously if the seed can be

reallocated from plots of land where it has a low marginal product to plots

where it has a high marginal product. But this requires credit, that       is,

some farmers will have to get more seed than their endowment in return for a

promise to repay next period, when the crop is harvested.'3 Banks are the

institutions within this society for screening the loan applicants, for

determining which plots have really high marginal returns, and for

        12
             Or desired consumption profiles. We shall focus in this
                                                                     paper on
investment rather than consumption loans.

     '3One might think that, in the absence of credit markets, farmers with
the more productive land would produce more and hence would accumulate a
greater surplus with which to invest and that consequently in the long run
these resource misallocations would disappear. Unless land is freely sold,
this is incorrect.
                     In a primitive agricultural economy, surplus is likely
to accrue to owners that had relatively large initial endowments even if
their land is not productive.     For wide ranges of inputs, increases in
capital inputs will increase the surplus available for investment1 even if
there are decreasing returns to scale in production.    This is because, at
low consumption levels, increases in output would be consumed while, at
moderate consumption levels, increases in output would be saved.    Thus, in
the absence of capital markets, capital would tend to be allocated according
to historic quirks that determined initial capital endowments rather than
according to where the return to capital was greatest.

                                          12
monitoring, for ensuring that the seeds are actually planted, rather than,

say, consumed by the borrower in a consumption binge."



                           2b. Sorting of Borrovers

     In   traditional economic theory, as represented by the Arrow-Debreu

model, individuals have certain endowments and those endowments determine

the claims that individuals can make against society's resources. There is

no bankruptcy and individuals always deliver on their promises.         Promises

may, of course, be contingent. i.e.. the individual may borrow with an

understanding that in a particular state of nature (not under     his   control)

the loan will not be repaid.        But there is no incentive problem--the

individual cannot affect the likelihood of the events under which he does

not repay.      Nor is there an adverse selection problem- -whether the

individual repays or not is not dependent on who the individual is.          The


need to screen loan applicants       and to monitor loans that are granted

should be self-evident:     there are always charlatans and cheats willing to

use or misuse others' resources for their own     benefit   or in any case, in

ways for which there are low social returns.

     Once adverse selection problems become evident, it becomes important to

 identify which of the potential borrowers are most likely to pay (or more

 accurately, to ascertain the expected repayments associated with different


      "Even in a pure exchange economy, there is a role for credit, if
 individuals'   marginalrates of substitution between consumption at
 different dates differ.

      '5As we emphasized in the introduction, the credit certification
 function of banks has important externalities;    when credit is granted,
 others are encouraged to undertake investments, the profitability of which
 depends on the continued operation of the borrower.


                                          1)
borrowers in different states of nature, so that the contract terms they are

offered can be adjusted accordingly).           Screening is, of course, never

perfect: potential borrowers are placed into different           loan categories but

the bank is fully aware that, within any loan category, there are some risks

(loans) which are much better, or much worse, than others. Separating these

good and bad risks perfectly is, however, if not impossible, at least too

costly.



                    2c. Banks and    Monitoring   of Borrowers

     Once   incentive   problems become evident, it becomes important to monitor

the actions of the borrower, to ensure that he uses the funds in the manner

intended, and that he does not undertake undue risks.'6 Monitoring, like

screening, is, of course, never perfect'.           Some actions of the borrower

are restricted.    Often, the bank exercises only indirect control, that is,

it imposes restrictions which are not so much of interest in their own

right, but because of the effect the restrictions (compliance with which is

more easily observable) have on the (less directly observable) actions of

interest. Thus, banks will seek to liait the amount that the borrower can

borrow from other sources, knowing that the amount of indebtedness affects

the borrower's willingness to undertake risks.t! The rate of interest they


     '6See Stigi.itz (1985) for a discussion of why it is that banks play a
central role in monitoring, and why it is that owners of equity play such a
limited role in joint stock companies with widely diversified ownership.

     "Monitoring is costly, so that even were it feasible to monitor
perfectly, it would not be desirable to do so.

     '°See, for instance, Arnott and Stiglitz (1983), Kletzer (1.984),
Eaton, Cersovitz, and Stiglitz (1986).



                                           14
charge and the collateral requirements they impose are other aspects of the

loan contract which affect the behavior of the borrower.



                         2d.   Certification   and   Lendint
     There are three       economic functions which banks might perform in

extending credit.      They could just obtain information about borrowers'

credit worthiness and monitor their actions; they could provide zuarantees

about credit worthiness; or they could actually extend funds. The question

we now ask is why a bank's information activities take on the particular

fort :hat they do.

     The reason that banks do not only supply information is simple: it is

related to the difficulties of ensuring that the information is credible.

The fact that banks not only say that the individual is credit worthy, but

show it through their willingness, in effect, to provide insurance, is

important. y making long-term loans, the bank says to society (to others

with whom the borrower deals):         give this individual resources and we

insure that he will be able to          pay for them.          The supplier is paid

immediately, the customer pays for the goods, in effect, when the loan is

repaid later.       Banks not only certify that the customer has the resources

(endowment) to make the repayment when indicated; they also stand behind

that coimnitment.     If the individual cannot make the repayment, they, the

bank--not those who have supplied him with goods-bear the loss. They know,

of course, that there are certain contingencies in which the individual will

not be able to repay the indicated amount; and they accordingly charge him

an insurance premium: when he can repay, he repays more than he would if

there were no risk associated with his repaying. It is not an easy matter


                                           15
to provide appropriate incentives for information providers to         evaluate

accurately what the appropriate insurance premium should be and to

communicate that evaluation.'9       Functions of providing insurance and

obtaining information about the borrowers' riskiness are linked so that the

supplier of information (the bank) bears the cost- -the      loss in returns

resulting from default--for any failure to obtain accurate informatioL.2°

     In short, by linking the certification process with either guarantees

or actually granting loans, the certification process gains credibilicy and

partially ameliorates the problem of "who audits the auditors".



            Ze. The Credibility of Banks as Certifying Institutions

     Lines of credit, or guarantees as opposed to loans, have greater value

the greater is the credit worthiness of the certifier and the more certain

are third parties that these lines of credit will not be withdrawn when the

firm has cash flow difficulties.      This problem does not arise in the case

of loans.      Thus, for sufficiently small reserve requirements, we, would

expect to see credit extended directly as loans rather than through indirect

guarantees. When a bank makes a loan, it does not merely guarantee the

credit but actually extends the credit.       A firm "A" which supplies some

purchaser "B" more resources than he has previously earned the right to,

accepts a "deposit";       rather than the purchaser being in debt to the


     19We have perhaps somewhat overstated the case for the interlinking of
these two activities:         there are some institutions which do sell
information; their desire to maintain their reputation (and the rents they
earn on that) is what makes the information they supply credible.

     20Clearly, if the bank has insufficient reserves, prior to FDIC,
depositors would have had to bear some of the costs as well. Presently
those risks are borne by taxpayers and large (uninsured) depositors.


                                         16
supplier X,     the   bank X pays the supplier, and the purchaser owes the bank

money.      In very simple terms,   it   is equivalent to the purchaser owing the

seller resources, but the intermediary has provided an essential insurance

function.



                          U. Other Credit Institutions.

      The fact that so much of credit is intermediated through the banking

institutions should not obscure the fact that much of it is extended in

other ways; on the one hand there is trade credit, the extension of credit

by one party to a transaction to the other; and on the other hand credit is

extended through markets, through commercial paper markets and loan markets,

not intermediated by a gttarantor.2t But even in these cases the certifying

role of banks may prove crucial. Firms will be more willing to extend trade

credit     to customers with substantial bank balances (even if those customers

also have significant long-ten debts).



      3.       Market    Cleaj1.na__nd the Failure of the Interest Rate
                             Mechanism

      The question now needs to be posed: why do we need banks? Why doesn't

the   market mechanism solve this resource allocation problem, Just           as   it

solves other resource allocation problems? Can't we think        of   a market as an

auction? Won't those who value the resources (the corn today) the most be

willing to bd the most for it?            If they are wrong. }3y (the borrowers)

bear the consequences of their errors in judgement.


     2tThere are good reasons for the variety of forms in which credit is
extended. The fact, for instance, that information concerning attributes of
potential borrowers is very diffuse provides a partial explanation of trade
credit.

                                              17
     This reasoning--based on the analogy between credit and other "goods"--

is flawed, because credit is fundamentally different from goods such as

peanuts. When individuals exchange commodities contemporaneously, the price

has a tangible meaning: it denotes the ratio of the number of units of one

good that are given up in exchange for the number of units of the other good

that are received.    The interest rate, however, is nothing more than a

promise, an agreement that a certain amount will be repaid, if possible, at

some date in the future.   While some might claim that promises are made to

be broken, we need not go so far:     all that we need to claim is that the

relationship between what is promised and what is actually delivered is

tenuous.22   In particular, as we argued in our earlier papers, promising

more does not necessarily mean delivering more. Those who offer to pay more

are not necessarily those who, ex       will actually deliver more. That is

why thinking about the allocation of credit as being like an auction market

is so misleading.    And that is why banks do not allocate credit to the

highest bidders.       They see themselves as screening and monitoring

institutions, not as auctioneers.23


     2201 course, similar issues arise in virtually all intertemporal
trades and long ten relationships. Thus, an employer "promises" to provide
certain job amenities, the worker "promises" to provide certain services.
The wage or price of labor certainly affects the probability that those
promises are honored.    The insurance firm "promises" to pay a certain
amount, if a particular type of accident occurs. Zven in commodity markets,
automobile manufacturers promise to make certain repairs.
     23We suggested in the previous footnote that similar problems arise in
a varietyof other economic relationships. By the same token, one of the
important functions performed by many firms is screening, identifying for
instance, which suppliers are likely to deliver on the date required, or
which purchasers are actually likely to be able to be able to pay for the
goods ordered.    (In this context, the producer is acting as a lender,
performing an informational role analogous to that performed by the bank.
As we remark later, there are good reasons for this credit allocation
process to be decentralized.)
                                       18
       Indeed, it is not only that those offering to pay the highest interest

may   not,   on average, deLiver (yield) the highest expected return; but there

may be systematic reasons for suspecting that those who are willing to offer

to pay the highest interest rates are not among the best credit risks.

       Some of these reasons we alluded to in our earlier papers: among those

who are most likely to bid high interest rates are risk lovers (who are

willing to undertake very risky projects, with a small probability of

success, but high returns if successful); optimists (who overestimate the

probability of projects succeeding and the return if successful); and crocks

(who, because they do not plan to pay back the money anyway, are virtually

indifferent to the interest rate which they "promise).

      As a consequence, as the bank raises the rate of interest, there is an

adverse selection effect; the mix of loan applicants changes adversely, so

much so that the expected return from those receiving loans may actually

decrease as the interest rate charged increased.          And there may be an

adverse incentive effect; borrowers take riskier actions, which increases

the probability of default. The relation between the interest rate charged

and the expected return per dollar loaned may not be monotonic, as in

figure 1.

       It should thus be apparent why it is that credit is not allocated in an

auction market, and why institutions, such as banks, which screen and

monitor loan applicants, arise.24


       241t should be noted, of course, that banks do not necessarily lend to
those whose projects have the highest expected return; the bank is only,
concerned with the fraction of the total returns that it can appropriate,
and projects with higher expected returns may have lower returns to the
bank.   Moreover, it is not even the case that the market equilibrium is
constrained Pareto optimal.   See Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), Ordover and
Weiss (1981) and Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986)

                                           19
               3*. Credit Rationing and Interest Rate Rigidities

     The fact that the return received by lenders may        decrease   with an

increase in the interest rate has one further effect:      it means that there

may be credit rationing; the demand for loans may not equal the supply of

loans.     Changes in the real rate of interest do not serve to equilibrate

demand and supply for funds (or, more generally, the demand and supply for

goods). Banks will not raise the rate of interest, even though there is an

excess demand for loans.25      Lenders charge the interest rate r* at which

their expected return is maximized (so long as they can obtain borrowers at

that rate of interest). If they raise the interest rate in response to the

excess demand for funds, the bank's expected return may fall.

         Thus, market equilibrium may be characterized by credit rationing and

interest rate rigidities.     Similarly, increases or decreases in (the) loan

supply (function) may have no effect on the interest rate charged. As we

coent later, the market rate of interest may change with changing economic

circumstances, but not necessarily in ways which would be stabilizing, or in

the manner which would be suggested by the conventional supply and demand

analysis.




     23
  Indeed, it has often been observed that the (subjective) expected real
returns that firms require in order to undertake a project are far in
excess of real rates of interest, sufficiently far in excess that variations
in the real rate of interest (of the magnitude observed at least prior to
1980) are of negligible significance; the error made by ignoring these
variations would be swamped by other errors inevitably made by firms in the
process     of estimating the returns on a project.    That is why surveys
repeatedly show that firms pay   relatively little attention to thereal rate
of interest (although they are concerned about the availability of credit
and a change in their credit standing).

                                          20
     It should be emphasized that these arguments apply so long as the bank

does not have erfect information concerning borrowers.      Banks categorize

potential borrowers. This process of assigning risk categories to different

borrowers is. as we have noted, one of the main functions of banks. But the

categorization is never perfect, and so long as that is the case, interest

rates (and other terms of the loan requirement, including collateral)
                                                                        may be
used to convey and obtain information about characteristics of borrowers.

By the same token, so long as there is not perfect monitoring of borrowers,

as we have noted, the interest rate charged may affect the actions which the

borrowers undertake.     So long as either the adverse incentive or
selection effects from raising interest rates is sufficiently strong,

interest rates will not be used to equilibrate the loan market.




                                       21
                                    PART II.
                    MACRO- ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS

    Our interest in the banking system is largely motivated by our concern
to understand better the cyclical fluctuations that have characterized

capitalist economies.        There is a widespread belief that banking
institutions have played a role in those fluctuations, though there are

disagreements about whether the interaction of an activist monetary policy

working through a modern banking system has done more to alleviate or

exacerbate business cycles. The issues are complex, and to make progress we

need to divide the analysis into two stages, first considering the role of

credit markets in a corn economy and then in a modern monetary economy.



          4. Macro-economic adjustments in p    corn econon
     In the previous section, we argued that one of the main functions of

banks was to categorize loan applicants, to judge their credit worthiness,

and to monitor their actions; that they performed these information

gathering functions imperfectly;2       and that in the presence of imperfect

information there were adverse selection and incentive effects associated

with increasing the interest rate, so that the interest rate might not

adjust, even in the presence of an excess demand for funds. The interest

rate does not perform the "equilibrating" role usually assigned to prices in

conventional price theory.



     28That is, they cannot specify precisely the actions the borrower is
to undertake: there remain areas of discretion. And while banks divide loan
applicants into categories, within each category, not all potential
borrowers have the same probability of default:But it is too costly to
further delineate those with low default probabilities from those with
higher default probabilities.

                                          22
     Using the interest rate as a "decentralized regulating mechanism" in a

macro-economic context is even more problematical. For, what borrowers care

about- -or would care about in the absence of credit rationing- -   is   the long

term interest rate (that is, the interest rate over the length of life of

the investment project)     So long as there are not heavy penalties for

refinancing, an individual who is optimistic about long term real interest

rates falling would be willing to borrow, even if the current short ten

real interest rate is high)' Moreover, loan contracts are not made on the

basis of real interest rates, but nominal interest rates; and those with the

highest expectations of inflation will view themselves as confronting the

lowest real interest rates.28   In short, amongst those willing to bid the

highest nominal interest rates for credit are not just those who view

themselves as having the best investment opportunities; these individuals

are mixed together with those who have the highest estimates of the rate of

inflation and the lowest estimates of future real interest rates.          It is

neither privately profitable nor socially desirable to allocate credit- -

scarce investment resources--on the basis of these expectations, on the
willingness of the borrower to "promise" to pay high interest rates.



     27Believers in the rational expectations hypothesis might claim that
such behavior is irrational, that all the relevant information about future
interest rates is contained in the current market rates, and that,
accordingly, individuals should not hope to "gamble" against the market.
The fact of the matter is that many individuals do believe that they can
outsmart the market, and so long as that is the case, and so long as those
beliefs affect individual actions (including their willingness to undertake
investment projects) lenders must take this into account.

     280ne of the long-standing conundrums of monetary economics is why
loan contracts are not made in real terms.   tJe do not resolve that question
here. Our analysis does, however, point to some of the consequences of the
failure to index which have so far received insufficient attention.


                                        23
     (Of course, even ignoring these differences in expectations, the

borrowers which, from the perspective of the bank, represent the best

candidates for loans (that is, for whom the expected return to the bank is

highest) are not necessarily the borrowers whose projects have the highest

expected gross returns, as we showed in Stiglitz-Weiss [19811.



           4a. Cyclical adlustments of interest rates with rational
                                 extectations.

     Even with perfectly rational expectations concerning the course of

future interest rates, interest rates charged on loans may not adjust over

the business cycle in a way which serves to stabilize the economy.

     Indeed, banks Day respond to a downturn either by leaving interest

rates charged to borrowers unchanged, or even by increasing interest rates,

(See Stiglitz-Weiss 1987.)      Moreover, the greater uncertainty associated

with downturns may lead to lower expected returns to bank loans, because

with greater uncertainty,29 banks may be able to capture a smaller fraction

of the total returns; these expected returns themselves are likely to be

lower in a recession.     The lower return on bank loans leads to lower rates

of interest paid to depositors, and to a reluctance on the part of banks to

lend money (as opposed, say, to purchasing government bonds. The net result

is a lower supply of bank loans. This is true    even if individuals are risk
neutral.     Thus, the   eouilibrium response to greater uncertainty may be a

lower level of investment and a lower national   income.




    29That is, Stiglitz and Weiss (1981] show that a mean preserving
spread in the returns to an investment will, at a fixed interest rate
charged by a bank, lower its expected return.

                                         24
     In our corn economy, even small changes in expectations (whether

rational, i.e.. based on "true" changes in probabilities of success of

various types of investment projects, or not) may lead to marked changes in

the level of investment, and accordingly, in subsequent years, in the level

of output.3°   Yet resources remain fully employed.      There is no excess

capacity or unemployment usually associated with business slumps in
capitalist economies. The reason for this is simple: banks can only lend

out corn to potential "investors" if savers have deposited the corn with

them. Our corn economy is essentially a 100% reserve banking system, with

no states in which banks have excess reserves.31



                5. Adlustment Dynamics in Monetary Econoties

     More serious problems arise in economies either where the process of

certification is divorced from the extension of credit, or (in monetary

economies) where there is fractional reserve banking.

          What ensures that the number of individuals certified to be credit

worthy, combined with those with cash resources, generates a demand for

current resources equal to current supplies? Remember, in our decentralized

market economy, certification is being done by hundreds, perhaps thousands,

of separate agencies, paying no attention to the aggregate balances.

     The answer provided by traditional micro-economic analysis is simple:

if there is an excess demand for current resources, the real rate of


     30creenwald and Stiglitz (1987, 1988) provide further arguments for
why, with equity rationing (but even without credit rationing) small
 disturbances to the economy may be amplified.

      310ur previous analysis only showed the possibility of an excess
 demand for credit, not the possibility of an excess supply of credit.


                                         25
interest will rise; as this happens, the demand for credit, i.e., the number

of individuals seeking certification from the banking institutions (or other

credit certifying agencies) is reduced until demand equals supply at full

employment for current resources.32       Similarly, potential borrowers with

high expected yield projects will bid more for resources, resulting in an

efficient allocation of resources.

       In previous sections we have argued that banks will not adjust the

rates of interest charged, even in the presence of an excess demand for
credit.      Our analysis was an equilibrium analysis; the statements made in

the previous section concerning changes in interest rates were based on how

the equilibrium interest rate would change with a change in the relevant

parameters of the economy (a standard comparative statics exercise).

       There is a long tradition of arguing that the price system provides

important signals for the adjustment of the economy.         If the demand for

pencils exceeds the supply, the price of pencils is bid up, and this induces

pencil producers to produce more pencils, until equilibrium is attained.
This   informal argument provides an important basis for our belief in the
desirability of the decentralized price system, in spite of the fact that
attempts to model formally this view of the price system as an information
gathering,    processing and dissemination mechanism in a dynamic context (with

an economy facing a variety of shocks) have met with so little success.

       We now argue that, in economies characterized by the information

imperfections with which we have been concerned here, the price system      may
well not serve the information-equilibrating role assigned to it by



     32This is obviously an over simplification; these demands and     supplies
depend, of course, on the whole vector of future expected prices.

                                          26
conventional theory;     we argue, for instance, that if it should turn out

that the "decentralized" process of credit allocation results in too many

or too few individuals receiving credit, so that there is over-all an excess

demand or an excess supply of goods, the adjustment process is not one which

is likely to restore the economy to equilibrium quickly.        Thus, while

decentralization makes sense from the perspective of ensuring that those who

are most credit worthy have access to resources, the absence of the

coordinating function provided by prices (interest rates) has important

macro-economic consequences:     the adjustment dynamics associated with an

excess supply of credit may not be self-correcting.

     to see this, note that because the supply of credit created by the

banking system determines (in part) the level of aggregate demand, an

increase in the supply of credit may lead to inflationary pressures.33 which

in fact means that the likelihood of borrowers fulfilling their promises is

actually increased.    The number of credit worthy individuals appears to be

enhanced)        In addition, if real assets are used as collateral, during

inflationary periods the fall in the real value of the loan will be

accompanied by an increase in the fraction of the outstanding loan that is

collateralized     .   This change in the proportion of the loan that     is
collateralized will lead borrowers to choose safer technologies.       These

effects will partially offset the cost to the lender from loans being

repaid in cheaper dollars.     Because loan repayments of one borrower make


     33so   long as      loans are denominated in money tens--as they
conventionally are.

     3*These unexpected changes in prices have, of course, redistributive
effects, which may in turn have further real effects on the economy. For a
discussion of these, see Creenwald and Stiglitz (1987).


                                        27
 loan repayments of others more likely,     generating positive externalities

for the economy as a whole, a (moderate) degree of unanticipated inflation

may make both lenders and borrowers better off.

     Conversely, an unanticipated fall in the rate of inflation may make

both borrowers and lenders worse off.         When an insufficient number of

individuals are certified as credit worthy, full-employment savings will

exceed investment; the downturn in the economy will serve to confirm

lenders' views concerning the shortage of credit worthy borrowers.

     Thus, the effect of imperfect indexing of loan contracts is ambiguous.

Unanticipated price declines (in the absence of indexed loan contracts)

redistribute income between lenders and borrowers.         To the extent chat

lenders are better off, their willingness to lend will be enhanced; to the

extent that borrowers are worse off ,       their    willingness to invest is
decreased3'   and lenders' willingness to lend to them- -their belief in

borrowers' credit worthiness--is decreased)


     As Greenwald, Stiglitz, and Weiss (1984) have argued, firms often
face equity rationing; that is, the marginal cost associated with raising
additional funds through additional equity is so high (either because of
moral hazard or adverse selection effects) that firms choose not to raise
additional, funds by this means; it as if they are equity rationed. And as
Greenwald and Stiglitz (1987) have argued, in the presence of equity
rationing, firms' willingness to borrow will depend on their net worth.
Hicks, in recent work (1986) has emphasized the importance of    firms'
balance sheets as a determinant of their behavior.

     36There are other reasons to believe that the equilibrating forces
within credit systems may, at best, be weak. Greenwald and Stiglitz (1987)
argue that because of imperfect equity markets, the shadow price associated
with investment is higher in recessions.             Screening potential loan
applicants is an investment, and hence banks' incentives to engage in these
screening activities is reduced in recessions.
     The nature of information implies that it will be efficient for only a
few firms to be informed concerning the credit characteristics of a
potential borrower.  Thus, when banks fail in a recession, it may not pay
new potential lenders to perform the required screening to ascertain the
credit worthiness of the borrower.      This compounds the deflationary
                                       28
     This process might be contrasted with how resources might be allocated

in a more centralized banking system, where the single bank was aware of,

and concerned 3bout, the supply of available resources.                     Assume for

simplicity that full employment output is         '1*   •       and that consumption is

simply a function of *         (e.g.   the interest elasticity of consumption is

zero), C — C(Y*)   .   For full employment to be maintained (absent government

expenditures), investment must equal Y* - C(Y*)             .    The central bank wouLd

then review the available list of loan applicants and choose the best from

among these applicants, allowing them the claims on current resources

remaining after consumption.      In short, the central bank would be directly

involved in the allocation of resources; it would not rely on the

decentralized "price" system to allocate investment.



    6. centralization vs. decentralization in the provision of credit



     In the preceding section, we argued that credit was not allocated by

"prices1' (interest rates) and that, as a result, there was no obvious

mechanism by which the supply of credit was "equilibrated" to the level of

available savings.       We contrasted a decentralized credit allocation

mechanism with how a centralized system might work.




problems.
     Moreover, credit interdependencies result in disturbances having
multiplier effects. See Stiglitz (1987).
     There are offsetting effects: to the extent that collateral is
denominated in nominal terms, declining prices mean that the real value of
the collateral is increased, thus making banks more willing to lend in
periods of declining prices. By the same token, they will be less willing
to lend in inflationary periods.

                                            29
     In market economies, there is good reason that the allocation of credit

is highly decentralized, in spite of the obvious advantages (from macro-

economic balance) that might come from centralization. The information that

is required to assess whether a particular individual or firm is credit-

worthy is very locaLized information; it is highly diffuse.          Moreover

competition among lending authorities is critical if the process of credit

allocation is not to become corrupted. It is difficult for outsiders to tell

whether a particular loan has been put into the appropriate loan category;

putting a loan into a better category than it deserves is, of course,

equivalent to providing a gift to the borrower.          The incentives for

individuals lending out money that is not their own to make such gifts (in

return for other favors) has, in the absence of the checks of the market

place, proven irresistible in instance after instance.

     The system towards which modern capitalist economies have evolved

represents an attempt to take advantage of the virtues of both the
centralized and decentralized credit systems.     Credit is allocated in a

decentralized manner.   But central banks use a variety of instruments to

affect the magnitude of credit extended.     They do not simply rely on the

price system to equilibrate demand and supply, to ensure full employment.



     6a. Externalities and other inefficiencies in Credit Creation

     Though our discussion of decentralized provision of credit has focused

on some of the issues related to macro-economic adjustment, there are other

problems with the efficiency of decentralized credit. For instance, credit

creation--the fact that one bank is willing to extend credit to a firm--




                                        30
generates an externality, even within a full employment model.31       Others

make inferences from that. Customers and suppliers that contemplate making

costly long-term commitments associated with an economic relationship with a

firm will care both about the liquidity of the firm and about the banks

assessment of the firm's long-run probability of bankruptcy.     Sank credit

provides both functions, as well as ensuring third parties of ongoing

monitoring of the firm (including the riskiness of the firm's investments).

     And credit runs- -   the withdrawal of credit- -can similarly have large
negative external effects.      (See Diamond and Dybvig (1983) and Stiglitz

(1987).)

     Further, as we have already noted, banks do not necessarily lend to

borrowers with projects yielding the highest expected return.      They care

only about that fraction of the returns which they can appropriate (though

the loan contract.) Elsewhere, we have shown that systematic misallocations

may result. (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1981, 1983, 1987)




     "That is, ignoring the potential multipliers to which credit creation
can give rise in the presence of underemployment.

                                         31
                                     III.
                     CREDIT VERSUS THE STANDARD THEORY

     In   this part, we address two    questions:   what is the relationship
between our theory and the standard monetary theory, and what is it that
accounts for the success (measured by the prevalence of its use) of that

theory.

     As we have noted, the view of banks which we are putting forth here is

hardly new.     Theories emphasizing credit availability were popular both

before and after Keynes.38 But economists have had a hard time dealing with

these theories of credit availability, particularly within a general

equilibrium framework.



                             7. Money and Credit

     Credit is not like an ordinary good. It is not only that credit is not

allocated by the price system.      It is possible to create credit seemingly

out of thin air. And by the same token, credit can disappear: a confidence

crisis can suddenly lead to the shrinking of credit. Thus, the magnitude of

credit outstanding may not be easily predictable though changes in the

level of credit outstanding may itself have predictable consequences, or at

least correlations, say, with the level of economic activity.

     Simple    monetary   models,   in which money provides a service
(transactions) enables the tradition-bound economist to use his standard

tool kit to analyze monetary phenomena. In standard micro-economic theory

courses we learn about the power of the price system as an allocative

mechanism: we learn not only how the market system works, but that it has


      °     For a partial survey, see Jaffee and Stiglitz (1988).
                                            32
certain desirable attrib'.ates.    It was thus natural that economists would

think in the same terms when they came to think of the allocation of

investment and credit. All that was required was a change of notation, from

"x" (representing the quantity of goods) to "K" (representing the quantity

of money) from"p" (for price) to "r" (for interest rate). While this way of

thinking may be useful for some purposes, we argue below that it may be

seriously misleading for others.



                     7a. The Informational. Role of Money

        The "confusion" about what the function of the banking system is, is

compounded by the close empirical relationship between money and credit

creation, and by the fact that, to some extent, in primitive, pre-capitalist

economies, as we have already noted, money performs an informational role

not unlike that performed by the banking system and credit in modern

capitalist economies.



                         lb. Mone, and credit creation.

        In the normal course of affairs, there is a close link between credit

and money creation. One means by which banks create credit is by extending

a credit line. When the potential borrower wants to make use of the credit

line,     an entry is made to the deposit account of the borrower.     Credit

creation thus becomes money creation. (For a brief account of these links,

see Blinder and Stiglitz, 1983.) Note that in this perspective, it is the

demand for goods (the desire to make use of one's credit line) which gives

rise to the creation of money, not the other way around.




                                          33
        The monetary authorities can affect both banks' capacities (in ways by

which by now are familiar) and willingness39 to create credit. But the fact

that there is thus this Link between money and credit creation should not

obscure the fact that credit can be created in other ways not controlled

directly by the banking system or monetary authorities; the recognition of

this has important implications for the design of monetary policy.,



                   8. A Critique of Conventional Monetary Theory

        The fact that there is a close link between credit and money, on the

one hand, and credit and economic activity, on the other, means of course

that there is a close link between money and economic activity, a link which

has been at the center of much work in macro-economics during recent

decades.     We do not wish to undertake an assessment here of the empirical

work,      of whether,    for   instance,     the   relationship between   (some

appropriateLy defined measure of) money and output is stronger or weaker

than that between (some appropriately defined measure of) credit and output.

Rather, we want to focus our remarks on the "reasonableness" of the




     39This aspect of bank behavior has recently been emphasized by
Greenwald and Stiglitz, who argue that banks can be viewed as equity-
constrained firms, whose productive activity is "extending credit." Just as
conventional firms' willingness to produce, to undertake risks, is affected
by their balance sheet, by their net worth, so too for banks.
     Note, however, that governmental authorities are more concerned with
banks' capital adequacy than they are with that of other firms, so they may
be required to restrict "production" (that is, lending) if their equity
falls.

                                            :34
alternative theories,'0 and on the circumstances under which the alternative

theories are likely to yield different predictions.''

     In particular, we wish to focus our remarks on those theories which

emphasize the transactions demand for money.    The simplest, and cleanest,

form which such theories take is that in which there is a cash in advance

constraint;42   transactions cannot be completed unless the purchaser has


     '°Some "monetarists" take a seemingly agnostic view of the mechanism by
which money affects the economy.    They are only concerned with noting the
presence of an empirical regularity.    In this view, then, the theory which
we present here is but an alternative "mechanism," providing an explanation
of the empirical regularities.

     ''Recent years have seen the disappearance of the regular relationship
between money and economic activity: the velocity of circulation appears to
have changed dramatically, and in ways quite unexpected.           Though the
relationship between credit and economic activity appears no worse than that
between money and economic activity, it has not fared much better. For an
excellent survey of the empirical evidence, see Friedman (1988).
     The erratic relationship between money and income is possibly due to
several factors working in different directions. One dramatic change in the
1980's may be the increased extent to which money may be used as a store of
value for illicit gains.   (This may be due both to the increase in trade in
illegal drugs, improved monitoring of the banking system, both domestically
and internationally, the cessation of new issues of bearer (unregistered)
bonds, and the growth in tax avoidance activities. Thus, the demand for
liquid anonymous assets has increased while the supply of substitutes (for
these purposes) for cash has decreased.
     Moreover, as the percentage of trade conducted with money decreases,
 the proportion of money that is used as a store of value increases, thus
 causing a fall in velocity.
      In a similar vein, the erratic relation between credit (particularly
 bank credit) and income may be due to the availability of new close
 substitutes.  For example, many brokerage accounts let individuals write
 checks against the value of the securities in the account.    Individuals
 having such accounts or home equity tines of credit might, on the one hand,
 be more likely to incur debts, since credit is more readily available; on
 the other hand, they would borrow exactly the amount needed at every moment,
 thus possibly decreasing their demand for credit.

      eamis constraint can be viewed as informationally based, rather than
 related to transactions technology:     having cash certifies that the
 individual has a rightful claim over resources, as we noted in the preceding
 section.    But as we also noted in the preceding section. in modern
 capitalist economies this is a sufficient, but hardly necessary, basis for
 certifying individuals' claims on resources.

                                         35
 cash.      The government controls the money supply.     And there is a well.

 defined technology which determines the velocity of circulation; if the

 velocity is fixed, then by controlling the money supply, the value of
 transactions is precisely determined.

         Our contention is     that cash is simply not needed for most
 transactions.3       All that is required is credit.        And, in fact, the
proportion of transactions that are consummated via credit appears to be

 increasing.

         Theories which assume that money is required are, at best, ad hoc- -for

they leave unexplained why it is that money (cash) is required- -and at
worst, wrong.       Advocates of this view today generally admit that many

transactions do not require money, but they point to the transactions, such

as taxi cabs, which do. Yet as they point to such examples, instances arise

where credit cards are beginning to be accepted.

     These theories do not provide a clear articulation of the     technologies
which limit the velocity of circulation. The new computer technologies have

allowed the velocity potentially to be          extremely high, as funds are
instantaneously deposited into one's money market checking account (the

source of these funds could range from loans against the value of one's

equities, to cash from the sale of shares in interest bearing mutual funds

which have been invested in short term treasury bills) and credited to




     our list of objections to the conventional approach is not meant to
be exhatsgiv     For instance, a persuasive case can be made that the
government does not control the supply of money, or of at least near-money
substitutes.   If the government attempted to restrict the supply of the
medium of exchange in a way which had important economic consequences, firms
would have an incentive to devise alternative arrangements for exchange.

                                          36
another account, from which the funds are then instantaneously withdrawn, to

be used to purchase, say, some other financial asset, or goods.

     Nor is there a clear link between the volume   of   transactions and the

level of economic activity. For most transactions are exchanges of assets,

not sales of labor services or goods currently being produced. Of course,

most such asset transactions do not use money. And this is precisely the

point:   transactions do not require money. Determining which transactions

do should be a subject of theoretical and empirical enquiry.           But the

assumption that "income generating" transactions do, and asset transactions

do not, require money is neither plausible, theoretically explained, nor

empirically verified. This is particularly important because the magnitude

of asset transactions is highly volatile, and indeed may     exhibit   cyclical

variability.




                                        37
                                     Part IV

               Contrasting Implications of the Alternative Theories



     So long as the link between money and credit does not change much,

predictions based on using money as an explanatory variabiS may do well.

The question is, are there policies or structural changes in the economy

from which we might expect a change in the relationship?

     There are three issues to which we would like to call attention here:

the effects (and desirability) of certain financial innovations; the role of

interest rates in monetary policy; and the long run viability of monetary

policy as an effective instrument of government control.

                            9. Financial Innovation

     Changes in financial institutions have affected both credit creation

and transactions technologies.         The fact that changes, such as the

development of improved transactions technologies have not had the expected

effects on velocity during the past five years remains a punle. The fact

that recent changes in the technologies by which transactions are made and

recorded has had so little effect on the money/income relationship

reinforces our belief that what is central is credit, not money-as-a-Deans

of exchange.

     Our view     on banks as social accountants provides an alternative
perspective on    the rote of financial innovations. Many of these take on the

form of speeding the timing of the recording of certain accounts. We would

argue that, although it is essential for a capitalist economy to have a good

accounting system, the social gains from improving the speed with which


                                          38
transactions are recorded are minimal (though they may reduce "unnecessary"

precautionary balances), and in any case, far less than the private returns.

Recording transactions rapidly does not, in itself, create more goods; it

simply changes the accounts to which interest is credited.

     The following simple model illustrates this.    Consider a three period

(life cycle) model, in which individuals receive one unit of manna the first

period. Each unit of manna is planted and yields, in two periods, I + G.

Individuals only value consumption in the last period of their lives.

Population is constant.    Individuals sell their current manna supply in

exchange for a promise to receive manna in the future.        The government

intermediates this market, borrowing from the current young to finance the

payments to the elderly.     Assume initially that it takes one period to

record a transaction. Then there is a steady state equilibrium in which the

government pays an interest rate of 1 + G.       Now assume some individual

succeeds in getting his bond transaction recorded instantaneously.     Since

the bonds yield a return per period of (1+0), he gains by doing so, but

really at the expense of others.      Assume, in fact, that all switch to

recording their transactions instantaneously. Then the new steady state

equilibrium entails exactly the same flow of consumption, but the interest

rate paid on the bond falls to g. where

     (1+g)2 —   I   + C.

In fact, if there are net transactions costs from the speed-up in
recording, the change is Pareto inferior. Assume that it costs t more to

record a transaction in one period than in two; then steady state
consumption is reduced by t but the equilibrium will entail the speedier

recording, so long as C > t.    (Of course, some of the increases in speed in


                                          39
recording, such as a shift from paper transfers to electronics, involve

fewer resources 4)

       It is easy to construct other examples showing that improving the speed

with which transactions are recorded may yield little social return. Assume

that the pay that workers receive for work at date t is not recorded until t

+ 2.    Prices are rising at the rate of(l + i). Workers consume everything

that they receive in the first period in which they can. The wage they are

paid takes into account the fact that there is a two period delay in

recording. Thus, if the equilibrium real (consumer) wage is w*, and Pt is

the price leveL in period t, the wage they receive in period t is w

w*pt(l+i)2     to compensate for the increase in prices which will occur

between t and t+2.    Now, if some bank can take some individual's check, and

clear it in one period, the individual will be better off; the real wage he

receives will have increased. Rut when all individuals do this, wages will

adjust to w*pt(l+i), and none will be better off;          if there is a cost

associated with the increased speed of recording, all individuals will be

worse off.''




       "And the opposition to such changes arises from those who lose from
the technology change, e.g. •   those who make their money off the float.

     ''There is a certain similarity between these arguments, that the
social and private returns to recording transactions quickly may differ
markedly, and the arguments that the social and private returns to the
acquisition of information quickly may differ markedly.


                                          40
                10. IntereSt Rates and Economic Activity



    A basic difference between our perspective and that of standard

Keynesian economics ties     in the role ascribed to interest rates.

Admittedly, in traditional Keynesian analysis, there was some confusion

between real and nominal interest rates.        The real interest rate was

relevant for investment and savings. The nominal interest rate was relevant

for determining the quantity of savings that would be held as money. If

inflationary expectations were given, then there was a simple link between

the two, and a consistent IS-LZ4 analysis emerged.       But if inflationary

expectations were linked to the level of economic activity and/or to the

nominal interest rate, then the IS-L24 framework is, at best, confusing, and

at worse, misleading.

     But the irrelevance of this theory for understanding the role of

monetary policy has become increasingly apparent with the growth of interest

bearing deposit accounts:   today, most money is interest bearing, to our

knowledge, no serious theory of monetary policy is based on the restrictive

definition of money, currency.   Though money market checking accounts and

similar financial instruments are not conventionally included in the money

supply, they serve virtually all the transactions functions of bank checking

accounts.   It is the difference between the interest rate paid on money

market accounts and the expected (risk adjusted) return available on the

best relevant altenative investments (where best is a subjective evaluation

of the individual saver) that determines the proportion of savings that

will be held in money market accounts.       For different savers the relevant


                                        41
alternatives could include treasury bills and notes, certificates of

deposit, stocks, and bonds.       It is some weighted average of these

differences which should appear in the LM equation. If changes in the money

supply have (at fixed levels of income) an effect on some interest rates, it

must only be through their effect on this difference.     But changes in the

differences appear to be extremely small, and hard to relate to changes in

the real rates of interest that ought to be affecting investment.

     In our simple theory of credit markets, when credit is being rationed,

the terms of loan contracts may not be as important as credit availability.

Economic policies which affect the availability of credit will affect the

level of investment, whether real interest rates (either those paid to

depositors or charged borrowers) rise, fall, or remain the same.

     Even during periods in which credit is not rationed, all of the terms

of credit contracts, as well as the interest paid depositors, are Loportant

for determining the level of investment and the allocation of investment

funds across different projects. When credit is not being rationed, changes

in monetary policy will affect the terms at which credit is made available.

Adjustments in interest rates charges are only one of the instruments which

adjust. Collateral requirements, for instance, also adjust, as does the mix

of loans of various types.      Thus there is not simple link between the

availability or allocation of credit and averaae interest rates charged even

in the absence of rationing, see Stiglitz and Weiss [1987]

     It follows, then, that real interest targets are unlikely to be the

appropriate basis for the design of monetary policy,     Of course, monetary

authorities have not traditionally focused on real interest rates, but on

nominal interest rates; and since nominal interest rates are          highly


                                        42
correlated with (expected) rates of inflation, focusing on nominal interest

rates is much like focusing on inflationary expectations.            Because our

theory suggests that monetary authorities focus on aggregate demands, it

provides a rationale for such policies.'6 For when there is excess demand

for goods, too many investment certifications have been issued; one way to

reduce aggregate demand is to reduce the demand for investment goods by

reducing the availability of credit.             Thus, our theory yields results

concerning the effects of monetary policy (in periods in which there is

credit rationing'1) which are in accord with the standard theory, but for

quite different reasons.      At the same time, to the extent that there is a

close link between money and credit, and between credit and economic

activity, our theories provide a rationale for monetarist positions which




     There are, however, some telling criticisms of using interest rate
targets.      interest rates, both real and nominal, reflect both the
authorities' own actions, and the impact of the economy on them.    Thus,
using nominal, interest rates may reflect either tighter policy or a more
expansionary/inflationary economy, and it may be hard to distinguish the
relative   strength   of the two effects.
     Our argument here is simply to suggest that, in our model, it makes
sense for the monetary authorities to focus their attention on some
indicator of excess demand.

     '7And in which banks are constrained in the amount of credit which
they can make available, i.e. there are no free reserves.
    Creenwald and Stiglitz (1987) provide an explanation for why, when
there are free reserves, monetary policy is likely to be ineffective:
increasing the amount of free reserves is unlikely to result in increased
availability of credit, and hence in increased investment.
     Of course, no single bank will ever be constrained by the quantity of
free reserves; so long as it is credit worthy, it can borrow, e.g. via the
interbank market. Presumably the interest rates charged on these loans must
adjust so that no bank wishes to borrow more.


                                            43
argue that the central variable of concern is the quantity of money, not the

interest rate.'8

     It is perhaps worth noting that France and Portugal, where controls on

interest rates paid and charged lead to patterns of responses similar to

those described here, have employed credit targets.



                   1,1. Some Perstectives on Monetary Policy

     Since monetary policy directly affects bank lending, restrictions on

credit not only have a disproportionate effect on those who make more

extensive use of bank lending- -a potentially large distortionary effect of

the use of monetary policy as a control mechanism- -but also give rise to

forces for the use of other credit creation mechanisms and institutions.

Earlier episodes of tight credit, for instance, gave rise to a vast

expansion in the commercial paper market. Not everyone has equal access to

the commercial paper market. Rut to the extent that large borrowers switch

to the commercial paper market and reduce their demand for bank loans, funds

are freed for the use of smaller borrowers.      There are large fixed costs

associated with establishing alternative institutions and institutional

arrangements; the advantages of banking institutions as intermediaries may

mean that it will not pay for many borrowers to "switch" to alternative

institutional arrangements, provided that they believe that the credit

restrictions are infrequent and temporary. But if they come to believe that



     48
        If. for instance, for one reason or the other, ordinary
relationships between the level of economic activity and the rate of
inflation become disturbed, then the quantitative targets associated with
the control of money (credit) may be more effective than interest rate
targets.


                                         44
they are frequent and/or long lasting, then their incentives for developing

alternative intermediary arrangements, not subject (or less subject) to the

control of the monetary authorities, are Increased.     As a result, credit

control can, at best, only be effective if it is used only sparingly.




                                        45
                                      Part V

                         A General Equilibrium Model of Credit Rationing
                 —


        The discussion so far has been couched mainly in partial equilibrium

terms:     we have not constructed a complete model of the economy.          Our

objective in this section is to show how a simple general equilibrium model

with credit rationing can be constructed.       We do not present the details of

the model, nor do we show how monetary authorities affect the general

equilibrium of the economy. Our point here is simply to show that it is, in

fact, easy to construct a consistent general equilibrium model with credit

rationing.

     Again. we turn to a simple life cycle model, now the more standard two

period overlapping generations model. Individuals have wealth ¶1.      There are

two investment projects, each costing B > ti.        The safe project yields a

return a5,    with   probability p5, zero otherwise; the risky project a return

of R" with probability R, zero otherwise.9           For simplicity, assume all

individuals are identical, with no collaterizable wealth.          (In Stiglitz-

Weiss, 1986, we analyzed the case with heterogeneous individuals having

different amounts of collaterizable wealth.)        There is a critical (real)

interest rate r*, such that above r* individuals invest in the risky




        '91n general, loan contracts are characterized not only by an interest
rate, r, but also by a collateral requirement.      Here, we assume
entrepreneurs invest all of their available wealth in the investment
enterprise, and hence no collateral is feasible.          The more general case
where there is both collateralizable and non-collateralizable wealth may be
handled similarly.

                                           46
asset)°    Banks (lenders) will charge no more than the interest rate r*,

even if there is an excess demand for credit at r*. If all individuals are

identical, then a fraction a of the individuals become entrepreneurs. Under

suitable conditions,5' it can be shown that entrepreneurs will invest all of

their wealth.     Assuming homothetic indifference curves, the remainder will

save a fraction s[(l+r*)p5]. Thus, a solves



          a(B - W)      —   (I       -
                                         a)s[(l-*r*)p5]W
    Demand for funds             Supply of funds



A credit rationing equilibrium exists for this model, so long as those who

become entrepreneurs are better off than those who do not. We let U(C, ,C2)

be the utility of the individual as a function of his consumption first and

second periods, respectively. Recall that entrepreneurs consume nothing the

first period.     Let V be the indirect utility function, giving the level of

utility as a function of the wealth and interest rate of a non-entrepreneur

(who simply takes whatever funds he does not consume and invests it at the

safe rate r*). We require that

     p5U(O,R5 - (B -W)(l+r5)) +              (1      -p5)U(O,O) >     V(tJ, (l+r*))



     50    r* is the interest rate such that the expected return to the firm
           investing in the safe and the risky asset is the same:

     p5U(O,R5 -   (l+r))    + (l-p5)1J(O,O) —
                  pRU(ORR        -
                                         (In))   +    (lpR)lJ(O,O),
  where U(. ,   .) is   the individual's two period utility function.
       'The elasticity of substitution between consumption in
   the two periods in the individual's life has to be
   sufficiently large, and the returns from investing
   have to be sufficiently great.


                                                         47
For sufficiently high values of R5 and sufficiently large elasticities of

substitution between consumption in the two dates, there exists a credit

rationing equilibrium.




                                     48
                          vi. concluding Remarks

    That there exists a link between money and banking, on the one hand,

and the level of_economic activity, on the other has long seemed evident, in
                                                                         The
spite of the well established propositions asserting its neutrality.

question is, why does money have the real effects that it seems to have?

What are the links?

     We have stressed here the informational role of banks, and the

importance of credit. Money creation has affects through credit creation.

Monetary disturbances have further affects through the disturbances which

they induce in society's accounting system, in the mechanisms by which it is

ascertained who is credit worthy, who has the right to the use of currently

available resources.     In the theory we have developed prices- -interest

rates--play an important role, but not the simple allocative role ascribed

 to them by the conventional paradiu.           Market equilibrium may be

 characterized by credit rationing; interest rate movements over the business

 cycle may be quite different from those depicted in the standard stories;

 and the equilibrating forces may be weak or virtually absent.

      While we have shown that in some instances the predictions of our

 theory accord with those of the conventional paradigm, there are other

 aspects in which they differ:   interest rate targets may be inappropriate;

 financial innovations, which increase the speed with which transactions

 become recorded. may be socially undesirable though privately profitable.

 and credit rationing may be effective only if used sparingly, and ev!n when

 effective, it may be highly distortionary.




                                         49
                                  REFERENCES




Arnott,  R. and J.E. Stiglitz (1983), "Equilibrium in Competitive
      Insurance [farkets," inimeo. Princeton University, December.

Blinder, A. and J.      E. Stiglitz (1983), "Money, Credit Constraints and
     Economic Activity," American Economic Review, 73(2),
     pp. 297-302.

Courakis, A.S. (1986), "In What Sense Do Compulsory Ratios
     Reduce the Volume of Deposits," in The Oteration and
     Regulation of Financial Markets," C. Goodhart, 0. Carrie,
     and D.T. Llewellyn, (eds.) Macmillan, pp. 150-185.

Diamond, D.W. (1984), "Financial Intermediaries and Delegated
     Monitoring," Review of Economic Studies, 54, pp. 339-414.

Eaton, J. ,K. Gersovitz and J.E. Stiglitz (1986), "Pure Theory
     of Country Risk," EuroDean Economic Review, Vol. 30, No. 3,
     June, pp. 481-513.

Fama, E.F. (1980), "Banking in the Theory of Finance," Journal of
      Monetary Economics, 6, pp. 39-58.

Friedman, 5. (1988) ,
                        "                " Journal   of Economic
     Perspectives, forthcoming.

Friedman, K. (1971), "A Monetary Theory of Nominal Income,"
     Journal of Public Economics, March/April.

_____(1968), "The Role of Monetary   Policy,"   American Economic
     Review, 58(1), pp. 1-17.

Coodhart, C.A.E. (1984), "Disequilibrium Money--A Note in his
     Monetary Theory and Practice: the UK Exoerience,"
     MacMi 11 an.



Greenwald and J. E. Stiglitz (1988a), "Pareto Inefficiency of Market
     Economies: Search and Efficiency Wage Models,"       American   Economic
     Review, 72(2), pp. 351-355.

     (1988b), "Information, Finance Constraints and Business
     Fluctuations," presented at Taipei Monetary Conference,
     January 3-8 in Finance Constraints. Exnectations and
     Macroeconomics, M. Kohn and S.C. Isiang (eds.). Oxford:
     Oxford University Press,




                                         50
_____ (1988c), "Financial Market Imperfections and Business
     Cycles," Taiwan Conference on Monetary Theory. NBER
     Working Paper # 2494.

_____ (1987a) "Imperfect Information, Credit Markets and
     Unemployment," Eurocean Economic Review, 31, pp. 444-456.

_____(1987b), "Keynesian, New Keynesian and New Classical
     Economics. Oxford Economic Pacers, 39, pp. 119-133.

____ (1986).  "ExternalitieS in Economies with Imperfect Information and
     Incomplete Markets," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May. pp. 229-
     264.

Greenwald, B., J.E. Stiglitz and A. Weiss, "Informational
     Imperfections in the Capital Markets and Macro Economic
     Fluctuations," American Economic Review, Vol. 74, No. 2,
     May. pp. 194-199.

Hicks, J. (1986), "Loanable, Funds Versus Liquidity Preference,'
     Green Economic Review, December.

_____ (1982). Collected Essays. Volume II, pp. 256-276.

     (1980), "IS-Ut--An Explanation," Reprinted in his
     Collected Essays. Volume II, pp. 318-332.

      (1979), "Causality in Economics. Oxford: Basil Blactcwell.

_____ (1967), "The Two Triad.s" in Critical Essays in Monetary Theory.
     Oxford: Clarendon PresS.

      (1938). Value and Canital. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

      (1937), "Mr. Keynes and the Classics." Reprinted in his
      Collected Essays. Volume II, pp. 100-115.

      (1936), "Mr. Keynes Theory of Employment." Reprinted in his
      Collected Essays. Volume It.

      (1935). "A Suggestion for Simplifying the Theory of Money."
      Reprinted in his Collected Essays. Volume II, pp. 46-63.

 _____(1933), "Equilibrium and the Cycle." Reprinted in his
      Collected Essays. Volume II, Money Interest and Wages,
      Basil Blackwell (1982). (where?)

 Jaffee, D.M. and J.E. Stiglitz (1988). "Credit Rationing" in
      Handbook of Monetary Economics, F.M. Hahn and B. Friedman
      (eds.), New York: North-Holland, forthcoming.



                                         51
Jaffee, D.M. and F. Modigliani (1969), "A Theory and Test of
     Credit Rationing,' &K. 59(5), Pp. 850-872.

Keeton, W.R. (1980), Equilibrium Credit Rationing. New York:
     Garland.

Kletzer, KM. (1984), "Asymmetries of Information and LDC
     Borrowing with Sovereign RIsk," Economic Journal 94,
     pp. 287-307.

L.aidler, D. (1971), "The Influence of Money on Economic Activity"
     in G. Clayton et al. (ed.) Monetary Theory and Policy in the    1970's
London: Oxford University Press.

Leland, N.E. and Pyle, DR. (1977), "Informational Asymmetries,
     Financial Structure and Financial Intermediation," Journal
     of Finance, 32, pp. 371-87.

Myers, S.C. and N.S. Majluf, 1984, "Corporate Financing and
     Investment Decisions 1hen Firms Have Information that
     Investors Do Not," Journal of Financial Economics, 11,
     pp. 187-221.

Nakamura, L.l. (1985), 'Customer Credit, Financial Intermediaries
     and Real Income: Preliminary Evidence That Credit Matters,"
     mimeo, Department of Economics, Rutgers University,
     October.

Ordover, J, and A. Weiss (1981), "Information and the Law: Evaluating Legal
     Restrictions on Competitive Contracts," American Economic Review, 47,
     pp. 149-155.

Stiglitz, J.E. (1987a), "The Causes and Consequences of the
     Dependence of Quality on Price," Journal of Economic
     Literature, March, pp. 1-47.

____(1987b), "The New Keynesian Economics: Money and Credit."
     Fisher-Schultz.

_____ (1985), "Credit Markets and the Control of Capital,"
     Journal of Money. Credit and Banking, Vol. 17, No. 1,
     May, pp. 133-152.

     (1982), "Information and Capital Markets," in
     Financial Economics: Essays in Honor of Paul Cootner, W.F. Sharpe
     and C. Cootner (eds.). Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice
     Hall, pp. 118-158.

     (1974), "Incentives and Risk Sharing in Sharecropping,"
     Review of Economic Studies, 41, pp. 219-255.



                                        52
Stiglitz, J.E. and A. Weiss (1987a). "Credit Rationing with
     Many Borrowers1" American Economic Review, 77(1).
     pp. 101-135.

     (198Th), "Macro-economic Equilibrium and Credit Rationing"
     NBER Working Paper.

     (1986), "Credit Rationing and Collateral," in
     Recent DeveloDments in CorDorate Finance, Jeremy Edwards, Julian
     Franks, Cohn Mayer and Stephen Schaefer (eds.), New York:
     Cambridge University Press, pp. 101-035.

_____ (1983), "Incentive Effects of Terminations: Applications to
     the Credit and Labor Markets," American Economic Review,
     Vol. 73, No. 5, pp. 912-27.

____ (1.981),   "Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information,
     American Economic Review, vol. 71, no. 3,    pp. 393-410.




                                        53
   Expected return to
          bank




                        /7'




                                                     N

                  7,;-
                                                  tnterest race
The increased uncertainty shifts the expected return curve of the
bank down, and some categories of loans get denied access to
credit   (even if the required return to the bank falls)

                              Figure 1




                                  54
