                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      TRANSFERS VS CREDIT POLICY:
             MACROECONOMIC POLICY TRADE-OFFS DURING COVID-19

                                         Saki Bigio
                                       Mengbo Zhang
                                      Eduardo Zilberman

                                      Working Paper 27118
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27118


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We are thankful to Andy Atkeson, Pierre-Olivier Weill, Harald Uhlig, and seminar participants at
the San Francisco Fed for valuable comments. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
Mengbo Zhang thanks the State Scholarship Fund of China Scholarship Council for financial
support.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Saki Bigio, Mengbo Zhang, and Eduardo Zilberman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Transfers vs Credit Policy: Macroeconomic Policy Trade-offs during Covid-19
Saki Bigio, Mengbo Zhang, and Eduardo Zilberman
NBER Working Paper No. 27118
May 2020
JEL No. E32,E44,E62

                                          ABSTRACT

The Covid-19 crisis has lead to a reduction in the demand and supply of sectors that produce
goods that need social interaction to be produced or consumed. We interpret the Covid-19 shock
as a shock that reduces utility stemming from “social” goods in a two-sector economy with
incomplete markets. We compare the advantages of lump-sum transfers versus a credit policy.
For the same path of government debt, transfers are preferable when debt limits are tight, whereas
credit policy is preferable when they are slack. A credit policy has the advantage of targeting
fiscal resources toward agents that matter most for stabilizing demand. We illustrate this result
with a calibrated model. We discuss various shortcomings and possible extensions to the model.


Saki Bigio                                      Eduardo Zilberman
Department of Economics                         Rua Marques de Sao Vincente, 255, Predio Frings, 2
University of California at Los Angeles         Department of Economics, PUC-Rio
8283 Bunche Hall                                Rua Marquês de São Vicente, 225 / F210 - Gávea
Box 951477                                      22451-900, Rio de Janeiro, RJ
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                      Rio de Janeiro, -- S 22451700
and NBER                                        Brasil
sbigio@econ.ucla.edu                            zilberman@econ.puc-rio.br

Mengbo Zhang
University of California at Los Angeles
mbzhangucla@g.ucla.edu
1    Introduction
The Covid-19 pandemic is a quintessential macroeconomic shock. Large and unexpected, the shock
has escalated so quickly that the self-stabilizing mechanisms of business cycles are likely not to work.
Learning from the recent experiences of the Great Recession, central banks and fiscal authorities have
responded with unprecedented speed and scale. An equally unprecedented amount of policy recom-
mendations has been produced by the macroeconomics community, e.g. Brunnermeier et al. (2020),
Gourinchas (2020), among many others. Calls for macroeconomic-stabilization have primarily focused
on large scale transfer programs and central-bank open-market operations that facilitate bank credit.
Both programs are geared toward expanding the amount of social insurance, while acting as a demand
stabilizer.
    In the case of the US, the combination of the CARES act setup by the US Treasury and the Main Street
Lending Facility of the Federal Reserve offer amount to a combination of 1,902 billion US dollars in direct
transfers, unemployment insurance, and credit to firms. A decomposition of this amount in this subset
of programs is presented in Figure 1.




Figure 1: US Covid-19 Policy Response: Decomposition of Programs Directed to Consumers and Loans
Note: This figure reports the share of each component of a subset of the CARES act programs and the Main Street Lending Facility of
the Federal Reserve. All figures are presented in current US Dollars: The Fed’s Main Street Lending Facility amounts to 600 Billion.
The CARES act assigns Cash Transfers for 300 Billion, 260 Billion in Unemployment Benefits and 43.7 Billions in Student Loans (as part
of the Economic Impact Payments to American Households program), 274 Billion in loans to small business (as part of the Small Busi-
ness Paycheck Protection Program) and 425 Billion in Corporate Loans. The figures are interpreted from statements from the U.S. Depart-
ment of the Treasury: https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/cares/preserving-jobs-for-american-industry, and the classifica-
tions cross-checked with related articles: https://messertodd.github.io/coronavirus-policy-response/Unconventional-MP.html, and
https://www.npr.org/2020/03/26/821457551/whats-inside-the-senate-s-2-trillion-coronavirus-aid-package.




                                                                  2
    Internationally, a recent report by UBS1 claims that 3.7 percent, so far, of global GDP has been put
forward in policies that vary in scale and target across countries. There is a striking difference between
the response of developed economies, and other economies. Developed markets are usings 31 percent of
fiscal expenditures on job retention schemes, 15 percent on business loans and grants, 15 percent on tax
reliefs, 12 percent on direct cash payments, mostly driven by Japan where the share of direct transfers
is 57 percent, and 10 percent on unemployment insurance. In emerging economies without China,2 the
figures on tax reliefs and unemployment insurance are comparable to those in developed economies,
18 percent and 10 percent, respectively. Nonetheless, emerging markets are relying more on direct cash
payments (20 percent), but less on job retention schemes (13 percent) and business loans and grants (4
percent). These figures are subject to revisions and reclassification, and may change as the crisis evolves.
    As policies are being refined on the spot, there is room for simple theories that assist this analysis.
Here is one such environment. The paper presents a simple incomplete markets economy, which we use
to frame the recent discussions regarding the macroeconomic trade-offs related to the policy responses
during the Covid-19 crisis. The model is an extension of Bigio and Sannikov (2019), with two sectors.
The economic forces are similar in spirit to Guerrieri et al. (2020). One sector produces social goods,
which need social interactions to be consumed, whereas the other produces goods that can be consumed
remotely. Households are subject to an unexpected shock that reduces the utility from consuming social
goods. After the shock is announced, except for the idiosyncratic risk, the economy proceeds in a deter-
ministic fashion. This reduction in utility is due to the fear of being infected, which induces a behavioral
response of individuals during a pandemic.
    The Covid-19 manifests as a discount factor shock in an equivalent representation of the model with
one sector. If the elasticity of substitution between social and remote goods (ESBG) as well as the elastic-
ity of intertemporal substitution (EIS) are greater than one (something we assume throughout the paper),
the shock can be represented equivalently as a positive discount factor shock (less discounting). Since
we assume labor is supplied inelastically and there is perfect reallocation of labor input across sectors,
under the flexible prices benchmark, after the shock the remote good sector absorbs the fall in the social
good sector. The unemployment rate remains at its natural level. Once we introduce rigid wages, if EIS
is sufficiently high (or ESBG sufficiently small), a point made in Guerrieri et al. (2020), the unemploy-
ment rate adjusts to accommodate the decline in aggregate demand that results from the shock. This
decline in consumption may manifest in both sectors, opening the door for macroeconomic stabilization.
Inspired by the current policy debate, we study the effectiveness of lump-sum transfers versus a credit
policy that generates the same path of government indebtedness.
    We argue that the power of lump-sum transfers versus a credit subsidy policy critically depends on
the level of financial development. Take two extremes. If we consider a natural borrowing limit, the Ri-
cardian equivalence holds and lump-sump transfers are neutral. In this case, credit policy should be the
preferred tool, and we show that it mitigates the recession. Now consider an economy with the borrow
limit equal to zero. In this case, a credit policy is immaterial and lump-sum transfers are the preferred
instrument. We also showcase an intermediate case. The choice of whether to go for transfers or credit
   1 “Global Economic Perspectives. Bubble, Bubble, Toil, and Trouble: which fiscal mix will work against Covid-19?,” UBS

Global Research Team, 21 April 2020.
   2 China is an outlier as its response to the crisis concerns mostly public investment, which according to the report represents

59 percent of total expenditures.


                                                                3
policy (or the optimal mix between them) depends crucially on how the lending channel is impaired
due to Covid-19 crisis, captured here by some static comparative on the borrowing limit. A first lesson is
that economies with a developed financial system should unleash credit. Developing economies should
rely more on transfers. We also argue that a stringent debt limit amplifies the recession, at the same time
that restricts the use of credit subsidy, perhaps the preferred instrument to target those households who
really need support. We enrich this discussion presenting a numerical illustration where we compare
both policies, for different levels of debt limits. To make policies comparable, we assume they produce
the same path of real government liabilities.
   This is a rudimentary environment that, being so, faces several limitations. An obvious limitation
is the assumption of perfect labor reallocation across sectors, given that one feature of the crisis is that
the actual mass of unemployed cannot be easily absorbed by the remote sector. The model assumes that
a bar tender can work in grocery deliveries the next day. Yet, the lesson is valid: the goal of macroe-
conomic stabilization is to prevent the needed recession in social sectors to spill over to sectors that
can be maintained active. Second, the policies themselves are very stark. For example, transfers are
not directed to the poor, which are likely to contract their demand the most for precautionary reasons.
Targeted transfers are part of social insurance in many countries and their effects in incomplete market
economies are well understood (e.g. Berriel and Zilberman, 2011). However, the speed of the crisis lim-
its the ability to setup transfers targeted to low wealth households rather than low income households.
Thus, transfers can be targeted only in as much income is a proxy for wealth. The credit policy here is
also stark because it targets individual debt only. In practice, governments are also attempting to target
firm credit, as a means to keep workers in their jobs and avoid the social losses produced by inefficient
unemployment spells. We explain how the model can be modified easily along those lines. Yet, we think
that governments should attempt to stimulate credit card debt, a policy that has not being used as much
as others. Third, the debt limits are exogenous. This is a key feature of the model that determines the
relevance of the transfers versus credit subsidy, but clearly a credit program has to confront the reality of
default risk and moral hazard. Finally, we leave aside the question of how these programs are financed.
Temporary deviations from a Taylor rule allow, at least partially, the consolidated government to control
the trajectory of real rates, and this can potentially introduce trade-offs.
   A final important shortcoming is that the model is not tailored to speak to forced lockdowns (or any
other containment policy). This could be simply accommodated by an ad-hoc restriction on the amount
of social goods that can be consumed. The representation in terms of the discount factor would be the
same as the one here, but the representation would be endogenous to policy. These are all issues that can
be addressed in variations to this model. Despite these limitations, and the distance to reality, the model
here is a good laboratory to think of policy implications in real time.
   This paper is one of the many research responses that study the positive and normative macroeco-
nomic implications of the Covid-19 pandemic. One group of papers integrates epidemiology and macro
models,3 and study how the evolution of the pandemic interacts with the macroeconomy. Examples
include Eichenbaum et al. (2020), Alvarez et al. (2020), Jones et al. (2020), Bethune and Korinek (2020),
Krüger et al. (2020) and Kaplan et al. (2020). Another group interprets the Covid-19 shock by using the
  3A  description of the baseline epidemiology model and simulations concerning the Covid-19 pandemic can be found in
Atkeson (2020) and Berger et al. (2020).



                                                         4
standard macroeconomics toolkit. In particular, the shock is interpreted as an unexpected shut down
of part of the economy as a consequence of the pandemic shock and unmodeled sanitation measures.
In Guerrieri et al. (2020), the shock is represented as a cap on labor employment. A key finding is that
this supply shock only generates demand deficiency in a tow-sectors economy for a specific (but not
restrictive) set of parameters. In Caballero and Simsek (2020), the large supply shock triggers a stock
wealth decline of risk-tolerant agents, leading to a feedback loop that further decreases asset prices and
output when the interest rate is constrained downward to accommodate the shock. In Buera et al. (2020),
some of the firms in their model with heterogeneous entrepreneurs must shut down due to the shock.
Our paper fits this branch of this emerging literature. We represent the Covid-19 shock as a shock that
reduces the consumption of social goods. We interpret it as a decease in marginal utility of consuming
such goods due to behavioral responses to the risk of being infected. Incidentally, this shock is more
likely to be recessive for a specific set of parameters, similar to the set found by Guerrieri et al. (2020).
Closely related is Faria-e Castro (2020), who studies policy responses to a similar shock in a two-sector
model with two types of agents, borrowers and lenders. He finds that unemployment insurance is the
preferred policy from the point of view of borrowers, while savers favor transfers. Finally, there is a
third branch that studies empirically the macroeconomic consequences of early pandemics. For exam-
ple, Barro et al. (2020), Correia et al. (2020), and Jordà et al. (2020). This literature is evolving fast, and
these papers represent a rather incomplete list.
      The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model. Section 3 discusses the results.
Finally, Section 4 concludes.


2     Model
Time is continuous, t ∈ [0, ∞). The economy is populated by ex-post heterogeneous households. There
is a consolidated government, which is a combination of a Central Bank (CB) and fiscal authority. Banks
intermediate between borrower and lender households, but since they make zero profits, they are sim-
ple pass through entities. The CB determines a common policy rate and conducts open market opera-
tions that translate into a credit subsidy. The fiscal authority makes/collects (lump sum) transfers/taxes
to/from households and manages unemployment insurance. Households face idiosyncratic income
shocks produced by unemployment spells. Households self-insure by borrowing and lending through
banks.
      There are two goods produced with a common input, labor. Due to wage rigidities, a shock aimed
to capture the economic impact of the Covid-19 pandemics (i.e., a shock that reduces the consumption
of goods that require social contact) generates unemployment beyond a natural level. This social inef-
ficiency is amplified through debt constraints. The objective is to study the role of two specific policies
aimed at stabilizing the economy after the shock. The policy options are either a credit policy that shows
up as a lending subsidy or lump-sum direct transfers to households.


2.1     Preferences, technology, and the Covid-19 shock

To accommodate a Covid-19 shock, we consider two types of goods, one that can be consumed remotely,
crt , and another that requires social interactions, cst . Let households instantaneous preferences be given

                                                      5
                   
               1− γ
by U ( xt ) ≡ xt − 1 / (1 − γ); the composite good xt is given by

                                                                                 e/(e−1)
                                xt = α1/e crt 1−1/e + ((1 − α) β t )1/e cst 1−1/e          .

Here, γ is both the risk aversion parameter and the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitu-
tion. For this version, the risk-aversion force is dominated by the elasticity of substitution. In turn, e
is the elasticity of substitution between goods, and α is the share of each type of good. Throughout the
paper, we take a stance that social and remote goods are substitute, e > 1, such that the consumption of
remote goods (at home, e.g., Netflix, Amazon, supermarket expenditures, etc) increases, whenever the
consumption of social goods (e.g., movies, restaurants, etc) decreases.
    We interpret β t ∈ [0, 1] as a shock that reduces the utility from social goods due to the fear of the
pandemic. Intuitively, individuals arguably experiment a lower degree of happiness whenever consum-
ing certain goods that involve risk of being infected. In that sense, our model is capturing a behavioral
response of individuals during a pandemic, rather than a proper containment policy that imposes social
distance. Alternatively, we could impose an upper limit on the consumption of social goods, say cst ≤ cs ,
that would capture a policy that aims to limit social interactions, such as a lockdown. Both assumptions
show up mathematically as a modification to the expenditure problem, but in the case of rationing, that
representation would not be invariant to policy. We will study a quantity restriction in a new version of
                                                                           ´ ∞
the paper. Utility flows are discounted accordingly with discount rate ρ, E 0 e−ρt U ( xt ) dt .
                                                                                              

    Let ct be total expenditures. For simplicity, we assume that both goods can be produced with the
same production function, so their relative prices is one—we can relax this assumption without difficulty.
The first-order conditions and simple algebra yield:

                                α                      ((1 − α) βt )
               crt =                     ct ; cst =                    ct ; x t = ((1 − α) βt + α)1/(e−1) ct .
                       (( 1 − α ) t)
                                  β  + α            (( 1 − α ) t)
                                                              β   +  α

Naturally, a decrease in βt not only decreases (increases) the consumption of social (remote) goods,
but if the elasticity of substitution is more than one, e > 1, for a given amount of expenditures, the
consumption of the composite good decreases. For plausible assumptions on α and e, conceptually we
can reverse engineer β t to deliver the path of cst compatible with people fearing going out and staying at
home for a given time, or the path desired by a containment policy cs that limits consumption of social
goods cst = cs .
   By substituting xt = ((1 − α) βt + α)1/(e−1) ct back into the households’ objective function, and given
that preferences are CRRA, one obtains
                                                    ˆ    ∞                          
                                                                  −ρt
                                                E             e         ξ t U (ct ) dt ,
                                                      0


where ξ t = ((1 − α) βt + α)(1−γ)/(e−1) .
  For (1 − γ) / (e − 1) < 0, which is true, for instance, when both e > 1 and γ > 1, a Covid-19 shock
that reduces the consumption of social goods, morphs into a negative discount factor shock (more dis-
counting of the future). In the other case, in which e > 1 and γ < 1, the shock can be represented
equivalently as a positive discount factor shock (less discounting) as agents do not gain much utility


                                                                    6
from current consumption. A positive discount factor shock, coupled with price rigidity, tends to gener-
ate a recession whenever the intertemporal elasticity of substitution is more than one, IES = 1/γ > 1, as
agents are willing to substitute aggregate consumption intertemporally. Hence, we also assume through-
out the paper that γ < 1, so our exercise can easily reproduce the feature that the Covid-19 shock is
clearly recessive. Note that the assumption that e > 1 > γ is consistent with the set of parameters for
which Guerrieri et al. (2020) find that a supply shock in one of the sectors in their two-sectors model
generates demand deficiency, something those authors calls a Keynesian supply shock—here we simply
refer to the spill-over across sectors. Finally, note that the higher the share of social goods, (1 − α), the
more intense will be the propagation of the shock.
      In addition, and for simplicity, we assume that production is a linear function of aggregate employ-
ment, crt + cst = (1 − Ut ), where Ut is the unemployment rate. Note that labor can be perfectly reallocated
across sectors in response to the Covid-19 shock. This is a useful benchmark to show that, even under
this assumption, the shock can induce a recession with a scope for policy response aimed at stabilizing
output. Nonetheless, imperfect reallocation seems to be a key ingredient under the current crisis: given
that the mass of unemployed cannot be easily absorbed by the essential sector, which would further
increase the scope for policy to improve welfare.
      Finally, there is no notion of payroll financing in this paper, as firms do not face frictions and always
honor their wage bills. Although subsidizing firms is an important aspect of the current crisis, the focus
here is on the trade-off between lump-sum transfers and credit subsidy to households, rather than firms.
Nonetheless, we can easily modify this approach, by studying a subsidy policy to keep workers away
from unemployment, but keeping them in a different pool of idle firms. The idea is that these workers
could return to the workforce immediately, rather than going through the unemployment to employment
process. We think this is a core policy response, but for now we abstract from it.


2.2     Households

The non-financial sector features a measure-one continuum of ex-ante identical households, that are
ex-post heterogeneous. Heterogeneity follows from uninsurable idiosyncratic risk z ∈ {u, e}, where u
stands for unemployed and e stands for employed. The stochastic process that governs this idiosyncratic
risk is independent and identically distributed across households. Households transit from one state
to another according to an instantaneous transition probabilities of Γeu
                                                                      t = ν + φt and Γt = ν −
                                                                           eu  +      ue   ue

φt− , where {νue , νeu } are exogenous (or natural) transition rates, and φt is an endogenous employment-
unemployment adjustment rate that occurs due to price rigidity. Namely, φt is positive (negative) when
the rigidity constraint is binding and there is an excess supply (demand) of final goods under φt = 0.
      Households receive a flow of real income given by:

                                             dwt = y (z) dt + Tt dt,

where income wt is the sum of direct transfers Tt (to be described below) and labor income (or un-
employment insurance) y(z). Note that, in equilibrium, the real wage rate is one. We assume that
y (e) = 1 − τ l , and thus, households are taxed with rate τ l whenever they are employed, and y (u) = b,
               

meaning that b is the replacement rate for unemployment insurance purposes.


                                                        7
      Financial claims are nominal. Although all claims are nominal, the individual state variable is st ,
the stock of real financial claims—the distinction would matter only with long-term debt. Households
store wealth in bank deposits, ath , or currency, mth , and borrow loans against banks, lth . By convention,
 h h h
  at , mt , lt ≥ 0. Let real rates of return be rtm ≡ itm − πt and rtl ≡ itl − πt , where itm is the monetary policy
rate, itl is the rate on loans, and πt = Ṗt /Pt is inflation. Note that the price of the composite good in terms
of money is Pt . Currency does not yield nominal interest, and thus, its real return is −π t . The law of
motion for real wealth follows

                                                ah        mth       h
                                                                      
                                                                 l lt
                                 dst =       rtm t   − πt     − rt − ct dt + dwt ,                               (1)
                                                Pt        Pt       Pt

and the balance-sheet identity is given by

                                                     ath + mth        lh
                                                               = st + t .
                                                         Pt           Pt

From a household’s perspective, there is no distinction between holding deposits or currency beyond
their rates of return. Hence, currency is only held when the nominal deposit rate is zero, and both assets
yield the same return. This feature is introduced into the model only to articulate a zero lower bound as
an implementation constraint. Another observation is that households do not hold deposits and loans if
there is a positive spread between them. Combining these insights, (1) can be written succinctly as:

                                           dst = (rt (st )st − ct ) dt + dwt ,                                   (2)

where rt (st ) = rtm if st ≥ 0, and rt (st ) = rtl if st < 0. Finally, households can borrow, but only up to a
certain limit. For now, there is a fixed threshold s̄ ≤ 0, such that st ≥ s̄. In this version of the paper,
we abstract from default risk and moral hazard associated with incentives to repudiate debt. This is
arguably a relevant feature of the current crisis. As we discuss below, the degree of slackness of such
debt limit is the key determinant of policy design in response to the shock. Hence, exogenous debt limit
is another feature of the model that is clearly restrictive.
      The Hamilton-Jabobi-Bellman (HJB) equation associated with the household’s problem is:

Problem 1 [Household’s Problem] The household’s value and policy functions are the solutions to:

                      ρV (z, s, t) = max ξ t U (c) + V 0 (z, s, t) [rtm (s)s − c + y (z) + Tt ]
                                          {c}
                                              0 
                                         +Γzz     V z0 , s, t − V (z, s, t) + V̇ (z, s, t) ,
                                                                          
                                           t


subject to s ≥ s̄.


2.3     Unemployment, inflation, and the Phillips curve

In standard Real Business Cycle models, prices adjust to ensure market clearing, whereas in standard
New Keynesian (NK) models prices are rigid but firms produce and supply goods to meed their demand.
Here, we follow the NK tradition, but instead of assuming monopolistic competition and a price adjust-


                                                              8
ment process, we simply postulate that prices are rigid in a way that makes inflation evolve according
to a classic forward-looking version of the Phillips curve:

                                             π̇t = ρ (πt − πss ) − κ (Uss − Ut ) ,

where the subscript ss denote steady-state levels. In particular, inflation increases (decreases) whenever
unemployment Ut is below (above) its natural rate Uss , or inflation πt is above (below) its long-run
expected inflation-target πss , implemented by the CB interest-rate policy. Different from a NK model,
steady-state inflation does not have consequences for efficiency.
      By solving the equation forward, one obtains the following integral solution for inflation at time t,
                                                        ˆ    ∞
                                        πt = πss + κ             exp (−ρs) (Uss − Ut ) ds.
                                                         0

Importantly, π t is not pre-determined, as it depends on path of future unemployment. Inflation is
boosted at intensity κ, as unemployment falls below steady state. When unemployment is below steady
state, the economy experience wage pressures. In that case, nominal wages tend to increase. Similarly,
the economy features deflation as the unemployment rate rises above steady state.
      In this model, as anticipated above, we assume that the endogenous component φt of employment-
unemployment transitions adjusts to ensure market clearing. In particular, the law of motion of unem-
ployment is given by
                                       U̇t = νeu + φt+ (1 − Ut ) − νue − φt− Ut .
                                                                         
                                                                                                                                (3)

If demand is insufficient, and prices cannot adjust downwards, the unemployment rate responds.


2.4     Intermediation and implemenation of credit spread with open-market operations

Financial intermediation is carried out by a competitive fringe of intermediaries. In the paper, these are
simple pass through entities. In particular, banks choose their supply of nominal deposits, at , nominal
loans, lt , and reserve holdings, mt .4 Free entry and perfect competition yield zero expected profits.
Deposits and reserves earn corresponding rates ita = itm , where itm is the policy target set by the CB. Due
to the credit policy, the interest rate on loans, itl , differs from the policy rate.
      To implement the credit policy, we assume that the CB branch of the consolidated government con-
ducts a policy that targets a given loan subsidy, σt > 0. This subsidy is induced by a combination of
interest on reserves and open-market operations as explained below. Due to competition, itl must be
such that expected returns satisfy itl + σt = itm . In real terms, let interest rates be expressed as rta , rtm and
rtl . Given that ita = itm = itl + σt , any composition of banks’ balance sheet, such that lt + mt = at , is
consistent with optimal behavior. The aggregate supply of deposits and loans, and holdings of reserves
are denoted by Abt , Lbt , and Mtb , respectively, and of course, must satisfies Lbt + Mtb = Abt .
      To explain how the CB implements a negative spread, we work with the continuous time limit of a
discrete time implementation. To implement a spread σt , the CB purchases a fixed allotment of loans
   4 Banks operate without equity. The introduction of a role for bank equity (via restrictions like capital requirements or limited
participation) would produce bank profits and would make equity an aggregate state variable. For simplicity, we abstract away
from this dimension in this paper. In practice, alleviating capital requirements is essential to expand credit.



                                                                   9
  f                                                                                                         Lbt
Lt . Loans are purchased at a random auction at a pre-specified price qt ≡ 1 + ∆σt ·                               f   for a small time
                                                                                                            Lt
interval ∆. Since the price is greater than one, all loans participate in the auction. Winners in the auction
                                                                                                               f
earn an arbitrage (qt − 1) per time interval. The probability of selling a loan is Θ = Lt /Lbt ∆ per interval
of time. Taking the interval to zero, then the bank earns an arbitrage of


                                                          σt ≡ lim (qt − 1) · Θt ,
                                                               ∆ →0

per instant of time.


2.5        Consolidated government

Throughout the paper, we consider the consolidated government budget constraint, which combines
budget constraints associated with the Central Bank (CB) and the branch of the government responsible
for fiscal policies, and use the terms CB and (consolidated) government interchangeably.


Budget constraint.                  The CB has a nominal net asset position, Et , defined as:

                                                                         f
                                                              Et ≡ Lt − Mt .
                                                                                                   f
The net-asset position is the difference between loans held by the CB, Lt , and the CB liabilities, i.e., the
monetary base, Mt . The monetary base is divided into the aggregate holdings of reserves by banks Mtb
and the household’s currency holdings, M0t . The monetary base is always positive. The CB can issue or
                          f                        f
purchase loans Lt : when negative Lt is understood to be a stock of government bonds, when positive, it
is understood to be the loan purchases of the CB.5 An open market operation is a simultaneous increase
                                      f
or decrease in Mt and Lt without altering net asset positions.6
       There are two “active” fiscal policies available to the government, lump-sum transfers Tt and the
credit subsidy σt . The parameter b is important to control the degree of insurance in the economy and
endow the unemployed with some income. We assume that the employment insurance is not necessarily
balanced, leaving a deficit of wt bU t − wt τ l (1 − Ut ). Considering the consolidated budget, the nominal
fiscal surplus without transfers is given by:

                                f          f
                              Πt = itm Lt − itm ( Mt − M0t ) − Pt Tt − σt Lbt + wt τ l (1 − Ut ) − wt bU t ,                        (4)

where the sources of income are given by the nominal interest on loans and labor taxes, whereas the
sources of expenses are reserve remunerations, transfers, the credit subsidy and unemployment insur-
ance. The net asset position of the consolidated government evolves according to

                                                                f              f
                                                       dEt = dΠt =           dLt − dMt .
                                                                             | {z }
                                                                         unbacked transfers

      5 There                                                                                  f                       f
                is no distinction between private and public loans. In fact, whenever Lt < 0, an increase in Lt is interpreted as a
                                                                     f                     f
conventional open market operation (OMO). Instead, when         > 0, an increase is an unconventional OMO. The assumption
                                                                    Lt                    Lt
is that government bonds are as illiquid as private loans from the point of view of banks.
    6 The model is rich enough to accommodate a “helicopter drop” through an increase in M , without a counterpart increase
                                                                                            t
       f
in Lt .


                                                                      10
The government accumulates a nominal claim on the private sector as undistributed income. The net
asset position decreases with the difference between the monetary base and the loan purchases of the
                                                                                                                f      f
CB. In real terms, the CB’s net asset position is Et ≡ Et /Pt and its loan holdings are Lt ≡ Lt /Pt . Let
Wt denote the real wage, and f (z, s, t) the density associated with the joint distribution of savings s and
employment status z. The next proposition exploits this observation to express the law of motion of the
real net asset position Et in real terms.
    In real terms, Et satisfies:
                                 ˆ        0                                                            
     Ėt = rtm Et + (σt − πt )                s [ f (e, s, t) + f (u, s, t)] ds + Wt τ l (1 − Ut ) − bUt − τt Et , E0 given.   (5)
                                     s̄

where transfers are given by Tt = τt Et . The first term in (4) is the portfolio income earnings (losses) of
the CB which equal the real rate times the net asset position. The second term captures the losses from
the CB’s subsidy. The third term is the outcome of income taxation and unemployment insurance policy.
Finally, transfers are subtracted from the real asset position. A policy path is constrained by solvency
conditions. An important restriction is a long-run solvency constraint for the CB. In particular, there
is a limit limt→∞ Et ≥ E for some minimum E that guarantees that the CB can raise enough revenues
and satisfy dE = 0. It must be the case that at E discount window revenues cover any balance sheet
costs. This condition is equivalent to assuming that the CB’s liabilities are not worth zero in equilibrium.
The model features a Laffer curve for CB revenues. Although we do not solve for E explicitly, in the
exercises we analyze in the following section, we impose that all policy paths lead to a convergent stable
government net asset position and limt→∞ dEt = 0. Another restriction in the opposite direction is that
Et ≤ −s̄, which is equivalent to saying that the CB claim on the public cannot exceed the public’s debt
limit.


Taylor rule. To set the interest instensivelyon reserves, the CB works with a Taylor rule that allows
for a discretionary component that is triggered by the shock, but also follows a standard Taylor rule
that captures commitment for the long-run. This feature is important. Without a Taylor rule, the model
is unstable, so we need the long-run component. At the same time, we want to capture the idea that
monetary policy responds to economic conditions. For that, we specify the following rule:

                                                        itm = i∞
                                                               m
                                                                 + η · (πt − πss ) ,                                           (6)

where η > 1 is the parameter that governs the response of nominal interest rate to inflationary pressures.
              m is chosen to guarantee an inflation target π .
In addition, i∞                                             ss


Fiscal rule. To allow comparisons among policies, lump-sum transfers and credit policies, we setup a
path for government debt as a policy target. During the crisis, we allow debt to expand and then shrink
it back. We assume the following rule
                                                          h       i                   h      i
                 Et =        E∞         + (Ed − E∞ ) · exp −γ LR t + (Et− − Ed ) · exp −γSR t .                                (7)
                            |{z}
                        long-run target
                                          |           {z          } |              {z         }
                                                         long-run deviation             short-run deviation




                                                                      11
The term E∞ is a long-run target. The term Ed is an attraction point of net asset position. The rate Et−
is the government net asset position the instant before a shock. Finally, the term exp −γSR t captures
                                                                                             

the speed of expansion of government debt and exp −γ LR t the speed of reversal of the discretionary
                                                             

policy to the long-run target. We further discuss this rule in the Appendix A, where we argue that by
assuming γ LR < γSR , the net asset position (debt) decreases (increases) and then increases (decreases)
during and after the crisis to accommodate the stabilizing policies. Since the path of net asset position
is pinned down, we obtain the possible mix of transfers and credit policy as a residual as follows. Take
derivatives with respect to time to obtain:
                          h                     h       i                       h      ii
                   Ėt = − γ LR (Ed − E∞ ) · exp −γ LR t + γSR (Et− − Ed ) · exp −γSR t .                                     (8)

And thus, all policies that combine paths for transfers Tt and credit subsidy σt satisfying


                                           ˆ        0                                                            
           Tt =    rtm Et   + (σt − πt )                s [ f (e, s, t) + f (u, s, t)] ds + Wt τ l (1 − Ut ) − bUt − Ėt ,    (9)
                                               s̄

  they also imply the same path for debt and, thus, they are comparable.
   We consider two types of policy. First, a pure transfers policy, for which we set σt − πt = 0, and thus
solve for the path of lump-sum transfers that is consistent with the expansion of debt in (7). In this case,


                                                                         
                                       Tt = rt Et + Wt τ l (1 − Ut ) − bUt − E˙t .

  In addition, we consider an active credit policy for which we set the path credit subsidy according to:
                                                              h       i                   h      i
                   σt =          σ∞         + (σd − σ∞ ) · exp −ψ LR t + (σt− − σd ) · exp −ψSR t ,                          (10)
                                |{z}
                            long-run target
                                              |           {z          } |             {z         }
                                                            long-run deviation              short-run deviation

and transfers are backed as a residual from (9). This subsidy rule is akin to the evolution of debt in (7),
in which the value σ∞ plays to role of the long-run target. Again, the term σd is an attraction point of
the subsidy policy, and the rate σtm− is the credit policy the instant before a shock. As regarding the law
of motion to debt, the term exp −ψSR t captures a degree of responsiveness to the shock: the speed
                                           

at which the discretionary policy kicks, whereas exp −ψ LR t the speed of reversal of the discretionary
                                                                 

policy, to the long-run target. Again, we further discuss this rule in the Appendix A. In this case, we
assume that ψ LR > ψSR such that the credit subsidy σt first increases, and then decreases toward its
long-run target.
   One important aspect of macroeconomic stabilization policy is the speed of the implementation. The
Covid-19 shock has evolved faster than ever. Arguably, a credit policy is faster to implement, given
that monetary operations do not require the bureaucratic burden of a sending checks. We can control
the speed of the policy responses via the parameters ψSR , γSR . Another critical aspect, is that we do
                                                    




                                                                         12
not consider targeted transfers. Thus, the transfer program wastes budgetary resources distributing re-
sources to wealthy individuals. Although in practice, transfers have been assigned to low-wage earners,
the misallocation of transfers is still a problem. There are many low wage earners that have years of
savings, and many high wage earners that are in deep debts. Without appropriately observing wealth,
the effectiveness of the policy faces clear implementation constraints.
      Finally, we could enrich the model to evaluate different schemes to finance those policies. For in-
stance, by introducing short-run deviations of the Taylor rule that imply a lower path for the interest
itm , the debt evolution is mitigated, but this can potentially introduce trade-offs. Hence, the model can
also provide insights on the welfare implications of the fiscal-monetary interactions needed to finance
the debt implied by policies.


2.6     General equilibrium

Distribution of wealth and employment status. The mass of agents sums to one. At each instant t,
there is a distribution f (z, s, t) of real financial wealth across households given their employment status
z. The law of motion of this distribution satisfies a Kolmogorov-Forward Equation (KFE). The KFEs are
given by:

                   ∂                 ∂
                      f (e, s, t) = − [µ (e, s, t) f (e, s, t)] − Γeu
                                                                   t f ( e, s, t ) + Γt f ( u, s, t ) and
                                                                                      ue
                   ∂t                ∂s

                ∂                  ∂
                   f (u, s, t) = − [µ (u, s, t) f (u, s, t)] − Γue
                                                                t f ( u, s, t ) + Γt f ( e, s, t ) .
                                                                                   eu
                                                                                                     (11)
                ∂t                 ∂s
                              ´∞
Note that a fraction Ut = s̄ u f (u, s, t) ds is unemployed, whereas a mass 1 − Ut is active in the work-
force. The mass of unemployed evolves according to the law of motion in (3).
      Markets. Recall that mth (z, s), ath (z, s) and lth (z, s) are the demand for currency, deposits and loans,
respectively, at instant t by a household with employment status z and savings s. Outside money is held
as bank reserves or currency. The aggregate currency stock is
                                       ˆ        ∞   h                                                      i
                              M0t ≡                     mth   (e, s) f   (e, s, t) + mth   (u, s) f (u, s, t) ds.
                                           s̄

Naturally, households only hold currency at a zero-lower bound. Equilibrium in the outside money
market is:
                                                                 M0t + Mtb = Mt .                                   (12)

The credit market has two sides: a deposit and a loans market. In the deposit market, households hold
deposits supplied by banks. In the loans market, households obtain loans supplied by banks and the
CB. The distinction between the loans and deposits is that they clear with different interest rates. The
deposit market clears when:
                                       ˆ        ∞   h                                                  i
                               Abt =                    ath (e, s) f (e, s, t) + ath (u, s) f (u, s, t) ds,         (13)
                                           0




                                                                            13
whereas the loans market clears when:
                                                       ˆ        0   h                                                  i
                                                 f
                                         Lbt + Lt =                     lth (e, s) f (e, s, t) + lth (u, s) f (u, s, t) ds,                          (14)
                                                           s̄

                        f
whereLbt and Lt are loans purchases by banks and the CB, respectively. Note that household deposit
demand is given by ath (z, s) ≡ Pt s − mth (z, s) for positive values of s whereas demand for loans by
lth (z, s) ≡ − Pt s for negative values of s.
      Finally, the goods market clears when:
                                                                          ˆ        ∞
                                   (1 − Ut ) ≡ Yt = Ct ≡
                                                                              s̄
                                                                                           ∑      (crt (z, s) + cst (z, s)) f (z, s, t) ds,          (15)
                                                                                       z∈{e,u}


where crt (z, s) and cst (z, s) represent the demands for remote and social goods, respectively, at instant t by
a household with employment status z and savings s. The definition of the perfect foresight equilibrium
is standard.



Equilibrium computation. The real equilibrium deposit rate solves a single clearing condition (Bigio
and Sannikov, 2019):
                   ˆ        0                                                      ˆ       ∞
               −                s [ f (e, s, t) + f (u, s, t)] ds =                            s [ f (e, s, t) + f (u, s, t)] ds + Et for t∈[0,∞).   (16)
                       s̄                                                              0

If we obtain the real deposit rate, we also obtain the real value of loans and deposits as well as the
evolution of wealth. By Walras Law, if (16) holds, then the goods market clearing condition (15) also
holds.


3     Policy responses and trade-offs
3.1     Two insights

We state here two insights to guide the discussion below. First, consider the case in which the borrowing
limit is the natural one. Since this borrowing limit is never binding, and except for the initial unexpected
shock there is not aggregate risk, the Ricardian equivalence holds meaning that debt and lump-sum
transfers are equivalent to finance expenditures—see Ljungqvist and Sargent (2012) for a textbook treat-
ment. Hence, if the economy eventually returns to the same steady-state, any path of transfers is neutral
as it will be consistent with a path in which transfers are set to zero all time. This insight showcases an
extreme economy where one of the policies we evaluate has muted effects. Second, consider the other
opposite case, an economy where debt limits are severe, as in Werning (2015) and Guerrieri et al. (2020).
In particular, let the borrowing limit be zero. By construction, any credit subsidy is immaterial as there
is not credit to be subsidized.
      This discussion showcases that the effectiveness of policy critically depends on the extent of borrow-
ing limits. In one extreme, when credit is ample, transfers are useless. In the other case, when credit is


                                                                                                14
restricted, a credit policy is useless. These insights might be important for ongoing policy debates, as
it means that in developed economies, with ample credit limits, transfer policies are more likely to to
be neutral, whereas in emerging economies, with low credit limit, credit subsidy might not have a bite.
These insights seem to be guiding policies to some extent: as we noted in the introduction, developing
countries are relying more intensively on transfer programs, developed economies on credit programs.


3.2     Numerical illustrations

To evaluate the model, we present a simple calibration for illustrative purposes. As explained above,
we assume that e = 1.8 and γ = 0.5, such that the shock in the marginal utility of social consumption
is associated with less discounting, and thus, due to IES > 1 and rigid prices, it generates a recession.
Also, we assume a low degree of substitutability, which is in line with the idea that some substitution
occurs (e.g., going to the movies for online streaming), but given the nature of goods that requires social
interactions, we doubt they can be largely substituted for goods that can be consumed at home.
      We assume the economy is initially in the steady-state. Then, we solve the model for a time-varying
path of β t , which governs the evolution of behavioral responses due to the infection risk of Covid-19.
Eventually, the economy converges back to steady-state. We assume β t follows an inverse-hump-shape
path (see Figure 2, left-top panel), which becomes perfectly foreseen once the unforeseen Covid-19 shock
hit the economy.
      We consider a few exercises. First, we analyze the model dynamics in an environment with fully flex-
ible prices. Second, we compare the model dynamics in an environment with rigid prices under three
different scenarios: no policies at all (laissez-faire), a pure transfers policy in which the credit subsidy is
set to zero, and an active credit subsidy in which lump-sum transfers are computed as a residual. Finally,
we experiment with different degrees of borrowing limits. We consider the natural borrowing limit, in
which transfers are immaterial due to arguments related to the Ricardian equivalence, so credit subsidy
is the preferred policy. We also consider a zero borrowing limit, in which a credit subsidy by construc-
tion cannot do anything, so lump-sum transfers are the preferred one. And, finally, an intermediate
borrowing limit in which trade-offs between the use of both policies emerge.


3.2.1    Benchmark: flexible prices

      To set the stage, in this section, we report results under a flexible prices benchmark, which we ob-
tain by setting the parameter κ to infinity. Figure 2 displays four plots. The top-left panel displays the
evolution of β t , the shock governing the marginal utility of consuming social goods. Under the assump-
tion that e > 1 and γ < 1, this shock affects the economy as if there is less discounting of the future.
Market clearing implies that consumption equals output, which is not affected by the shock since labor
flows are exogenous. As the bottom panels reveal, output is constant and households simply reallocate
consumption from social goods, affected by the negative marginal utility shock, toward remote goods.
The price margin that adjusts is the real interest rate. Regarding the path of the interest rate, this path
first increases at the time the shock arrives unexpectedly. Intuitively, given that households anticipate
a fall in the the marginal utility of consumption of social goods as the shock escalates, they would like
to anticipate consumption and, thus, interest rate must increase at the very beginning of the transition


                                                      15
path. As the shock evolves in a perfect foreseen fashion, interest rate follows an inverse hump shape,
remaining temporarily below its steady-state level, given the incentives households face to postpone
consumption to the future. Finally, given that output is constant, and consumption paths for social and
remote goods depend mostly on γ and e, the borrowing limit does not affect these paths. It affects only
the path of interest rate which moves downwards as the borrowing limit becomes tighter and reduces
the demand for loans.


     100

      98                                                                             0.8

      96                                                                             0.6


      94                                                                             0.4


      92                                                                             0.2

                                                                                      0
      90

                                                                                    -0.2
      88

                                                                                    -0.4
      86
                                                                                    -0.6
      84
                                                                                    -0.8
      82
                                                                                      -1
           0       20          40        60       80     100                               0       20       40        60        80       100




                   (1) Preference Shock β (t)                                                            (2) Output Yt

                                                                                     10

      25                                                                              8

                                                                                      6
      20
                                                                                      4

                                                                                      2
      15
                                                                                      0

      10                                                                              -2

                                                                                      -4
      5
                                                                                      -6

                                                                                      -8
      0
                                                                                     -10
           0       20          40        60       80     100                               0       20       40        60        80       100




                        (3) Real Interest Rates                                                   (4) Consumption Ctr and Cts

                                          Figure 2: Transition paths under flexible prices.
Note: The figure reports the paths of preference shock, total output, real interest rate and consumption of social goods and remote goods under
flexible prices after an unforeseen Covid-19 shock. In panel (1), the preference parameter of social goods consumption β t is expressed in the
percentage of steady-state value. In panels (2) and (4), the total output and consumption of social goods and remote goods are expressed in
percentage deviations from the steady-state values. In panels (3), the real interest rates are expressed in annual percentages under three levels
of borrowing limit: natural borrowing limit, zero borrowing limit, and a moderate borrowing limit where s̄ = −0.1b.



    This is a stark economy. Labor reallocation is perfect and instantaneous, meaning that a bar tender
can become a UPS driver or a nurse the next day. This assumption is at odds with reality, but still,
showcases that that some segments of the economy should absorb resources not employed in sectors


                                                                      16
that have to be avoided. The next sections address the points that with wage rigidity, remote sectors can
be dragged down by the recession in social sectors.


3.2.2   Rigid prices, pure transfers and active credit policy

    Under the assumption of price rigidity, κ < ∞, output drops in a persistent way, enhancing the
role of potential policies to mitigate the impact of the shock. In the next sections, we consider scenarios
without policy interventions (laissez-faire), with pure lump-sum transfers, and with an active credit
policy where transfers adjust as a residual. To make policies comparable, we assume they generate the
same path of the consolidated government’s position in the latter two cases. We report results for three
different degrees of borrowing limits. First, we consider the natural borrowing limit, in which transfers
are innocuous. Second, we consider a zero borrowing limit in which credit subsidy is immaterial. Finally,
an intermediate borrowing limit that illustrates the trade-off between using both policies.


   Natural borrowing limit. Figure 3 considers the policy interventions, whereas Figure 4 displays
output, consumption and interest rate paths. Compared to laissez-faire (full blue line), dashed red lines
(dash-dotted green lines) represent the paths that take into account transfers policy (active credit policy)
right after the shock, when the Government instantaneously implements them. Policies are designed
to generate the same path of debt, as illustrated in the first panel of Figure 3. The second and third
panels plot paths of transfers and credit policy, respectively. In the later case, transfers adjust residually
as illustrated by the seconde panel.




                                                     17
      0


                                                                                       45
      -1


      -2                                                                               40


      -3
                                                                                       35

      -4

                                                                                       30
      -5


                                                                                       25
      -6


      -7                                                                               20

           0       20        40        60           80     100                               0       20           40        60       80      100




                  (1) Real Net Asset Position Et                                                          (2) Real Fiscal Transfer


                                              1.4


                                              1.2


                                               1


                                              0.8


                                              0.6


                                              0.4


                                              0.2



                                                     0      20        40        60          80      100




                                                          (3) Real Credit Subsidy σt − πt

                        Figure 3: Nominal rigidity and policy variables (natural borrowing limit).
Note: The figure reports the paths of real net asset position, real fiscal transfer and real credit subsidy in the following scenarios of policy
interventions after an unforeseen Covid-19 shock: laissez-faire, pure lump-sum trasnfer and active credit policy. In panels (1) and (2), the net
asset position and fiscal transfers are expressed in percentage terms of the steady-state output. In panels (3), the real credit subsidity rate is
expressed in annual percentage. The pure fiscal transfer policy and active credit policy follow the same path of net asset position, and the
credit subsidy rates in laissez-faire and pure fiscal transfer policy are equal to zero. Given the paths of net asset position and credit subsidy
rate, the paths of fiscal transfers are computed as residuals from equation (9). In all figures the households’ borrowing limit is set at the natural
borrowing limit level, such that the mass of population constrained at the limit is zero along the whole path of transition.



     With nominal rigidity, and no policy interventions (blue full-lines in Figures 3 and 4), the output
drops in a persistent way. As we explained earlier, this responds to the inability of the remote sector to
absorb the slack of the social sector. There are more job separations which implies larger unemployment,
and is captured by the slope of the output path. Micro uncertainty increases, meaning that precautionary
savings should increase. This reinforces the negative effect on interest rates due to “less discounting”
and IES < 1, or a more willingness to substitute intertemporally rather than intratemporally. Hence, as
opposed to the flexible prices benchmark, consumption of remote goods does not absorb perfectly the
fall in the consumption of social goods. There is scope for macroeconomic stabilization, a policy analysis
we pursue next.


                                                                           18
                                                                                      0
      0

                                                                                      -2

      -2                                                                              -4

                                                                                      -6

      -4                                                                              -8

                                                                                     -10
      -6
                                                                                     -12

                                                                                     -14
      -8
                                                                                     -16

                                                                                     -18
     -10

                                                                                     -20
           0        20       40        60       80       100                               0       20          40        60       80     100




                           (1) Output Yt                                                       (2) Consumption of Social Goods Cts


     3.5                                                                             4.6

      3                                                                              4.5

     2.5                                                                             4.4
      2
                                                                                     4.3
     1.5
                                                                                     4.2
      1
                                                                                     4.1
     0.5
                                                                                      4
      0

    -0.5                                                                             3.9

      -1                                                                             3.8

    -1.5                                                                             3.7
           0        20       40        60       80       100                               0       20          40        60       80     100




               (3) Consumption of Remote Goods Ctr                                                      (4) Real Interest Rates

                         Figure 4: Nominal rigidity and real variables (natural borrowing limit).
Note: The figure reports the paths of total output, consumption of social goods and remote goods, and real interest rate in the following
scenarios of policy interventions after an unforeseen Covid-19 shock: laissez-faire, pure lump-sum trasnfer and active credit policy. In panels
(1), (2) and (3), the total output and consumption of social and remote goods are expressed in percentage deviations from the steady-state
values. In panels (4), the real interest rates are expressed in annual percentages. In all figures the households’ borrowing limit is set at the
natural borrowing limit level, such that the mass of population constrained at the limit is zero along the whole path of transition. The paths of
policy interventions follow Figure 3.


    Due to arguments related to the Ricardian equivalence, except for approximation errors, the output,
consumption and interest rate paths under laissez-faire and pure transfers overlap perfectly as portrayed
in Figure 4. In contrast, if a credit policy is implemented by reducing the path of transfers, the fall in
output is mitigated due to a boom in the consumption of remote goods. Due to the absence of any
containment policy in our model, perhaps undesirably, the decline in the consumption of social goods
is also mitigated. In addition, we do not see an initial increase in the interest rate any more, whose
path follows an inverse hump shape, with the valley occurring before than in the laissez-faire economy.
Intuitively, the incidence of a credit subsidy implies a lower rate that debtors must honor, but a higher
rate that remunerates depositors. Hence, both paths of bank deposits and bank loans increase with
respect to an economy where transfers are innocuous, as illustrated by Figure 5.


                                                                      19
    40.5

     40                                                                              38

    39.5
                                                                                     37
     39

    38.5                                                                             36

     38
                                                                                     35
    37.5

     37
                                                                                     34
    36.5

     36                                                                              33

    35.5
           0       20         40       60       80       100                              0        20        40       60        80       100




                        (1) Bank Deposits At                                                            (2) Bank Loans Lt

                   Figure 5: Nominal rigidity and banking variables (natural borrowing limit).
Note: The figure reports the paths of bank deposits and loans in the following scenarios of policy interventions after an unforeseen Covid-
19 shock: laissez-faire, pure lump-sum trasnfer and active credit policy. The bank deposits and loans are expressed in percentages of the
steady-state output. In all figures the households’ borrowing limit is set at the natural borrowing limit level, such that the mass of population
constrained at the limit is zero along the whole path of transition. The paths of policy interventions follow Figure 3.


    We do not analyze an economy with credit against future taxes. But the result is instructive: if
borrowing limits are very large, then how much we vary the limit with transfers will not have a large
impact on the allocation.


    Zero borrowing limit. Now we move to the opposite extreme. Consider Figures 6 and 7 that are the
counterparts of Figures 4 and 5 for the case in which we assume no borrowing at all (we omit the paths of
policies since they carry a similar message to the previous case in Figure 3). In the zero borrowing limit
case, the credit policy is innocuous, and since transfers adjust residual to deliver the same expansion of
debt as in the pure fiscal policy exercise, the paths under both policies (dashed red lines and dash-dotted
green lines) overlap. This means that the marginal impact of the credit policy is muted here. Figure
6 reveals that, under the zero borrowing limit and laissez-faire, the same shock generates a recession
nearly seven times larger than under the natural debt limit, which makes policy even more urgent. In
other words, a stringent debt limit amplifies a lot the recession, at the same time that restrict the use of
credit subsidy, perhaps the preferred policy tool to target those households who really need support.
Once transfers kick in, the recession (as well as the fall in the consumption of social and remote goods)
is mitigated substantially. As expected, the remote sector accommodates better the effect of transfers.




                                                                      20
      0                                                                                 0


     -10                                                                               -10


     -20                                                                               -20


     -30                                                                               -30


     -40                                                                               -40



     -50                                                                               -50



     -60                                                                               -60


                                                                                       -70
     -70
           0        20       40        60        80        100                               0       20         40        60       80        100




                          (1) Output Yt                                                          (2) Consumption of Social Goods Cts

      0
                                                                                       10


     -10                                                                                9

                                                                                        8
     -20
                                                                                        7

     -30
                                                                                        6


     -40                                                                                5

                                                                                        4
     -50
                                                                                        3

     -60
                                                                                        2


     -70                                                                                1
           0        20       40        60        80        100                               0       20         40        60       80        100




               (3) Consumption of Remote Goods Ctr                                                        (4) Real Deposit Rate

                         Figure 6: Nominal rigidity and real variables (zero borrowing limit).
Note: The figure reports the paths of total output, consumption of social goods and remote goods, and real interest rate in the following
scenarios of policy interventions after an unforeseen Covid-19 shock: laissez-faire, pure lump-sum trasnfer and active credit policy. In panels
(1), (2) and (3), the total output and consumption of social and remote goods are expressed in percentage deviations from the steady-state
values. In panels (4), the real interest rates are expressed in annual percentages. In all figures the households’ borrowing limit is set at the zero
borrowing limit level, i.e., s̄ = 0. The paths of net asset position and credit subsidy rate follow Figure 3 and the paths of lump-sum transfers
are computed as residuals from equation (9).


     Under the zero borrowing limit and laissez-faire, interest rate initially increases abruptly as agents
are willing to borrow to smooth the shock but the zero borrowing limit impedes so. Once transfers
are implemented, as illustrated in Figure 7, part of it becomes deposits mitigating such increase in the
interest rate.




                                                                        21
                                                                                        1
      7
                                                                                      0.8

      6                                                                               0.6

                                                                                      0.4
      5

                                                                                      0.2
      4
                                                                                        0

      3                                                                               -0.2

                                                                                      -0.4
      2
                                                                                      -0.6
      1
                                                                                      -0.8

      0                                                                                -1
          0        20         40       60        80       100                                0       20        40       60        80        100




                        (1) Bank Deposits At                                                              (2) Bank Loans Lt

                        Figure 7: Nominal rigidity and banking variables (zero borrowing limit).
Note: The figure reports the paths of bank deposits and loans in the following scenarios of policy interventions after an unforeseen Covid-19
shock: laissez-faire, pure lump-sum trasnfer and active credit policy. The bank deposits and loans are expressed in percentages of the steady-
state output. In all figures the households’ borrowing limit is set at the zero borrowing limit level, i.e., s̄ = 0. The paths of net asset position
and credit subsidy rate follow Figure 3, and the paths of lump-sum transfers are computed as residuals from equation (9).



     Moderate borrowing limit. Finally, we consider the moderate borrowing limit. We calibrate s̄ such
that 10 percent of households are at the borrowing limit, st = s̄, in the steady-state, which implies that
29 percent of them are indebted, st ∈ [s̄, 0). Figures 8 and 9 are the counterparts of Figures 4 and 5,
and again we do not report the policy paths for conciseness. Recall that a pure fiscal policy (dashed red
lines) means that transfers are set to match a given path of debt. As in the case with natural borrowing
limit, under this policy, the fall in output and consumption of both social and remote goods is mitigated
with respect to the laissez-faire benchmark. Nonetheless, with an intermediate level of borrowing limit,
if the government uses part of its fiscal resources to implement an active credit policy rather than solely
pure transfers, it can further improves outcomes. Indeed, output and consumption paths move further
upward (dashed-dot green lines), with a expansion in the remote good sector.




                                                                        22
      0                                                                               0

      -2

                                                                                      -5
      -4

      -6
                                                                                     -10
      -8

     -10
                                                                                     -15
     -12

     -14                                                                             -20

     -16

     -18                                                                             -25


     -20
           0        20        40        60      80       100                               0       20         40        60      80        100




                            (1) Output Yt                                                      (2) Consumption of Social Goods Cts



      2                                                                              4.5


      0

                                                                                      4
      -2


      -4
                                                                                     3.5
      -6


      -8
                                                                                      3

     -10


     -12                                                                             2.5

           0        20        40        60      80       100                               0       20         40        60      80        100




               (3) Consumption of Remote Goods Ctr                                                      (4) Real Deposit Rate

                         Figure 8: Nominal rigidity and real variables (moderate borrowing limit).
Note: The figure reports the paths of total output, consumption of social goods and remote goods, and real interest rate in the following
scenarios of policy interventions after an unforeseen Covid-19 shock: laissez-faire, pure lump-sum trasnfer and active credit policy. In panels
(1), (2) and (3), the total output and consumption of social and remote goods are expressed in percentage deviations from the steady-state
values. In panels (4), the real interest rates are expressed in annual percentages. In all figures the households’ borrowing limit is set at a
moderate level, i.e., s̄ = −0.1b. The paths of net asset position and credit subsidy rate follow Figure 3, and the paths of lump-sum transfers are
computed as residuals from equation (9).


    In addition, due to this mitigation in output and consumption once policies are implemented, interest
rates do not increase as much as they do in the laissez-faire case to induce market clearing. The timing
when rates fall below their steady-state level are anticipated once policies are implemented. With a mod-
erate borrowing limit, transfers further increase deposits as part of the households save their transfers,
but loans also fall as transfers to another part of the households weak precautionary needs at the same
time that they can be used to anticipate consumption. Government debt absorbs such difference, affect-
ing the path of interest rate in the aforementioned way. Under the credit policy, which stimulates both
deposits and loans as illustrated by Figure 9, the interest rate increases less right after the shock, just to
follow the same inverse hump-shape path towards the steady-state.



                                                                       23
                                                                                       1.2
      7
                                                                                       1.1

      6                                                                                 1

                                                                                       0.9
      5
                                                                                       0.8

      4                                                                                0.7

                                                                                       0.6
      3
                                                                                       0.5

                                                                                       0.4
      2

                                                                                       0.3
      1
                                                                                       0.2
          0        20         40       60        80        100                               0       20        40        60        80        100




                        (1) Bank Deposits At                                                              (2) Bank Loans Lt

                  Figure 9: Nominal rigidity and banking variables (moderate borrowing limit).
Note: The figure reports the paths of bank deposits and loans in the following scenarios of policy interventions after an unforeseen Covid-19
shock: laissez-faire, pure lump-sum trasnfer and active credit policy. The bank deposits and loans are expressed in percentages of the steady-
state output. In all figures the households’ borrowing limit is set at a moderate level, i.e., s̄ = −0.1b. The paths of net asset position and credit
subsidy rate follow Figure 3, and the paths of lump-sum transfers are computed as residuals from equation (9).




4     Final remarks
All the examples above are illustrative of the mechanism. The key message is that the best use of the mix
between lump-sum transfers and active credit policy depends crucially on the extent of the borrowing
limit. In the next versions of the paper, we aim to explore more this trade-off under a proper calibration
and extensions that consider default risk and endogenize the borrowing limit. This is important to
asses possible moral-hazard constraints. In addition, we aim to compare other types of policies, such as
unemployment insurance and job retention schemes.
     Next versions of the paper aim also to relax the assumption on perfect reallocation of labor input
across sectors, to study an ad-hoc restriction on the amount of social goods that can be consumed so
we can simulate containment policies, and to allow temporary deviations from the Taylor rule so the
consolidated government can tame the debt path with a lower interest rate.




                                                                        24
References
Alvarez, Fernando E, David Argente, and Francesco Lippi, “A simple planning problem for covid-19
  lockdown,” Technical Report 26981, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Atkeson, Andrew, “What will be the economic impact of COVID-19 in the US? Rough estimates of
  disease scenarios,” Technical Report 26867, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Barro, Robert J, José F Ursúa, and Joanna Weng, “The coronavirus and the great influenza pandemic:
  Lessons from the “spanish flu" for the coronavirus’s potential effects on mortality and economic activ-
  ity,” Technical Report 26866, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Berger, David W, Kyle F Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey, “An seir infectious disease model with
  testing and conditional quarantine,” Technical Report 26901, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2020.

Berriel, Tiago and Eduardo Zilberman, “Targeting the Poor: A Macroeconomic Analysis of Cash Trans-
  fer Programs,” 2011. Draft, PUC-Rio.

Bethune, Zachary A and Anton Korinek, “Covid-19 Infection Externalities: Trading Off Lives vs. Liveli-
  hoods,” Working Paper 27009, National Bureau of Economic Research April 2020.

Bigio, Saki and Yuliy Sannikov, “A Model of Credit, Money, Interest, and Prices,” 2019. Draft, UCLA.

Brunnermeier, Markus, Jean-Pierre Landau, Marco Pagano, and Ricardo Reis, “Throwing COVID Liq-
  uidity Life-Line,” 2020.

Buera, Francisco J., Roberto N. Fattal-Jaef, P. André Neumeyer, and Yongseok Shin, “The Economic
  Ripple Effects of COVID-19,” Draft, World Bank, 2020.

Caballero, Ricardo and Alp Simsek, “A Model of Asset Price Spirals and Aggregate Demand Amplifi-
  cation of a “Covid-19" Shock,” 2020. Draft, MIT.

Correia, Sergio, Stephan Luck, and Emil Verner, “Pandemics Depress the Economy, Public Health In-
  terventions Do Not: Evidence from the 1918 Flu,” 2020. Draft, MIT.

e Castro, Miguel Faria, “Fiscal Policy during a Pandemic,” 2020. Draft, FRB St. Louis.

Eichenbaum, Martin S, Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt, “The macroeconomics of epidemics,”
  Technical Report 26882, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, “Flattening the Pandemic and Recession Curves,” 2020.

Guerrieri, Veronica, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and Iván Werning, “Macroeconomic Impli-
  cations of COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages?,” Technical Report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.




                                                     25
Jones, Callum J, Thomas Philippon, and Venky Venkateswaran, “Optimal Mitigation Policies in a
  Pandemic: Social Distancing and Working from Home,” Working Paper 26984, National Bureau of
  Economic Research April 2020.

Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Gianluca Violante, “Pandemics according to hank,” 2020. Draft,
  University of Chicago.

Krüger, Dirk, Harald Uhlig, and Taojun Xie, “Macroeconomic Dynamics and Reallocation in an Epi-
  demic,” 2020. Draft, University of Chicago.

Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent, Recursive Macroeconomic Theory, 3rd edition ed., Boston: MIT
  Press, 2012.

Òscar Jordà, Sanjay R Singh, and Alan M Taylor, “Longer-run economic consequences of pandemics,”
  Technical Report 2020.

Werning, Ivan, “Incomplete Markets and Aggregate Demand,” October 2015. Draft, MIT.




                                                26
                                                          Appendix
A      Properties of policy rules
This section discusses the class of policy rules used in the draft. We specify rules of the form: :
                                                                                               
                                xt = x∞ + ( x̄0 − x̄∞ ) · exp −µ LR t + ( x0− − x̄0 ) · exp −µSR t .

In this rule, the value x̄∞ is a long-run target. The term x̄0 is an attraction point of the policy rate in the short-run, after a shock.
The rate x0− is the policy variable the instant before a shock. The term exp −µSR t captures a degree of responsiveness to the
                                                                                          

shock to its short-run attraction point—the speed at which the discretionary policy kicks in, whereas exp −µ LR t the speed
                                                                                                                             

of reversal of the discretionary policy, to the long-run target. In what follows we assume µ LR < µSR . This functional form has
several natural properties:
    1. First, observe that for any finite pair µSR , µ LR we have the following:
                                               


                                                                    lim xt = x̄∞ .
                                                                    t→∞


    2. Consider that for any finite pair µSR , µ LR we have the following:
                                        


                                                                    lim xt = x0− .
                                                                   t → 0+


    3. Consider that for any finite pair µ LR we have the following:
                                        


                                                                 lim     lim xt = x̄0 ,
                                                                 t→0+ µSR →∞

       meaning that the adjustment is immediate.
    4. Consider that for any finite pair µSR we have the following:
                                        


                                                                 lim lim xt = x̄0 ,
                                                                 t→∞ µ LR →∞


       meaning that the attraction point is the discretionary point.
    5. Consider the limit, µ LR /µSR → ∞, then speed of responsiveness is immediate and the
                                                                  h                                             i
           lim     lim      xt = lim        lim   x̄∞ + exp −µSR t ( x̄0 − x̄∞ ) · exp − µ LR − µSR t + ( x0− − x̄0 )
            t→∞ µSR /µ LR →∞           t→∞ µSR /µ LR →∞
                                                                                      h              i
                                  =    x̄∞ + ( x̄0 − x̄∞ ) lim     lim       exp −µSR t exp − µ LR − µSR t
                                                          t→∞ µSR /µ LR →∞
                                                                                      h                   i
                                  =    x̄∞ + ( x̄0 − x̄∞ ) lim     lim       exp −µSR t exp µSR 1 − µ LR /µSR t
                                                          t→∞ µSR /µ LR →∞
                                  =    x̄0 ,

       where the last line follows by L’Hospital rule.
    6. Monotonicity of xt . Let’s assume x∞ > x̄0 and x0− > x̄0 , which is the scenario in our simulations. If µ LR < µSR , then
                                                                                                     !
                                               ∂xt                1                  µSR x0− − x̄0
                                                   T 0 iff t T SR      ln                ·               ,
                                               ∂t             µ − µ LR               µ LR x∞ − x̄0

       which means that the path of x̄t first decreases over time from x0− , then increases back to x∞ , which is our parametriza-
       tion for the evolution of real net position, Et , after the shock to represent the fiscal space available for stabilizing policies.
       If instead, µ LR > µSR , then
                                                                                LR
                                                                                       x∞ − x̄0
                                                                                                 
                                             ∂ x̄t                   1          µ
                                                   T 0 iff t S LR           ln       ·             ,
                                              ∂t                µ − µSR         µSR x0− − x̄0
which means that the path of x̄t first increases over time from x0− , then decreases back to x̄∞ , which is our choice
whenever we study an active credit subsidy σt .




                                                     A2
