Determinants of Disparities in Covid-19 Job Losses
Laura Montenovo, Xuan Jiang, Felipe Lozano Rojas, Ian M. Schmutte, Kosali I. Simon, Bruce
A. Weinberg, and Coady Wing
NBER Working Paper No. 27132
May 2020, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. I1,J0,J08

                                         ABSTRACT

We make several contributions to understanding the socio-demographic ramifications of the
COVID-19 epidemic and policy responses on employment outcomes of subgroups in the U.S.,
benchmarked against two previous recessions. First, monthly Current Population Survey (CPS)
data show greater declines in employment in April and May 2020 (relative to February) for
Hispanics, younger workers, and those with high school degrees and some college. Between
April and May, all the demographic subgroups considered regained some employment. While in
most cases the re-employment in May was proportional to the employment drop occurred through
April, we show that this was not the case for Blacks. Second, we show that job loss was larger in
occupations that require more interpersonal contact and that cannot be performed remotely.
Third, we see that consistent with theories of occupational segregation, the extent to which
workers of certain demographic groups sort (pre-COVID-19) into occupations and industries can
explain a sizeable portion of the gender, race, and ethnic gaps in recent unemployment. However,
there remain substantial unexplained differences in employment losses across groups even in
these detailed decompositions. We also demonstrate the importance of tracking workers who
report having a job but are absent from work, in addition to tracking employed and unemployed
workers. We conclude with a discussion of policy priorities and future research needs implied by
the disparities in labor market losses from the COVID-19 crisis that we identify.

Laura Montenovo                                 Kosali I. Simon
Indiana University                              O’Neill School of Public and Environmental Affairs
2451 E. 10th Street                             Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47408                           1315 East Tenth Street
lmonten@iu.edu                                  Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
                                                and NBER
Xuan Jiang                                      simonkos@indiana.edu
The Ohio State University
1945 N High St                                  Bruce A. Weinberg
Columbus, OH 43210                              Ohio State University
jiang.445@osu.edu                               Department of Economics
                                                410 Arps Hall
Felipe Lozano Rojas                             1945 North High Street
Indiana University                              Columbus, OH 43210
2451 E. 10th Street                             and NBER
Bloomington, IN 47408                           weinberg.27@osu.edu
flozanor@indiana.edu
                                                Coady Wing
Ian M. Schmutte                                 Indiana University
Terry College of Business                       1315 E 10th St
University of Georgia                           Bloomington, IN 47401
Athens, GA 30602                                cwing@indiana.edu
schmutte@uga.edu
                DETERMINANTS OF DISPARITIES IN COVID-19 JOB LOSSES




          Laura Montenovo    Xuan Jiang   Felipe Lozano Rojas  Ian M. Schmutte
                      Kosali Simon    Bruce Weinberg   Coady Wing


                                           September 9, 2020



We make several contributions to understanding the socio-demographic ramifications of the COVID-19 epi-
demic and policy responses on employment outcomes of subgroups in the U.S., benchmarked against two
previous recessions. First, monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) data show greater declines in em-
ployment in April and May 2020 (relative to February) for Hispanics, younger workers, and those with
high school degrees and some college. Between April and May, all the demographic subgroups considered
regained some employment. While in most cases the re-employment in May was proportional to the em-
ployment drop occurred through April, we show that this was not the case for Blacks. Second, we show that
job loss was larger in occupations that require more interpersonal contact and that cannot be performed re-
motely. Third, we see that consistent with theories of occupational segregation, the extent to which workers
of certain demographic groups sort (pre-COVID-19) into occupations and industries can explain a sizeable
portion of the gender, race, and ethnic gaps in recent unemployment. However, there remain substantial
unexplained differences in employment losses across groups even in these detailed decompositions. We
also demonstrate the importance of tracking workers who report having a job but are absent from work, in
addition to tracking employed and unemployed workers. We conclude with a discussion of policy priorities
and future research needs implied by the disparities in labor market losses from the COVID-19 crisis that
we identify.




Keywords: Stratification, Economic Recession, Job Loss; Work Features; Decomposition; Discrimination
*JEL Codes: J6, J25, J15, J16, Z13




Montenovo: Indiana University;
Jiang: Ohio State University (gratefully acknowledges support from UL1 TR002733 and R24 HD058484);
Lozano-Rojas: University of Georgia;
Schmutte: University of Georgia;
Simon: Indiana University;
Weinberg: Ohio State University (gratefully acknowledges support from UL1 TR002733 and R24 HD058484);
Wing: Indiana University.
1    Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic represented a large shock to the working and personal lives of millions
of people around the world. The threat of contracting SARS-CoV-2 has made it risky to engage in
a variety of economic, social, familial, and cultural activities that were commonplace only a few
months ago. But the epidemic has had disparate impacts on different groups, frequently mediated
by the kind of job a person holds, her household and family structure, geographic location, and
various measures of socio-economic status.
     The SARS-COV-2 virus spreads mainly through droplet transmission that occurs when people
are in close physical proximity. It follows that employment losses may be larger in jobs that
involve face-to-face contact and smaller in jobs that can be done remotely. At the same time, work
continues in essential industries. Sub-populations of workers are differentially sorted in jobs that
vary by these characteristics, and so their employment outcomes will differ accordingly. On the
labor supply side, the transmission mechanism also raises the health risks of work tasks that require
face-to-face contact with customers or co-workers. Moreover, the mortality risks of COVID-19
vary across individuals: mortality rates appear to be higher for men, older people, and people with
underlying health conditions. We expect that high-risk workers may supply less labor, especially in
high-exposure jobs (Guerrieri et al. 2020). Labor supply might decrease through other channels as
well. For example, people might reduce their labor supply because the epidemic has compromised
child care services, schooling options, and other types of home and family health care availability
(Dingel et al. 2020).
     In this paper, we focus on the labor market disruptions and job losses during the early months
of the COVID-19 recession in the United States. We document substantial disparities in recent un-
employment patterns across demographic sub-populations defined by age, gender, race/ethnicity,
parental status, and education. We also show that job attributes are related to employment. Specifi-
cally, people working in jobs with more remote work capacity and less dependence on face-to-face
interaction were more secure. Similarly, people working in essential industries were much less
likely to become unemployed in the early months of the epidemic, patterns that seem likely to per-
sist. In general, major demographic sub-populations are not evenly distributed across occupations
and industries and this is one reason why some demographic groups have fared better than others.
We use decomposition techniques to quantify the share of employment disparities that is rooted in
pre-epidemic sorting across occupations and industries. Occupation and industry sorting explains
a substantial share of many of the disparities in employment outcomes in recent months. And the
job and industry factors that protected jobs during the early months of the epidemic are often also
associated with higher income and job security in normal times. This suggests that the epidemic



                                                 1
has often aggravated the existing inequalities and social divides in society.
    Our work falls into a line focused on the determinants of socioeconomic inequality and mo-
bility, and the mechanisms that contribute to their persistence over time. Research on social strat-
ification takes on the role of “understanding and investigating the sources” of social inequality
(Sakamoto and Daniel 2003) through the study of population composition affects. Our paper exam-
ines the distribution of job losses during the early epidemic in a social stratification framework that
exploits population subgroups sorting across different jobs. We use information on how subgroups
allocate themselves in different occupations and industries to explain the labor market shocks they
experience during COVID-19, and the changes in inequality dynamics they will experience as a
consequence.
    We present four broad analyses to investigate disparate impacts in labor market impacts. First,
we use data from the monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) to document and compare dispar-
ities across groups in a range of labor market outcomes (current employment, absence from work,
and especially recent unemployment). We find large declines in employment and increases in re-
cent unemployment among women, Hispanics, and younger workers. There is also polarization
by education, with fewer job losses among college graduates (and above), who can often work
remotely, and also high school dropouts, who are often in essential jobs. This finding is significant
in that it suggests that although both groups are somewhat shielded from job loss, highly educated
workers are also insulated from risk of infection, while less educated workers likely face greater
risk of COVID-19 exposure. In this way, stratification operates differently in terms of health and
employment risk. We contrast these changes with the employment losses experienced during the
Great Recession and the 2001 Recession.
    Second, we explore disparities in COVID-19 job losses across occupations and industries. We
use O*NET data to develop indices of the extent to which each occupation allows remote work
and requires face-to-face interaction. Both Dingel and Neiman (2020) and Mongey and Weinberg
(2020) use measures in O*NET to define high work-from-home occupations. Leibovici et al.
(2020) takes a similar approach to measure occupations with high interpersonal contact. We show
larger declines in employment in April and in May 2020 in occupations requiring more face-to-
face interactions. Workers in jobs that could be performed remotely were less likely to experience
recent unemployment, although the relationship is weaker in May relative to April. We further
classify jobs as essential based on the “Guidance on the essential critical infrastructure workforce”
issued by The Department of Homeland Security (2020) using the interpretation in Blau et al.
(2020). We show that workers in essential jobs are less likely to lose a job between February and
April and are also less likely to have been absent from work; both these phenomena are present in
May, but to a lower degree. We provide evidence that socio-demographic groups sort themselves


                                                  2
in occupations that vary widely in their reliance on remote work and face-to-face activities. Then,
we show how much of the differences in labor market outcomes can be explained by such sorting
of sub-populations.
    Third, exploiting the differences in COVID-19 mortality rates by gender and age groups, we
provide some preliminary evidence about the labor supply effects during the epidemic. In fact,
changes in aggregate employment may reflect demand or supply shocks, but changes among high-
risk workers (e.g. older workers and men) in high-exposure industries are more likely to reflect
supply side factors. In April, we find little indication of a relative reduction of high-risk workers’
employment in high-exposure industries, suggesting that labor supply factors have played a rela-
tively small role in the employment response so far. However, in May, we show stronger evidence
that high-risk workers are significantly less likely to be recently unemployed, and, with lower mag-
nitudes, more likely to be absent from work. To assess the importance of caring for dependents
as a factor in labor supply, we estimate changes in employment for families with children, and for
women in particular. We find that women are more likely to become unemployed between Febru-
ary and April, and between February and May, and that women with young children experience
substantially higher rates of absence from work, a concerning result given widespread closures of
schools and childcare. Moreover, single parents, who are disproportionately female, are particu-
larly likely to have lost jobs. Similarly, Alon et al. (2020) find that the social-distancing policies
have a larger effect on women than men, unlike in a “regular” recession. They suggest that the
impact of the epidemic on working mothers could be persistent.
    Our fourth contribution is to decompose the gross differences in job losses across key demo-
graphic and social groups using an Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition. This analysis decomposes the
difference in employment losses between two demographic groups into an unexplained component
and components that are due to the observable characteristics of their occupations and their human
capital characteristics. A significant share of differences in employment loss across demographic
groups is explained by differences in pre-epidemic sorting across occupations. However, in most
of our models, a non-negligible share of the difference in outcomes for the subgroups remains un-
explained by either occupation sorting or other observable traits. These results are consistent with
previous studies that find that social stratification and sorting mediate in labor outcomes (Busch
2020).
    In addition to these substantive contributions, we also provide some analysis of recent concerns
about anomalies in recent CPS data that are related to the classification of work absences vs un-
employed workers U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020c). Our analysis shows that the treatment
of work absences does have important implications for the overall assessment of the early labor
market effects of the COVID-19 epidemic.


                                                  3
2    Related Research
The COVID-19 epidemic and the social distancing responses to it have already had profound ef-
fects in the United States. Between February and April 2020, the US witnessed a drastic reduction
in the size and scope of economic activity. Large sectors of the economy – transportation, hos-
pitality, and tourism – essentially shut down their normal operations during this time. During
the shutdown phase, state governments implemented a range of social distancing mandates(Gupta
et al. 2020; Goolsbee and Syverson 2020; Bartik et al. 2020; Coibion et al. 2020). In May, both
the public and private sectors began to take steps to reopen some economic activities.
     The literature on labor market impacts of the epidemics is evolving rapidly. Using cell phone
data on mobility and interaction patterns, Gupta et al. (2020) document a massive, nationwide
decline in multiple measures of mobility outside the home. Even states that had not adopted re-
strictive policies experienced large reductions in mobility. However, Gupta et al. (2020) also find
evidence that early and information-focused state policies did lead to larger reductions in mobility.
These reductions in time outside the house suggest that many people are experiencing work dis-
ruptions, and that those who can work remotely may be more able to maintain employment during
the crisis. Alon et al. (2020) find that the social-distancing policies have a larger effect on women
than men, unlike in a “regular” recession. They suggest that the impact of the epidemic on working
mothers could be persistent.
     Lozano-Rojas et al. (2020) show that the historically unprecedented increase in initial unem-
ployment claims in March 2020 was largely across-the-board, occurring in all states regardless of
local epidemiological conditions or policy responses. Similarly, Kahn et al. (2020) show a large
drop in job vacancy postings – an indicator of labor demand – in the second half of March, so
that by early April, there were 30% fewer job postings than at the beginning of the year. These
large declines happened across states, regardless of state policies or infection rates. Adams-Prassl
et al. (2020) and Dasgupta and Murali (2020) study disparities in labor market impacts in other
countries.
     There is mounting evidence that layoff statistics may severely underestimate the extent of la-
bor market adjustments. Using data from an early-April household survey, Coibion et al. (2020)
estimate that unemployment greatly exceeds unemployment insurance claims. There is a growing
literature that – like the present paper – uses O*NET occupational characteristics to capture the
type of work conducted by each occupation and further investigate the employment variation at-
tributed to occupational traits. Both Dingel and Neiman (2020) and Mongey and Weinberg (2020)
use measures in O*NET to define high work-from-home occupations. Leibovici et al. (2020) takes
a similar approach to measure occupations with high interpersonal contact.



                                                 4
    However, given the nature of this health crisis, it is expected that the population of workers was
differentially affected by the response policies that followed, and it is likely that these difference
exacerbate the already deep social inequality in the US.
    A large literature illustrates how existing patterns of social stratification shape socio-economic
outcomes and the effects of large events and crises. Dudel and Myrskylä (2017); Cheng et al.
(2019) and Killewald and Zhuo (2019) illustrate disparities in occupational wage gaps and other
labor market outcomes on the basis of age, gender, and ethnicity both in the US and abroad.
Dudel and Myrskylä (2017) show that the Great Recession shortened the life expectancy for senior
workers specially among white men. Zissimopoulos and Karoly (2010) examine the short- and
longer-term effects of Hurricane Katrina on labor market outcomes by subgroup of evacuees. Be-
yond labor market outcomes, large economic and social events also influence fertility (Grossman
and Slusky 2019; Seltzer 2019), marriage (Schneider and Hastings 2015), migration (Sastry and
Gregory 2014) and children’s well-being (Cools et al. 2017; Schenck-Fontaine and Panico 2019).
    In a study that is closely related to ours, Adams-Prassl et al. (2020) document unequal impacts
of the COVID-19 pandemic on labor market outcomes in the US, UK and Germany. They suggest
that countries – like Germany – which have more flexible unemployment insurance systems that
allow workers to temporarily reduce worker hours without severing employment relationships, may
weather the crisis better than countries with more conventional unemployment insurance systems.
They also find that within countries, workers in less remote-workable occupations, less educated
workers, and women are more affected by the crisis. Looking at the current crisis, Dasgupta and
Murali (2020) study the disparities of job loss by high and low skilled workers in a developing
economy. We explicitly contrast the pattern of labor impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic by social
strata to other recent recessions.
    Given the peculiarities of the COVID-19 economic crises, that derive from how the virus
spreads, what measures can slow down the spread, and how quickly the crisis came about, it is
necessary to investigate which population strata are particularly affected, and to what extent this
is due to their occupational sorting. Understanding the most vulnerable workers’ subgroups dur-
ing the COVID-19 epidemic is paramount for a speedy and permanent recovery. In fact, there is
substantial evidence about the long-lasting effects of economic crises can have on those who expe-
rience it and are directly affected. Hetschko et al. (2019) studies how involuntary unemployment
affects negatively well-being after retirement using data German data. Considering the exposure
of senior cohorts, Dudel and Myrskylä (2017) analyze how the Great Recession affected older
workers and found that the working-life expectancy decreased and more so for old men. Seltzer
(2019) looked at the Great Recession long lasting effects on fertility, despite the amelioration of
the conventional economic indicators. Designing policies that are targeted at the subgroups mostly


                                                  5
hit by the COVID-19 crisis will contribute to soften scarring effects that they would inevitably
experience.


3       Data

3.1     Current Population Survey
Our main analysis uses data from the Basic Monthly CPS from February, April and May 2020.
These surveys use a reference week that includes the 12th of the month (U.S. Census Bureau
2019). To focus on job losses related to the epidemic, we use a measure of recent unemployment
that defines a worker as recently unemployed if he/she is coded as being unemployed in the focal
week of April 2020, and reports having been unemployed for at most 10 weeks. For May 2020,
recently unemployed workers are individuals who claim to be unemployed and have been so for
at most 14 weeks. When creating this variable, we exclude individuals who list themselves as
currently out of the labor force. Focusing on recent unemployment allows us to study the rate
of recent job losses using only the April 2020 CPS cross section.1 Appendix Figure 8.2 shows
that the incidence of recent unemployment across demographic groups is very similar to month-
over-month changes from February to April and from February to May in the employment-to-
population ratio. The left graphs of both Panels of Appendix Figure 8.2 show the average change
in employment rates from February 2020 to April 2020 (Panel A) and to May 2020 (Panel B) by
demographic sub-population. The right graphs show the fraction of labor force participants who
became unemployed recently as of the April CPS (Panel A) and May CPS (Panel B) reference
weeks. The figure shows that changes in employment and recent unemployment rates convey
similar information. Both employment outcomes are worse for younger workers, less educated
workers, Hispanics, females, and workers with their own children in the household. Given the
similarity between the two measures, we focus on recent unemployment.
    The CPS defines as “absent from job” all workers who were “temporarily absent from their
regular jobs because of illness, vacation, bad weather, labor dispute, or various personal reasons,
whether or not they were paid for the time off” (U.S. Census Bureau 2019). During the epidemic,
these employed-but-absent workers deserve particular attention for a few reasons. First, some
employers released workers intending to rehire them (Bogage 2020; Borden 2020). Second, some
workers may have requested leave from their schedule to provide dependent care or to care for a
sick household member. Third, there was a misclassification problem during the data collection
    1
    During April, 12.1% of those aged 21 and above in the labor force reported being unemployed at the time and
had lost their job sometime in the last 10 weeks. During May, 0.10% of the workers were recently unemployed (i.e.
unemployed for at most 14 weeks). In contrast, in February only 2.1% did so.


                                                       6
of the March and April 2020 CPS. The BLS instructed surveyors to code those out of work due
to the epidemic as recently laid off or unemployed, but U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020c),
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020b) and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020a) explain that
surveyors appeared to code at least some of them in the employed-but-absent category. These
reasons contribute to a massive increase in the share of workers coded as employed-but-absent
from work between February and April as well as May.2 Therefore, we performed most of our
analysis separately on measures of recent unemployment and employed-but-absent; see Appendix
9.3 and 9.4.


3.2    O*Net
We use the 2019 Occupational Information Network (O*Net) Work Context module, which reports
summary measures of the tasks used in 968 (2010 SOC) occupations (O*NET National Center for
O*NET Development 2020). The data are gathered through surveys asking workers how often
they perform particular tasks, and about the importance of different activities in their jobs. Some
of the questions relate to the need for face-to-face interaction with clients, customers, and co-
workers. Other questions assess how easily work could be done remotely (i.e. from a worker’s
home). These measures are typically provided on a 1-5 scale, where 1 indicates that a task is
performed rarely or is not important to the job, and 5 indicates that the task is performed regularly
or is important to the job. To measure the extent to which an occupation involves tasks that may
become riskier or more valuable during the COVID-19 epidemic, we developed indices for Face-
to-Face interactions and the potential for Remote Work. Appendix Table 9.1 presents the specific
O*Net questions used in each index. The value of each index for an occupation is a simple average
of O*Net questions listed in the table. We standardized the indices to have a mean of zero and a
standard deviation of one in our sample.
    The O*Net data classifies occupations using SOC codes and the CPS data classifies occupation
codes using Census Occupation codes. We cross-walked the two data sets to link the O*Net Face-
to-Face and Remote Work indices with the CPS microdata. The April CPS contains workers from
526 unique Census Occupations. We were able to link the index variables to 524 occupation codes,
leaving only 9 workers with missing indexes.3
   2
     In our sample, the employed-but-absent share group rose by almost 150% from February to April, 2020, and by
82% from February to May, 2020.
   3
     We were not able to link an O*Net Face-to-Face or Remote Work index to workers in Census Occupation Codes
1240 (Miscellaneous mathematical science occupations) and 9840 (Armed Forces).




                                                       7
3.3    Homeland Security Data on Essential Work
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) issued guidance about critical infrastructure
workers during the COVID-19 epidemic.4 The DHS guidance outlines 14 categories that are
defined as essential critical infrastructure sectors. We follow Blau et al. (2020)’s definition of
essential industries, which matches the text descriptions to the NAICS 2017 four-digit industry
classification from the U.S. Census Bureau,5 and to the CPS industry classification system. From
the 287 industry categories at the four-digit level, 194 are identified as essential in 17 out of 20
NAICS sectors. Appendix Table 9.2 gives an abbreviated list of essential industries to clarify the
classification scheme.


3.4    COVID-19 Exposure
To explore disparities in employment outcomes across states facing different epidemiological con-
ditions, we linked CPS data to the average cumulative number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in
a state during the focal week of the April and May CPS. We retrieve information on COVID-19
cases from The New York Times (2020).6 We control for a state’s population size using state level
Census population estimates in our regression analyses.


3.5    COVID-19 Mortality Risk
We constructed a COVID-19 mortality risk index by age and gender using data on case-mortality
rates released by CDC China and based on deaths in Mainland China as of February 11, 2020
(CCDC 2020). We applied the case-fatality rates to the U.S. workers in our sample by transforming
the relative mortality rates by age and gender.7 Our goal is to proxy for people’s COVID-19
mortality expectations as of the second week of April and as of the second week of May. While
mortality rates likely differ between the U.S. and China, these data are the best available at this
time, and age and gender based mortality rates are likely primary factors in forming expectations.
   4
     The list of critical infrastructure jobs is available at: https://www.cisa.gov/
   5
     North American Industry Classification System. Available at https://www.census.gov/
   6
     Last consulted on Jun 28, 2020.
   7
     We use Bayes’ theorem to infer mortality rates by age and gender from CCDC (2020). Specifically, we calculated:

                                             P r(Age|Death) · P r(Gender|Death) · P r(Death)
                P r(Death|Gender, Age) =
                                                         P r(Gender) · P r(Age)

Where: Gender = {F emale, M ale} and Age = {20 − 29, ..., 70 − 79, 80+}. We normalize the variable to have
mean of one and standard deviation of zero on the entire CPS sample.




                                                         8
4    Employment Disruptions in Three Recessions
Figure 1 shows the change in employment for the COVID-19 Recession compared with the peak-
to-trough change in employment for the entire 2001 Recession (March 2001 to November 2001)
and the entire Great Recession (December 2007 to June 2009). For COVID-19, we focused on two
time periods that cover the initial “closing” phase of the pandemic (i.e. from February to April)
and also a longer period that includes the ensuing “reopening” phase (i.e. from February to May).
All estimates use CPS sampling weights and we limit the sample to CPS respondents who are at
least 21 years old during the survey. When constructing the peak-to-trough change in employment
rates for the 2001 Recession and the Great Recession, we adjust for seasonality by removing month
fixed effects estimated from regressions of employment on month of year fixed effects using the
Basic Monthly CPS data from January 2015 to December 2019.
    By looking at the light grey lines on the figure, we see that the employment losses from Febru-
ary to April in the COVID-19 epidemic dwarf the declines for the other two recessions, which
span nine and nineteen months respectively. Moreover, this remains true in May even after the re-
opening, during which employment rebounded substantially. The size and unprecedented speed of
the COVID-19 recession are reinforced in Appendix Figure 8.1, which shows seasonally-adjusted
non-farm employment from March 2000 and May 2020. The bars in Figure 1 show the change
in the employment rate for sub-populations defined by gender, presence of own children in the
household, race, ethnicity, age group, and education achievement. Almost no group is spared
from employment loss during any of the three recessions. However, the pattern of employment
disruption is noticeably different in the early months of the COVID-19 recession.
    Young (ages 21-24) and Hispanic workers have fared the worst so far. After the first two months
of the COVID-19 epidemic, the fall in employment among young workers is almost 4.5 times larger
than the employment losses experienced by young workers across the entire Great Recession. The
change in employment rate for Hispanics was over 3.6 times larger between February and April
2020 than it was during the 19 months of the Great Recession. Our conjecture is that these two
groups disproportionately work in industries that are particularly hit by social distancing measures,
such as food service and construction. Women and respondents with own children in the household
also experience larger employment declines than their counterparts without children. This could
reflect labor supply constraints given school and daycare closures. During the COVID-19 outbreak,
employment rates fell by 14 percentage points among Black workers and by 12 percentage points
among White workers. A similar pattern arose during the 2001 Recession, but not during the Great
Recession.
    There is strong evidence of skill polarization effects during the current recession: high school



                                                 9
dropouts and college graduates have experienced substantially smaller employment declines com-
pared to the intermediate education groups. As we show below, highly-educated workers have
better options to work remotely, without in-person interactions. In contrast, less educated workers
are more likely to be in essential positions. While polarization is consistent with recent trends in
the labor market, this kind of pattern was not a feature of the two previous recessions (Autor et al.
2006).
     Comparing our results for the decrease in employment between February and April to those
between February and May indicates that there were gains in employment between April and
May as states ended the lock downs and began re-opening. The recovery in employment that the
groups experienced between April and May were broadly proportional to the employment losses
that occurred between February and April, so that the most hit subgroups remain such throughout
May as well. This suggests that the distributional incidence of job loss and recovery are largely
symmetric. There is, however, one notable exception. The employment of Blacks did not recover
in May as much as would have been expected given the decline in employment in April, meaning
that Blacks seem to have been re-employed relatively less in May than the other demographic
categories.
     In Figure 2, we report the same outcome as in Figure 1, employment change, by family struc-
ture. The sub-populations we consider are single individuals, married individuals, single parents,
parents in two-parent households, single parents of a young child (up to 13 years old), and married
parents of a young child (up to 13 years old). We coded as single all the respondents who claim
to be in any category that is not “married with a spouse present in the household”. Specifically,
it includes respondents who are married with an absent spouse, widowed, divorced separated, or
never married. “Married” workers responded to be married with a present spouse. We coded as
parents all those respondents who reported having own children below 18 living in their household.
We further divided this category to distinguish parents of young children (up to 13 years old).
     Figure 2 shows that single workers experienced a larger decrease in employment during the epi-
demic than married ones, regardless of whether we compare April to February or May to February.
Moreover, parents of own children living in the household fared worse than workers without de-
pendents below 18 years old (i.e. own children). Single parents, whether of younger children or
not, experienced the largest decrease in employment. Given that, in our sample for 2020, about
72% of the single parent category is female, it seems safe to say that single mothers represent
the family category, among those we considered, that experienced the most negative employment
shock during the epidemic. Throughout these estimates, the age of the child does not seem to
strongly impact the change in employment during these months. Thus, single parents and single
parents of young children appear roughly equally disadvantaged, as are married parents regardless


                                                 10
of child age. The bar charts shown in this section highlight Hispanics, young workers (between 21
and 24 years old), and single parents to be the most vulnerable workers as a result of the epidemic,
and those most in need of the policy protection.


5    Job Tasks and Recent Unemployment
In this section of the paper, we conduct descriptive and regression analyses to examine how recent
unemployment rates depend on characteristics of the job (remote work compatibility, and face-to-
face interaction), essential work designations, worker level COVID-19 risk, human capital, and
family structure. We focus on a binary measure of recent unemployment, which is an indicator
variable set to one if a person is unemployed and became unemployed within the past 10 weeks,
as of the April CPS and within the past 14 weeks, as of the May CPS. Ignoring re-employment,
this 10/14-week rate should capture the same employment disruptions as the overall change in
employment rates between February and April, and February and May. Panel A of Appendix
Figure 8.2 compares the recent unemployment rate in April 2020 with the February to April change
in employment rates by sub-population, whereas Panel B shows the comparison for the months of
February and May. The results in the figure confirm that the cross-sectional recent unemployment
rates have nearly the same pattern across groups as the February-April employment rate change,
and that this phenomenon remains unaltered during May.
    Figure 3 shows the mean of the Remote Work and Face-to-Face indices across sub-populations
in the February 2020 CPS. The graph shows how sub-populations were sorted into jobs with differ-
ent remote work and face-to-face interaction attributes before the epidemic. The remote work index
varies more across sub-populations than the face-to-face index. Women tend to work in jobs that
both allow more remote work and involve more face-to-face activities than men. Sharp differences
arise by ethnicity, with Hispanics disproportionately working in jobs that largely cannot be con-
ducted remotely. Younger workers (age 21-24) are in jobs with fewer remote work prospects and
in jobs that involve more face-to-face interaction, although the differentials are not very large. The
most dramatic differences in occupational sorting arise across the four education groups. Workers
with less than a college degree are in occupations with poor opportunities for remote work, and
this is particularly true among high school dropouts.
    Figure 4 shows the association between the remote work and face-to-face scores in an occu-
pation and the rate of recent unemployment in that occupation in the April CPS. Figure 5, on the
other hand, presents the results when looking at the cross-section in the May CPS. The diameter
of the bubbles is proportional to the number of workers in that occupation. There are a total of 524
occupations in our sample and in April the occupation-specific recent unemployment rates range


                                                 11
from 0% to over 30%. To improve readability, 52 occupations with recent unemployment rates
of more than 36.17% (the 90th percentile of the distribution) are excluded from the figure but not
from the regression below. For May, we also deleted occupations with extreme values of recent
unemployment rates. By doing this, we drop 53 occupations with recent unemployment greater
than 13.31%. The left panel in Figure 4 shows that the recent unemployment rate tends to be
much lower in occupations with higher scores on the remote work index, suggesting that the abil-
ity to work remotely has helped protect employment during the early months of the epidemic. The
second panel shows that recent unemployment rates are higher in occupations that involve more
face-to-face tasks. In other words, the more heavily the occupation relies on face-to-face activities,
the more likely its workers are to become unemployed as a result of the COVID-19 epidemic.
     In May, as presented in Figure 5, we see that the relationship is attenuated and that the fitted
lines have smaller slopes. While earlier on (i.e. April), recent unemployment was higher for
occupations with lower remote work and higher face-to-face indices, during May this difference is
less pronounced. This points to a deceleration of recent unemployment rates on those occupations
most hardly hit at the beginning of the epidemics. Job tasks are not the only factors that may
explain recent job losses. Essential work designations may help protect certain types of jobs, and
school closures and reduced access to child care may have disrupted employment in households
with children. Additionally, worker mortality risk from COVID-19 may have reduced labor supply
among high-risk groups. To examine these possibilities in more detail, we fit OLS regressions of
recent unemployment on a collection of worker and job characteristics:



       yijk = F acej β1 + Remotej β2 + Essentialk β3                                                        (1)
            + M ortalityi β4 + F emalei β5 + Childi β6 + (Childi × F emalei )β7 + C19s β8
            + Xi δ + ij

In the model, yij is an indicator set to 1 if person i from occupation j is recently unemployed.8
F acej and Remotej are the indices for face-to-face work and remote work. Essentialj is a dummy
variable equal to one for people employed in an industry considered essential by DHS. We define
an index of a person’s COVID-19 mortality risk, denoted M ortalityi . F emalei indicates that the
person is female, Childi is an indicator set to 1 if person i has a child under age 6 in the household,
and C19s is a measure of the log number of confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the state. Xi is a
vector of covariates, including a quadratic in age, indicators for race/ethnicity, and indicators for
   8
    We also fit models where the dependent variable indicates the worker reports being employed, but absent from
work during the CPS reference week, and we report results in Tables 9.3 and 9.4



                                                      12
levels of education. In some specifications, we include interaction terms between mortality risk
and job task indices, state fixed effects, and occupation code fixed effects.
    We present the estimated coefficients in Tables 1 and 2 using April and May data respec-
tively. Column (1) shows estimates from models that do not adjust for mortality risk or number of
COVID-19 cases in the state, but do control for occupation and individual characteristics. Column
(2) includes the mortality risk variable and logged state COVID cases. Column (3) accounts for the
interactions between mortality risk and job task indices, and column (4) adds interactions between
the state’s COVID rate and job characteristics. Column (5) replaces the job task indices with occu-
pation and industry fixed effects to account for any additional time-invariant job characteristics, as
well as state fixed effects to control for additional local time-invariant conditions. In the appendix,
we include the estimated coefficients for the same family of models using “employed but absent
from work” as a dependent variable (Tables 9.3 and 9.4).
    The results suggest that, even after adjusting for other covariates, people working in jobs with
more potential for remote work are less likely to be recently unemployed, confirming what we
presented above in Figure 4. The estimated coefficient on remote work in Column 1 implies that
working in a job that scores one standard deviation above the mean on remote work reduces the
risk of recent job loss by about 5.8 percentage points. The overall recent unemployment rate
during the April sample was 13.1 percent. This implies that working in a job that scored one
standard deviation above the average remote work score reduces the risk of recent unemployment
rate by 44 percent. On the other hand, jobs where face-to-face interactions are important have
higher recent unemployment rates. After adjusting for other factors, the model in column (1)
implies that recent unemployment rates are 1.6 percentage points higher for people working in jobs
that score 1 standard deviation above the mean on the face-to-face index. A 1 standard deviation
increase in the face-to-face index is associated with a 12 percent increase in recent unemployment
rates. The coefficient on “Essential” indicates that working in an essential industry substantially
reduces the probability of recent unemployment. In particular, working in an industry classified
as essential reduces recent unemployment rates by 8.9 percentage points, which is a 68 percent
decrease relative to the mean. These results are quite stable across specifications, although the
magnitude and precision naturally change when adding interactions between state level COVID-
19 cases and these characteristics (Model 4).
    When looking at the May CPS, the coefficient for the remote index drops to 4.6 percentage
points (from from 5.8 in April), and the coefficient for Essential industry drops to 7.3 percentage
points. In contrast, the coefficient for the Face-to-Face index, remains at the same level as in
April. This associations remain significant for the same models with the exception of when we add
interactions with the number of cases by state. May data shows an attenuated continuation of what


                                                  13
the labor market experienced during April. This is due to the business reopening policies that most
states implemented during May.
     The regressions also suggest that recent unemployment rates vary substantially across demo-
graphic groups and with human capital. Recent unemployment rates are about 3 percentage points
higher for women both in April and May, after adjusting for other covariates. The coefficient
on the interaction term between female and children under age 6 is small and not statistically
significant, suggesting that child care responsibilities have not explained much gender specific em-
ployment disruption so far. However, Appendix Table 9.3 shows that when the dependent variable
is “employed but absent”, the interaction between female and children under age 6 is large and sta-
tistically significant. Women with young children are 3.9 percentage points more likely to report
being employed but absent than men with young children during April. During May, women with
young children are still 3.6 percentage points more likely to fall into this category than their male
counterparts. These results suggest that child care and family responsibility could play an impor-
tant role in job losses downstream, if work absence is a leading indicator of future unemployment.
Moreover, they show that May reopenings were not crucial in helping women with young children
go back to work.
     We used a quadratic function to approximate the age profile of recent unemployment rates.
Taken literally, the coefficients from column (1) suggest that recent unemployment rates are quite
high for younger workers and decline with age up to around age 49 in April and 50 in May. Then
recent unemployment rates begin to rise again for older workers. Recent unemployment is lower
among college educated workers: graduate degree holders are about 8 percentage points less likely
to have become unemployed in the 10 weeks leading up to the April CPS, and college graduates
are about 5 percentage points less likely to be recently unemployed. This relationship remains at
the same level during May, when using a limit of 14 weeks for the unemployment spell.
     Employment disruptions do seem to vary across geographic areas. Recent unemployment rates
are about 3.3 percentage points lower among workers living in metropolitan areas, and 3.6 during
May. The tables also include the level of positive COVID-19 cases in a state during the week of
the CPS in April and interactions between COVID-19 cases and the job indices. We find that the
recent unemployment rate falls by about 1.5 percentage points during April, and 1.1 percentage
points during May, for each 1 percent increase in the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases in the
state during the same week in April.
     The results suggest that our proxy for COVID-19 mortality risk is not clearly related to job
loss during April. The coefficient on mortality risk is only statistically significant in one out of
the four specifications where it is included during April. However, during May, we find an inverse
relationship that is significant across all specifications. According to column (2) in Table 2, a one


                                                 14
standard deviation higher mortality risk is associated with 2.5 percentage points decrease in the
recent unemployment rate in May. The interactions of our mortality risk measure with occupation
indices are mostly insignificant both in April and in May, the only exception being the interaction
between risk and remote work: in jobs that can be performed remotely, higher mortality risk seems
associated with a slightly higher job loss rate in some specifications during both April and May.
    One plausible interpretation of this result is the need to keep employer provided health insur-
ance by those mostly at risk, considering that losing that protection in the middle of a pandemic
might prove more calamitous for those affected. In contrast, when looking at the Absent from
Work rate during May in Appendix Table 9.4, the evolution of the coefficients goes on the op-
posite direction to the one just described for recent unemployment, and the higher the mortality
risk, the higher the Absent from Work rate, which could be the result of at risk workers calling off
from work, either due to illness, or due to fear of contracting the disease. Still, we urge caution
in interpreting these coefficients considering that our index could be an imperfect measure of the
way people interpret their own mortality risk, as it is based only on the age and sex of COVID-19
related casualties in China.


6    Decomposing Group Differences in Recent Unemployment
Recent unemployment rates in April varied substantially across sub-populations. Some of these
differences may reflect pre-epidemic sorting across occupations and industries, differences in hu-
man capital, and differences in demographic characteristics. However, it is also possible that the
COVID-19 epidemic is affecting sub-populations differently. To shed light on these gaps, we used
Oaxaca-Blinder models to decompose recent unemployment gaps into the share explained by pre-
epidemic observable covariates, and an unexplained share which reflects differences across groups
in how recent job loss is associated with those covariates.
    Figure 6 summarizes the decomposition of the most significant gaps in our data. They appear
ordered from smallest (left) to largest (right) for: white versus Black, high school graduate versus
high school drop out, female versus male, non-Hispanic versus Hispanic, college graduate versus
high school graduate, and older versus younger workers. Figure 7 shows the same decompositions,
but applied to the May data for recent unemployment. The full results of the decompositions appear
in Appendix Tables 9.5 and 9.7.
    For each gap, we estimate three nested decomposition models. Each model includes basic de-
mographic characteristics (age, gender, race, ethnicity, education, and presence of young children)
and state controls. The three models are differentiated by how much detail we include regarding
job characteristics. Model A includes the Face-to-Face, Remote Work, and Essential Job indices.


                                                15
Model B adds a full set of 524 occupation dummies which, of course, absorb the variation from
the Face-to-Face and Remote Work indices.9 Finally, Model C adds a full set of 261 industry
dummies, which absorb the variation from the Essential index.
    Focusing first on Model A for the April data, the explanatory contributions of occupational
task-based sorting and essential industry sorting push in different directions across groups. For ex-
ample, the non-Hispanic/Hispanic gap is quite large at -4.4 percentage points, relative to a baseline
recent unemployment rate of 12.1 percent. About 53.3 percent of the raw gap arises because His-
panic workers are overrepresented in jobs with little opportunity for remote work. However, these
relative losses are partially offset by the fact the Hispanic workers are overrepresented in essential
jobs, accounting for -11.7 percent of the raw gap. This pattern is similar for the gap between Black
and white workers.
    The gender gap is different. Continuing with the April data, most of the gender gap is unex-
plained, and in fact sorting on the basis of remote work predicts a smaller gap than actually appears
in the data. Moving to Models B and C, we see that sorting by occupation and industry can explain
a sizeable portion of the gender, race, and ethnic gaps in recent unemployment. However, there
remain substantial unexplained differences in employment losses across groups even in these more
detailed decompositions.
    The largest gaps we observe are between college graduates and high-school graduates, and
between older versus younger workers. In Model C, we observe that a majority of both raw gaps
can be attributed to differences in the types of jobs workers held when the epidemic started. The
less detailed Model A suggests that a large portion of that gap was associated with differences in
capacity for remote work, and partially offset by employment in essential industries.
    All of the patterns we observe are consistent from April to May except one: the gap in recent
unemployment between Black and white workers. In May, the raw gap is -0.031 percentage points;
nearly double the -0.016 gap from April. Curiously, all of the growth in the gap is from sources
that are not explained by the individual or job characteristics included in the model. Overall,
recent unemployment rates fell in May relative to April (as they did for headline unemployment).
Consistent with this broad trend, recent unemployment also fell for white workers. However,
recent unemployment rates increased slightly for Black workers. Our decomposition indicates
that whatever prevented recent unemployment rates from falling as quickly for Black workers
was unrelated to any of the individual or job characteristics included in our model. One possible
   9
    For Model B, Table 9.6 in the Appendix reports the share of variation explained by sorting across five top-level
categories in the Census occupational classification system: “Management, Business, Science, and Arts”, “Service”,
“Sales and Office”, “Natural Resources, Construction, and Maintenance”, “Production, Transportation, and Material
Moving”. A sixth category, “Military Specific Operations”, does not appear because the CPS is a survey of the civilian
non-institutional population.



                                                         16
explanation is that, given the same characteristics, white workers are more likely to be re-employed
than Black workers in a recovery. These patterns could also arise from changes in how the CPS
classifies workers as unemployed relative to employed but absent across months.
    Across the board, differential sorting into occupations and industries are highly relevant in ex-
plaining gaps in recent unemployment. This finding echoes recent work byAthreya et al. (2020),
who find that the service sectors are most vulnerable to social-distancing. Nevertheless, the precise
sources of employment losses vary across groups in ways that are not neatly summarized by differ-
ential exposure to particular types of tasks or sectors. Finally, we note that demographic controls
do not explain a large part of any of the gaps, suggesting a limited role for labor supply effects in
explaining recent job losses.


7    Conclusion
After only a few months, the COVID-19 job losses are larger than the total multi-year effect of the
Great Recession. Moreover, there are large inequities in the job loss experiences across different
demographic groups. The April and May CPS offer the first complete window into the employment
disruptions produced by the COVID-19 epidemic. The April data provide detailed information
about the distribution of job losses during the early part of the epidemic, and the May data give us
some insights into the effect of work reopenings on job market patterns.
    We find substantial differences in employment across jobs. For example, we find that, in April,
recent unemployment rates are about 46% lower among workers in jobs that are more compatible
with remote work. In contrast, workers in jobs that require more face-to-face contact are at higher
risk of recent unemployment. A significant share of differences in employment loss across key
racial, ethnic, age, and education sub-populations can be explained by differences in pre-epidemic
sorting across occupations. However, in almost all cases, a large share of the gaps in job losses
between social strata cannot be explained by either occupation sorting or other observable traits.
There are at least three possible sources for the unexplained share. First, workers may have differ-
ent labor supply responses to the epidemic. Second, variation in exposure to labor demand shocks
may not be fully reflected in occupational or demographics differences. Finally, workers may face
disparate treatment when their employers are deciding whom to lay off. The available data do not
allow us to distinguish between these three channels.
    An important implication of these impacts by job characteristic is the difference between em-
ployment rates and COVID-19 exposure. Thus, the employment of higher educated workers ap-
pears more secure due to the possibility of remote work in their jobs. While the least educated
workers have also experienced less recent unemployment, largely due to their concentration in es-


                                                 17
sential industries, these workers likely face greater exposure to COVID-19 itself. Thus, the smaller
reduction in employment for both groups potentially masks other disparities. New government
policies or private sector innovations that increase the viability of remote work for a larger share
of the economy could be extremely valuable.
    The early labor market evidence from the CPS suggests that many workers are separating from
their employers, with the potential for long-term scarring effects known to befall displaced workers
during recessions. Finding and forming productive employment matches is costly. Furthermore,
workers receive health care and other benefits through employers. Assuming economic conditions
return to their pre-epidemic state, policymakers are right to help workers maintain jobs and pre-
serve links to their employers. On the other hand, if economic conditions do not return to normal
rapidly, then the reallocation of workers into different types of jobs may also be important.
    The analysis of May CPS data show an uptick in employment that likely derives from the
business reopenings implemented in most states during that month. Although rates of recent un-
employment and absence from work are still very high in the May CPS data, reopening policies
have reduced the negative impact of the epidemic on the labor market. The improvements in labor
market outcomes are consistent with cell signal data, which show a rise in physical mobility start-
ing in mid-April and continuing through May (Nguyen et al. 2020). Of course, it is unclear whether
these returns to normalcy can be sustained in the face of more recent increases in COVID-19 cases
and hospitalizations.
    In the meantime, our results make clear that there are large disparities in the current labor
market crisis, and they suggest a role for public policy that could target solutions on this basis.
Although women with young children do not have statistically larger increases in recent unem-
ployment compared to men with young children, despite the disruptions in school and child care,
their higher rate of “employed but absent” is worrying and could indicate larger losses in future
employment. Moreover, single parents, who are overwhelmingly women, experienced a larger de-
crease in employment between February and either April or May than their married counterparts.
Efforts to support new child care options may be important in the next phase of the epidemic. In
May, we found some evidence of racial disparities in the decline in recent unemployment. For ex-
ample, Black workers seem to have experienced a smaller decline in recent unemployment during
the reopening phase. The reasons for this appear to be unrelated to any of the individual or job
characteristics we considered.
    Our work also hints at deeper structural damage to the economy. Previous research documents
large scarring effects of graduating from high school and college during a recession, and the longer
term effects of early career setbacks may be even larger than the near term effects (Rothstein 2019).
Our work shows that recent unemployment rates are very high among the youngest workers overall


                                                 18
and in comparison to earlier recessions. Efforts to support early career workers as well as older
displaced workers may need to be a particular target of policy in the near future.




                                               19
References
Adams-Prassl, A., Boneva, T., Golin, M., and Rauh, C. (2020). Inequality in the impact of the
  coronavirus shock: New survey evidence for the uk. Cambridge-INET Working Paper Series,
  (2020/09).

Alon, T. M., Doepke, M., Olmstead-Rumsey, J., and Tertilt, M. (2020). The impact of covid-19 on
  gender equality. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Athreya, K., Mather, R., Mustre-del Río, J., and Sánchez, J. M. (2020). Covid-19 and households’
  financial distress part 1: Employment vulnerability and (financial) pre-existing conditions. Tech-
  nical report, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.

Autor, D. H., Katz, L. F., and Kearney, M. S. (2006). The polarization of the us labor market. The
  American economic review, 96(2):189–194.

Bartik, W. A., Bertrand, M., Zo, C. B., Glaeser, L. E., Luca, M., and Stanton, T. C. (2020). How
  are small businesses adjusting to covid-19? early evidence from a survey. National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Blau, F. D., Koebe, J., and Meyerhofer, P. A. (2020). Essential and frontline workers in the covid-
  19 crisis. Econofact.

Bogage, J. (2020). Coronavirus unemployment guide: What to do if you get laid off or furloughed.
  The Washington Post.

Borden, T. (2020). The coronavirus outbreak has triggered unprecedented mass layoffs and fur-
  loughs. Business Insider.

Busch, F. (2020). Gender segregation, occupational sorting, and growth of wage disparities be-
  tween women. Demography, pages 1–26.

CCDC (2020). The epidemiological characteristics of an outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus
 diseases (covid-19)—china, 2020. China CDC Weekly, 2(8):113–122.

Cheng, S., Tamborini, C. R., Kim, C., and Sakamoto, A. (2019). Educational variations in cohort
  trends in the black-white earnings gap among men: Evidence from administrative earnings data.
  Demography, 56(6):2253–2277.




                                                20
Coibion, O., Gorodnichenko, Y., and Weber, M. (2020). Labor markets during the COVID-19
  Crisis: A preliminary view. Technical Report w27017, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Cambridge, MA.

Cools, S., Markussen, S., and Strøm, M. (2017). Children and careers: How family size affects
  parents’ labor market outcomes in the long run. Demography, 54(5):1773–1793.

Dasgupta, K. and Murali, S. (2020). Pandemic containment and inequality in a developing econ-
  omy.

Dingel, J. I. and Neiman, B. (2020). How many jobs can be done at home? Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dingel, J. I., Patterson, C., and Vavra, J. (2020). Childcare Obligations Will Constrain Many
  Workers When Reopening the US Economy. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3579711, Social Science
  Research Network, Rochester, NY.

Dudel, C. and Myrskylä, M. (2017). Working life expectancy at age 50 in the united states and the
  impact of the great recession. Demography, 54(6):2101–2123.

Goolsbee, A. and Syverson, C. (2020). Fear, lockdown, and diversion: Comparing drivers of
  pandemic economic decline 2020. National Bureau of Economic Research.

Grossman, D. S. and Slusky, D. J. (2019). The impact of the flint water crisis on fertility. Demog-
  raphy, 56(6):2005–2031.

Guerrieri, V., Lorenzoni, G., Straub, L., and Werning, I. (2020). Macroeconomic implications of
  covid-19: Can negative supply shocks cause demand shortages? Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Gupta, S., Nguyen, T. D., Lozano Rojas, F., Raman, S., Lee, B., Bento, A., Simon, K. I., and Wing,
  C. (2020). Tracking public and private response to the covid-19 epidemic: Evidence from state
  and local government actions. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hetschko, C., Knabe, A., and Schöb, R. (2019). Looking back in anger? retirement and unem-
  ployment scarring. Demography, 56(3):1105–1129.

Kahn, L. B., Lange, F., and Wiczer, D. G. (2020). Labor demand in the time of covid-19: Evidence
  from vacancy postings and UI claims. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                21
Killewald, A. and Zhuo, X. (2019). Us mothers’ long-term employment patterns. Demography,
  56(1):285–320.

Leibovici, F., Santacreu, A. M., and Famiglietti, M. (2020). Social distancing and contact-intensive
  occupations. On the economy, St. Louis FED.

Lozano-Rojas, F., Jiang, X., Montenovo, L., Simon, K. I., Weinberg, B., and Wing, C. (2020).
  Is the cure worse than the disease? Immediate labor market effects of covid-19 case rates and
  school closures in the US. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mongey, S. and Weinberg, A. (2020). Characteristics of workers in low work-from-home and high
 personal-proximity occupations. Becker Friedman Institute for Economic White Paper.

National Bureau of Economic Research (2012). U.s. business cycle expansions and contractions.
  Information retrieved on May 7, 2020 from www.nber.org.

Nguyen, T. D., Gupta, S., Andersen, M., Bento, A., Simon, K. I., and Wing, C. (2020). Impacts of
  state reopening policy on human mobility. Forthcoming NBER working paper.

O*NET National Center for O*NET Development (2020). O*net online help: Data collection
  information. Data retrieved from O*NET Online on May 6, 2020 from www.onet.org.

Rothstein, J. (2019). The lost generation? scarring after the great recession. Technical report,
  Working Paper.

Sakamoto, A. and Daniel, P. A. (2003). Demography of social stratification. Handbook of the
  Social Psychology, Chapter 13, pages 383–416.

Sastry, N. and Gregory, J. (2014). The location of displaced new orleans residents in the year after
  hurricane katrina. Demography, 51(3):753–775.

Schenck-Fontaine, A. and Panico, L. (2019). Many kinds of poverty: Three dimensions of
  economic hardship, their combinations, and children’s behavior problems. Demography,
  56(6):2279–2305.

Schneider, D. and Hastings, O. P. (2015). Socioeconomic variation in the effect of economic
  conditions on marriage and nonmarital fertility in the united states: Evidence from the great
  recession. Demography, 52(6):1893–1915.

Seltzer, N. (2019). Beyond the great recession: Labor market polarization and ongoing fertility
  decline in the united states. Demography, 56(4):1463–1493.


                                                22
The Department of Homeland Security (2020). The department of homeland security guidance on
  essential critical infrastructure. Data retrieved on May 6, 2020 from www.cisa.gov.

The New York Times (2020). Coronavirus (covid-19) data in the united states. Data retrieved on
  April 8, 2020 from https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020a). The employment situation for may 2020. Document
  retrieved on June 29, 2020 from www.bls.gov.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020b). Frequently asked questions: The impact of the coron-
  avirus (covid-19) pandemic on the employment situation for april 2020. Document retrieved on
  May 6, 2020 from www.bls.gov.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020c). Frequently asked questions: The impact of the coron-
  avirus (covid-19) pandemic on the employment situation for march 2020. Document retrieved
  on May 6, 2020 from www.bls.gov.

U.S. Census Bureau (2019). Current population survey: Design and methodology, technical paper
  77. Technical report.

Zissimopoulos, J. and Karoly, L. A. (2010). Employment and self-employment in the wake of
  hurricane katrina. Demography, 47(2):345–367.




                                             23
Tables and Figures




                     24
                                                                Figure 1




Notes: Sample consists of CPS respondents age 21 years and older. For each bar, we compute the difference in the percent of the demographic
group that reports being employed and at work, between the start and end months of each recession pre COVID-19, and during COVID-19, by
the two main months with data thus far (National Bureau of Economic Research 2012), where in one COVID-19 bar we compare April 2020 to
February 2020 and in another, we compare May 2020 to February 2020. The estimates were weighted using the CPS composited final weights. To
include a seasonal adjustment, monthly fixed effects were included in the computation of the average subgroups employment change for the 2001
Recession and the Great Recession.




                                                                    25
                                                                Figure 2




Notes: Sample consists of CPS respondents age 21 years and older. For each bar, we compute the difference in the percent of the demographic
group that reports being employed and at work, between the start and end months of each recession pre COVID-19, and during COVID-19, by
the two main months with data thus far (National Bureau of Economic Research 2012), where in one COVID-19 bar we compare April 2020 to
February 2020 and in another, we compare May 2020 to February 2020. The estimates were weighted using the CPS composited final weights. To
include a seasonal adjustment, monthly fixed effects were included in the computation of the average subgroups employment change for the 2001
Recession and the Great Recession.




                                                                    26
                                                                              Figure 3
27




     Note: Sample consists of CPS February 2020 respondents age 21 and above who are in the labor force. Each index has been standardized to have mean 0 and
     standard deviation 1. We compute the average of each occupation index by subgroup. Negative numbers indicate lack of that characteristic in the jobs of that
     group.
                                                                              Figure 4
28




     Note: Sample consists of April CPS 2020 respondents age 21 and above who are in the labor force. We compute the average percent recent unemployed in each
     occupation and plot that against the occupation’s index value. Each occupational index has been standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Each
     bubble represents a Census Occupation, and its dimension is proportional to the size of the workforce that holds that occupation in our sample. We include a
     line plotting the prediction from a linear regression of recently unemployed on each occupation index. To improve readability of the graphs, we excluded from
     the sample the 52 occupations whose recent unemployment rate is above the 90th percentile (i.e. greater than 36.17%).
                                                                              Figure 5
29




     Note: Sample consists of May CPS 2020 respondents age 21 and above who are in the labor force. We compute the average percent recent unemployed in each
     occupation and plot that against the occupation’s index value. Each occupational index has been standardized to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. Each
     bubble represents a Census Occupation, and its dimension is proportional to the size of the workforce that holds that occupation in our sample. We include a
     line plotting the prediction from a linear regression of recently unemployed on each occupation index. To improve readability of the graphs, we excluded from
     the sample the 53 occupations whose recent unemployment rate is above the 90th percentile (i.e. greater than 13.31%).
Table 1: Cross-Sectional Models: Characteristics of the Recently Unemployed Workers in April

     Dependent = Recent Unemployed            Mean
     Apr Mean= 0.1306 ; Std. Dev = 0.3370   (Std. Dev)      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)

     Face-to-Face                            -0.017      0.016***    0.016***    0.017***        0.018
                                             (0.988)       (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.012)
     Remote Work                              0.071      -0.058***   -0.058***   -0.055***      -0.007
                                             (0.953)       (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.021)
     Essential                                0.706      -0.089***   -0.086***   -0.087***     -0.078*
                                             (0.455)       (0.014)     (0.013)     (0.013)     (0.042)
     Mortality Risk Index                    -0.315                  -0.018***      -0.014      -0.014     -0.012
                                             (0.527)                   (0.006)     (0.011)     (0.011)    (0.010)
     Risk x Face-to-Face                     -0.017                                  0.002       0.003      0.000
                                             (0.602)                               (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)
     Risk x Remote Work                      -0.018                                0.009*     0.009**       0.004
                                             (0.584)                               (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.004)
     Risk x Essential                        -0.222                                 -0.006      -0.006     -0.001
                                             (0.463)                               (0.011)     (0.011)    (0.009)
     Ln(COVID cases in State)                 9.370                  0.015***     0.015***    0.016**
                                             (1.291)                  (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.007)
     Ln(COVID cases) x Face-to-Face          -0.166                                             -0.000      0.000
                                             (9.355)                                           (0.001)     (0.001)
     Ln(COVID cases) x Remote                 0.715                                           -0.005**    -0.004**
                                             (8.991)                                           (0.002)     (0.002)
     Ln(COVID cases) x Essential              6.600                                             -0.001      -0.003
                                             (4.393)                                           (0.005)     (0.005)
     Fem x Child-U6                           0.062        -0.003       0.001       0.002        0.002     -0.009
                                             (0.241)       (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)
     Child under 6                            0.137       -0.013*     -0.011*     -0.011*      -0.011*      -0.001
                                             (0.344)       (0.007)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)
     Female                                   0.468      0.034***    0.029***    0.030***    0.030***       0.007
                                             (0.499)       (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.005)
     Black                                    0.126        -0.003      -0.003      -0.003       -0.003       0.012
                                             (0.331)       (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
     Hispanic                                 0.178         0.005       0.007       0.007       0.006       0.009
                                             (0.382)       (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.008)
     Age/100                                  0.428      -1.002***   -1.076***   -1.050***   -1.057***   -0.708***
                                             (0.143)       (0.144)     (0.149)     (0.147)     (0.147)     (0.098)
     (Age/100)2                               0.204      1.029***    1.177***    1.146***    1.152***    0.794***
                                             (0.130)       (0.154)     (0.168)     (0.165)     (0.165)     (0.116)
     Less-than HS                             0.067       Omitted     Omitted     Omitted     Omitted     Omitted
                                              0.250
     HS                                       0.249        -0.003      -0.001      -0.002       -0.001     -0.002
                                             (0.432)       (0.013)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.011)
     Some College                             0.274        -0.003      -0.001      -0.002       -0.001     -0.005
                                             (0.446)       (0.013)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.010)
     BA Degree                                0.259      -0.047***   -0.044***   -0.044***   -0.044***    -0.027**
                                             (0.438)       (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.011)
     Post D                                   0.151      -0.081***   -0.080***   -0.080***   -0.079***   -0.037***
                                             (0.358)       (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.013)
     Metropolitan                             1.114      -0.033***   -0.026***   -0.026***   -0.026***      -0.010
                                             (0.318)       (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.008)
     Ln(State Population)                    16.130         0.005       -0.010      -0.010      -0.010
                                             (0.914)       (0.005)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
     Constant                                            0.377***    0.468***    0.465***    0.456***    0.307***
                                                           (0.093)     (0.100)     (0.100)     (0.108)    (0.048)
     State + Occup. + Industry F.E.                                                                        Yes
     Observations                                         47146       46237       46237       46237       46232
     R-squared                                            0.069       0.067       0.067       0.068       0.184




                                                           30
Table 2: Cross-Sectional Models: Characteristics of the Recently Unemployed Workers in May

     Dependent = Recent Unemployed            Mean
     May Mean= 0.1118 ; Std. Dev = 0.3152   (Std. Dev)      (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)

     Face-to-Face                            -0.010      0.016***    0.016***    0.017***      -0.003
                                             (0.984)       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.015)
     Remote Work                              0.062      -0.046***   -0.048***   -0.046***      0.018
                                             (0.955)       (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.020)
     Essential                                0.707      -0.073***   -0.068***   -0.067***      -0.053
                                             (0.455)       (0.012)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.038)
     Mortality Risk Index                    -0.320                  -0.025***    -0.028**    -0.028**   -0.030***
                                             (0.519)                   (0.008)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.008)
     Risk x Face-to-Face                     -0.016                                 0.003        0.003      0.001
                                             (0.604)                               (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)
     Risk x Remote Work                      -0.018                                0.007*        0.007      0.001
                                             (0.577)                               (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.003)
     Risk x Essential                        -0.224                                 0.005        0.005     0.015*
                                             (0.460)                               (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
     Ln(COVID cases in State)                10.312                  0.011***     0.011***    0.013***
                                             (1.192)                  (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.005)
     Ln(COVID cases) x Face-to-Face          -0.117                                              0.002      0.002
                                            (10.223)                                           (0.002)     (0.001)
     Ln(COVID cases) x Remote                 0.680                                          -0.006***   -0.005***
                                             (9.903)                                           (0.002)     (0.002)
     Ln(COVID cases) x Essential              7.275                                             -0.001      -0.004
                                             (4.792)                                           (0.004)     (0.004)
     Fem x Child-U6                           0.060         0.002       0.008       0.008       0.008       -0.002
                                             (0.237)       (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.012)
     Child under 6                            0.135        -0.004      -0.005      -0.005       -0.005       0.005
                                             (0.341)       (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.006)
     Female                                   0.468      0.031***    0.026***    0.026***    0.026***       0.006
                                             (0.499)       (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.005)
     Black                                    0.126         0.011       0.009       0.009       0.009     0.018**
                                             (0.332)       (0.009)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
     Hispanic                                 0.179         0.012       0.010       0.010       0.009       0.009
                                             (0.383)       (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.006)
     Age/100                                  0.426      -0.840***   -1.034***   -1.016***   -1.023***   -0.673***
                                             (0.143)       (0.131)     (0.152)     (0.150)     (0.150)     (0.096)
     (Age/100)2                               0.202      0.848***    1.143***    1.120***    1.126***    0.759***
                                             (0.129)       (0.140)     (0.182)     (0.181)     (0.180)     (0.117)
     Less-than HS                             0.065       Omitted     Omitted     Omitted     Omitted     Omitted
                                              0.247
     HS                                       0.254        -0.003      -0.001      -0.002       -0.001     -0.002
                                             (0.435)       (0.013)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.011)
     Some College                             0.275        -0.003      -0.001      -0.002       -0.001     -0.005
                                             (0.446)       (0.013)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.010)
     BA Degree                                0.255      -0.047***   -0.044***   -0.044***   -0.044***    -0.027**
                                             (0.436)       (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.014)     (0.011)
     Post D                                   0.152      -0.081***   -0.080***   -0.080***   -0.079***   -0.037***
                                             (0.359)       (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.015)     (0.013)
     Metropolitan                             1.115      -0.033***   -0.026***   -0.026***   -0.026***      -0.010
                                             (0.320)       (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.008)
     Ln(State Population)                    16.129         0.005       -0.010      -0.010      -0.010
                                             (0.911)       (0.005)     (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)
     Constant                                            0.377***    0.468***    0.465***    0.456***    0.307***
                                                           (0.093)     (0.100)     (0.100)     (0.108)    (0.048)
     State + Occup. + Industry F.E.                                                                        Yes
     Observations                                         45712       44787       44787       44787       44779
     R-squared                                            0.059       0.058       0.059       0.059       0.167




                                                           31
                                   Figure 6: Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition for April: A Graphical Representation
                                        Model A                                                                     Model B




                                                                              Model C
32




     Note: The three figures are the graphical representation of the Oaxaca decomposition estimates shown in Table 9.5 and obtained through three different models.
     All the decomposition models include socio-demographic controls (i.e. age, gender, race, ethnicity, and education), state fixed effects, and a dummy for
     the presence of children under 6. Model A includes the Face-to-Face, Remote Work, and Essential Job indices. Model B adds a full set of 524 occupation
     dummies. Model C includes a full set of 261 industry dummies, and report the share of each gap explained by sorting into industries classified as Essential vs
     Non-essential. Each shaded area represents the share that is, depending on the color, explained by the different sets of variables reported in the legend.
                                    Figure 7: Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition for May: A Graphical Representation
                                        Model A                                                                     Model B




                                                                              Model C
33




     Note: The three figures are the graphical representation of the Oaxaca decomposition estimates shown in Table 9.7 and obtained through three different models.
     All the decomposition models include socio-demographic controls (i.e. age, gender, race, ethnicity, and education), state fixed effects, and a dummy for
     the presence of children under 6. Model A includes the Face-to-Face, Remote Work, and Essential Job indices. Model B adds a full set of 524 occupation
     dummies. Model C includes a full set of 261 industry dummies, and report the share of each gap explained by sorting into industries classified as Essential vs
     Non-essential. Each shaded area represents the share that is, depending on the color, explained by the different sets of variables reported in the legend.
8     Appendix

8.1     Employment Rates Over Time

                       Figure 8.1: BLS Employment Series (Seasonally Adjusted)




Note: The figure presents the seasonally adjusted series for All Employees in non-farm jobs (millions) between January
2000 and May 2020. The shaded areas represent the 2001 Recession (March 2001 to November 2001), the Great
Recession (December 2007 to June 2009), and the COVID-19 Recession. The figure implies that jobs lost during
April and May 2020 exceed jobs lost in either of the two previous recessions.




                                                      App. 1
                                                                            Figure 8.2
App. 2




         Note: In Panel A, Employment Change is computed as the February employment rate minus the April rate. Recently Unemployed is reported only from the
         April CPS (coded as Recently Unemployed if unemployed in April, and became unemployed at most 10 weeks before the CPS April survey week).
         In Panel B, Employment Change is computed as the February employment rate minus the May rate. Recently Unemployed is reported only from the May CPS
         (coded as Recently Unemployed if unemployed in April, and became unemployed at most 14 weeks before the CPS May survey week). In both panels, the
         change in employment is computed excluding workers who are employed but absent from work. The panel on recent unemployed in April and May 2020 has
         been produced selecting on the same sample used in the models shown in Tables 1 and 2.
9      Additional Tables and Figures

                                  Table 9.1: O*Net Index related Questions

       Index                                                           O*Net Items
                   How often do you have face-to-face discussions with individuals or teams in this job?
    Face to Face   To what extent does this job require the worker to perform job tasks in close physical proximity to other
                   people?
                   How often do you use electronic mail in this job?

Remote Work        How often does the job require written letters and memos?
                   How often do you have telephone conversations in this job?

Note: The O*Net “Work Context” module (2019 version: available www.onetcenter.org) reports summary measures
from worker surveys of the tasks involved in 968 occupations using the Standard Occupation Code, 2010 version).
The questions use a 1-5 scale, where 1 indicates rare/not important. We developed three indices: (1) Face-to-Face
interactions, (2) the potential for Remote Work, and (3) the extent to which work occurs Outside the Home using these
variables. The value of each index for an occupation is a simple average O*Net questions listed in the table.




                                                            App. 3
                                                        Table 9.2: Industry Sectors and Categories defined as Essential
         Sector                  Sector Name                                                                                     Examples
           11        Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and                  Crop production; Animal production; Forestry; Logging; Fishing, Hunting and trapping; Agriculture and forestry support
                     Hunting                                             activities
           21        Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas                  Oil and gas extraction; Coal mining; Metal ore mining; Nonmetallic mineral mining and quarrying; Not specified mining;
                     Extraction                                          Mining support activities
           22        Utilities                                           Electric power generation, transmission and distribution; Natural gas distribution; Electric and gas, and other combina-
                                                                         tions; Water, steam, air-conditioning, and irrigation,; Sewage; Other not specified
          23         Construction                                        All in construction
         31-33       Manufacturing                                       All Food manufacturing; All Animal food manufacturing; Industries: All in Paper related; Petroleum; Rubber & Tires;
                                                                         Pharma; Plastics; Chemicals; Pottery and ceramics; Cement; Glass; Iron; Aluminum; Nonferrous metal; Foundries;
                                                                         Forgings; Cutlery; Coating; All machinery and equipment manufacturing; Household appliance manufacturing; Mo-
                                                                         tor vehicles & parts; Aircraft & parts; Railroad; Ship and boats; other transportation; Sawmills; Wood manufacturing;
                                                                         Medical Supplies.
           42        Wholesale Trade                                     Paper; Machinery and equipment; Hardware; Household appliances; Lumber and construction; Grocery and related
                                                                         products; Drugs; sundries and chemical and allied products; Farm product raw material; Petroleum products; Alcoholic
                                                                         beverages; Farm supplies; other non-durable goods; electronic markets, agents and brokers.
         44-45       Retail Trade                                        Automotive parts and accessories; Electronics; Building materials; Lawn and garden equipment; Grocery stores; Super-
                                                                         markets; Convenience stores; Specialty food stores; Beer, wine and liquor stores; Pharmacies and drug stores; Health and
App. 4




                                                                         personal care stores; Gas stations; General merchandise stores; Electronic shopping and mail-order houses; Fuel dealers.
         48-49       Transportation and Warehousing                      Air, Rail T., Water, Truck, Transportation; Bus service and urban transit; Taxis; Pipeline transportation; Services inciden-
                                                                         tal to transportation; Postal Service; Couriers; Warehousing and storage.
           51        Information                                         Newspapers, periodicals, book and directory publishers; Software publishers; Broadcasting; Internet publishing and
                                                                         broadcasting; Wired telecommunication carriers; Telecomm.; Data processing, hosting and related; Other information
                                                                         services, except libraries and archives.
           52        Finance and Insurance                               Banking; Saving institutions; Credit Unions; Non-depository credit activities; Securities, commodities, funds, trusts;
                                                                         Other financial investments, Insurance carriers.
           53        Real Estate and Rental and Leasing                  Real State; Lessors, agents brokers; Property managers; Appraisers offices; Other related.
           54        Professional, Scientific, and Techni-               Accounting, tax preparation, bookkeeping and payroll services; Management, scientific and technical consulting services;
                     cal Services                                        Scientific research and development; Veterinary
           56        Admin. & Waste Manag. Services                      Security and investigation; Services to buildings; landscaping; waste management and remediation
           62        Health Care and Social Assistance                   Physicians, dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, other; Outpatient care centers; Home health care services; Other health
                                                                         care; Hospitals; Psychiatric and substance abuse hospitals; Nursing care facilities; Residential care facilities; Individual
                                                                         and family services; Child day care.
           72        Accommodation and Food Services                     Traveler accommodation; Restaurants and other food services.
           81        Other Services (except Public Ad-                   Automotive repair and maintenance; Machinery and equipment repair and maintenance; Funeral homes, cemeteries and
                     ministration)                                       crematories.
           92        Public Administration                               All in Public Administration.
         Note: Following Blau et al. (2020) and Census NAICS 2017 Industry Descriptions, we coded the DHS essential workforce definition. The table is presented for reference using consolidated
         4-digit industry categories for brevity and do not necessarily match NAICS complete names. In these sectors, Education Services; Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation and Management of
         Companies and Enterprises, no subcatergories are classified as essential workforce. 194 categories out of 287 at the 4 digit level are declared as jobs in Essential by the DHS. Available at:
         www.cisa.gov.
9.1   Additional Labor Outcomes




                                  App. 5
         Table 9.3: Cross-Sectional Models: Employed - Absent in April 2020

Dependent = Absent from Work
Apr Mean= 0.0734 ; Std. Dev = 0.2607     (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)

Face-to-Face                           -0.017    0.015***    0.015***    0.016***       0.004
                                       (0.988)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.013)
Remote Work                             0.071    -0.014***   -0.014***   -0.013***    0.018**
                                       (0.953)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.009)
Essential                               0.706    -0.034***   -0.034***   -0.036***     -0.029
                                       (0.455)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.025)
Mortality Risk Index                   -0.315                   0.007       0.013        0.013    0.014*
                                       (0.527)                 (0.007)     (0.009)     (0.008)    (0.008)
Risk x Face-to-Face                    -0.017                               0.002        0.003     0.002
                                       (0.602)                             (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)
Risk x Remote Work                     -0.018                               0.004        0.004     0.002
                                       (0.584)                             (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.003)
Risk x Essential                       -0.222                               -0.007      -0.007   -0.011**
                                       (0.463)                             (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)
Ln(COVID cases in State)                9.370                0.013***     0.013***   0.014***
                                       (1.291)                (0.002)      (0.003)     (0.004)
Ln(COVID cases) x Face-to-Face         -0.166                                            0.001     0.001
                                       (9.355)                                         (0.001)    (0.002)
Ln(COVID cases) x Remote                0.715                                        -0.003***   -0.002**
                                       (8.991)                                         (0.001)    (0.001)
Ln(COVID cases) x Essential             6.600                                           -0.001     -0.002
                                       (4.393)                                         (0.003)    (0.003)
Fem x Child-U6                          0.062    0.039***    0.037***    0.038***    0.038***    0.036***
                                       (0.241)    (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.008)    (0.007)
Child under 6                           0.137      0.001        0.001      0.000        0.000      0.002
                                       (0.344)    (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.006)
Female                                  0.468     0.008*     0.009**     0.010**      0.009**      0.002
                                       (0.499)    (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.005)    (0.004)
Black                                   0.126      0.003       -0.000     -0.000       -0.000      0.003
                                       (0.331)    (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)    (0.005)
Hispanic                                0.178     -0.006      -0.004      -0.004        -0.005    -0.007
                                       (0.382)    (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)      (0.009)    (0.008)
Age/100                                 0.428    -0.169**     -0.110      -0.094        -0.099    -0.080
                                       (0.143)    (0.074)     (0.087)     (0.089)      (0.089)    (0.091)
(Age/100)2                              0.204    0.290***     0.199*       0.179        0.183      0.171
                                       (0.130)    (0.084)     (0.111)     (0.113)      (0.114)    (0.113)
Less-than HS                            0.067    Omitted     Omitted     Omitted      Omitted    Omitted
                                       (0.250)
HS                                      0.249       0.005       0.007       0.007       0.007     0.011
                                       (0.432)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)   (0.010)
Some College                            0.274      -0.003      -0.001      -0.002       -0.001    0.006
                                       (0.446)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)   (0.011)
BA Degree                               0.259     -0.026**    -0.025**    -0.025**    -0.025**   -0.010
                                       (0.438)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)   (0.011)
Post D                                  0.151    -0.043***   -0.043***   -0.043***   -0.043***   -0.019
                                       (0.358)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)   (0.012)
Metropolitan                            1.114      -0.011      -0.007      -0.007       -0.007   -0.002
                                       (0.318)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)   (0.008)
Ln(State Population)                   16.130    0.009***       -0.004      -0.004      -0.004
                                       (0.914)     (0.002)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Constant                                           -0.015       0.062       0.061       0.055    0.089***
                                                   (0.040)     (0.043)     (0.044)     (0.042)    (0.028)
State + Occup. + Industry F.E.                                                                     Yes
Observations                                      47146       46237       46237       46237       46232
R-squared                                         0.019       0.021       0.021       0.021       0.074




                                                 App. 6
            Table 9.4: Cross-Sectional Models: Employed - Absent in May 2020

Dependent = Absent from Work
May Mean= 0.0529 ; Std. Dev = 0.2238     (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)

Face-to-Face                            -0.010    0.010***    0.010***    0.012***       0.008      [t]
                                        (0.984)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.009)
Remote Work                              0.062    -0.010***   -0.011***   -0.009***     0.021
                                        (0.955)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.020)
Essential                                0.707    -0.021***   -0.021***   -0.023***   -0.041**
                                        (0.455)     (0.006)     (0.006)     (0.007)    (0.020)
Mortality Risk Index                    -0.320                   0.009      0.017*     0.017*       0.012
                                        (0.519)                 (0.006)     (0.009)    (0.009)     (0.008)
Risk x Face-to-Face                     -0.016                             0.007***   0.008***    0.007***
                                        (0.604)                             (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)
Risk x Remote Work                      -0.018                              0.006**    0.006**     0.005*
                                        (0.577)                             (0.003)    (0.003)     (0.003)
Risk x Essential                        -0.224                               -0.007     -0.007     -0.007
                                        (0.460)                             (0.006)    (0.006)     (0.005)
Ln(COVID cases in State)                10.312                0.011***     0.011***    0.010**
                                        (1.192)                (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.004)
Ln(COVID cases) x Face-to-Face          -0.117                                           0.000       0.001
                                       (10.223)                                        (0.001)     (0.001)
Ln(COVID cases) x Remote                 0.680                                          -0.003      -0.002
                                        (9.903)                                        (0.002)     (0.002)
Ln(COVID cases) x Essential              7.275                                           0.002       0.001
                                        (4.792)                                        (0.002)     (0.002)
Fem x Child-U6                           0.060    0.036***    0.035***    0.036***    0.035***    0.035***
                                        (0.237)    (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)
Child under 6                            0.135      -0.000     -0.001      -0.001       -0.001      -0.000
                                        (0.341)    (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Female                                   0.468    0.009***    0.011***    0.012***    0.012***     0.007**
                                        (0.499)    (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.003)
Black                                    0.126      0.004       0.003       0.003       0.003        0.006
                                        (0.332)    (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)
Hispanic                                 0.179      -0.005     -0.004      -0.004       -0.005      -0.004
                                        (0.383)    (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.006)     (0.004)
Age/100                                  0.426     -0.157*      -0.089      -0.062      -0.065      -0.108
                                        (0.143)    (0.081)     (0.094)     (0.094)     (0.094)     (0.077)
(Age/100)2                               0.202    0.261***      0.154       0.118        0.120     0.180*
                                        (0.129)    (0.088)     (0.113)     (0.113)     (0.113)     (0.091)
Less-than HS                             0.065    Omitted     Omitted     Omitted     Omitted     Omitted
                                        (0.247)
HS                                       0.254      -0.005      -0.006      -0.006       -0.006    -0.007
                                        (0.435)     (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.007)     (0.007)    (0.007)
Some College                             0.275       0.004       0.004       0.004       0.004      0.004
                                        (0.446)     (0.008)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)    (0.008)
BA Degree                                0.255      -0.012      -0.014      -0.013       -0.013    -0.009
                                        (0.436)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)    (0.007)
Post D                                   0.152    -0.028***   -0.030***   -0.030***   -0.030***   -0.017**
                                        (0.359)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)    (0.007)
Metropolitan                             1.115      -0.006      -0.003      -0.003       -0.003     0.001
                                        (0.320)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.005)
Ln(State Population)                    16.129       0.004       -0.007      -0.007      -0.007
                                        (0.911)     (0.003)     (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)
Constant                                             0.027       0.083       0.080       0.091    0.056**
                                                    (0.057)     (0.062)     (0.062)     (0.066)   (0.022)
State + Occup. + Industry F.E.                                                                      Yes
Observations                                       45712       44787       44787       44787       44779
R-squared                                          0.012       0.015       0.015       0.016       0.064




                                                  App. 7
                                                                  Table 9.5: Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition for April

                                          Male/Female            Non-hispanic/Hispanic             White/Black                Older/Younger                HS/non-HS                  Coll/non-Coll
                                      Estimate    Share          Estimate     Share            Estimate    Share           Estimate    Share          Estimate    Share           Estimate     Share
                                         (1)       (2)              (3)        (4)                (5)       (6)               (7)       (8)              (9)       (10)             (11)        (12)

         Raw Gap                      -0.0249      100.00%       -0.0444      100.00%          -0.0161       100.00%       -0.0884      100.00%       -0.0203       100.00%       -0.0832      100.00%

                                                                                                    Model A
         Explained                    0.0068       -27.11% -0.0243            54.72%           -0.0134 82.98%              -0.0425      48.07%        -0.0159       78.30%        -0.0414      49.80%
         Socio-demographic            0.0034       -13.78% -0.0080            17.99%           -0.0069 42.87%              -0.0181      20.43%        -0.0030       14.59%        -0.0018      2.18%
         Children under 6             -0.0001      0.41%   0.0003             -0.69%           0.0000   -0.08%             -0.0039      4.36%         0.0008        -3.72%        -0.0005      0.60%
         FacetoFace                   -0.0030      12.18%  0.0005             -1.06%           -0.0020 12.37%              -0.0020      2.30%         0.0026        -12.80%       -0.0008      0.92%
         Remote Work                  0.0142       -56.98% -0.0237            53.30%           -0.0096 59.76%              -0.0202      22.90%        -0.0285       140.61%       -0.0507      60.96%
         Essential                    -0.0075      30.25%  0.0052             -11.70%          0.0033   -20.19%            0.0014       -1.54%        0.0052        -25.60%       0.0118       -14.16%
         State                        -0.0002      0.81%   0.0014             -3.11%           0.0019   -11.75%            0.0003       -0.38%        0.0071        -34.78%       0.0006       -0.70%
         Unexplained                  -0.0317      127.11% -0.0201            45.28%           -0.0027 16.77%              -0.0459      51.93%        -0.0044       21.70%        -0.0418      50.20%

                                                                                                    Model B
App. 8




         Explained                    -0.0127      50.89%        -0.0251      56.50%           -0.0066 40.85%              -0.0516      58.43%        -0.0190       93.52%        -0.0589      70.72%
         Socio-demographic            0.0021       -8.63%        -0.0043      9.64%            -0.0035 21.63%              -0.0100      11.29%        -0.0050       24.82%        -0.0029      3.53%
         Children under 6             0.0000       0.12%         0.0001       -0.21%           0.0000   -0.03%             -0.0018      1.99%         0.0005        -2.23%        -0.0003      0.31%
         All Occupations              -0.0084      33.84%        -0.0290      65.21%           -0.0080 49.78%              -0.0411      46.53%        -0.0258       127.06%       -0.0666      79.97%
         Essential                    -0.0061      24.44%        0.0042       -9.45%           0.0026   -16.25%            0.0013       -1.52%        0.0037        -18.39%       0.0107       -12.80%
         State                        -0.0003      1.11%         0.0039       -8.69%           0.0023   -14.28%            -0.0001      0.13%         0.0077        -37.75%       0.0002       -0.29%
         Unexplained                  -0.0122      49.11%        -0.0193      43.50%           -0.0095 59.15%              -0.0367      41.57%        -0.0013       6.48%         -0.0244      29.28%

                                                                                                    Model C
         Explained                    -0.0166      66.75%        -0.0276      62.01%           -0.0055 34.39%              -0.0567      64.14%        -0.0229       112.82% -0.0607            72.94%
         Socio-demographic            0.0018       -7.14%        -0.0032      7.28%            -0.0029 17.81%              -0.0083      9.43%         -0.0049       24.32%  -0.0029            3.45%
         Children under 6             0.0000       0.17%         0.0001       -0.28%           0.0000   -0.04%             -0.0018      2.09%         0.0006        -2.75%  -0.0003            0.32%
         All Occupations              -0.0095      38.25%        -0.0197      44.27%           -0.0087 54.18%              -0.0353      39.97%        -0.0189       93.13%  -0.0455            54.65%
         Industry-Essential           0.0062       -24.76%       -0.0122      27.40%           -0.0014 8.48%               -0.0074      8.39%         -0.0132       65.34%  -0.0183            21.93%
         Industry-nonEssential        -0.0168      67.52%        0.0027       -6.07%           0.0034   -21.08%            -0.0048      5.43%         0.0064        -31.62% 0.0036             -4.28%
         State                        -0.0002      0.95%         0.0041       -9.30%           0.0023   -14.43%            -0.0004      0.41%         0.0075        -37.11% 0.0003             -0.31%
         Unexplained                  -0.0083      33.25%        -0.0169      37.99%           -0.0106 65.61%              -0.0317      35.86%        0.0026        -12.82% -0.0225            27.06%
         Notes: This table shows Oaxaca decomposition of gap in the proportion of workers recently unemployed in April. Entries in bold are statistically significant at the 5% level. Model A includes two
         indexes describing occupational characteristics: the Face-to-Face index and Remote Working index. Model B includes a full set of 524 occupation dummies. Model C includes a full set of 524
         occupation dummies and 261 industry dummies. All models include basic socio-demographic controls, including age, age squared, gender, race, ethnicity, education, and state fixed effects. All
         regressions use CPS sample weights. In Models B and C, we reported the aggregated shares of explanation by the 524 occupations, while we list the shares of explanation by five occupation categories
         in Table 9.6. For Model C, we report the shares of explanation of industries in two groups: essential industry and non-essential industry.
                                          Table 9.6: Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition for April: Five Occupation Groups

                                    Male/Female             Non-hispanic/Hispanic              White/Black                Older/Younger                  HS/non-HS                  Coll/non-Coll
                                Estimate    Share           Estimate     Share             Estimate    Share           Estimate    Share            Estimate    Share           Estimate     Share
                                   (1)       (2)               (3)        (4)                 (5)       (6)               (7)       (8)                (9)       (10)             (11)        (12)

         Raw Gap                -0.0249       100.00%       -0.0444       100.00%          -0.0161       100.00%       -0.0884       100.00%        -0.0203      100.00%        -0.0832      100.00%

                                                                                                  Model B
         Mgmt/Tech/Arts         -0.0070       28.02%        0.0031        -7.07%           0.0024   -14.83%            0.0009        -0.98%         0.0060       -29.77%        0.0069       -8.28%
         Service                -0.0176       70.51%        -0.0160       35.98%           -0.0061 38.06%              -0.0286       32.33%         -0.0174      85.71%         -0.0335      40.21%
         Sales/Office           -0.0086       34.67%        -0.0013       2.84%            -0.0015 9.54%               -0.0127       14.33%         0.0109       -53.85%        -0.0075      8.97%
         Constr/Nat. Res.       0.0148        -59.19%       -0.0103       23.19%           0.0046   -28.27%            0.0004        -0.47%         -0.0193      95.38%         -0.0134      16.14%
         Prod./Trans.           0.0100        -40.18%       -0.0046       10.27%           -0.0073 45.27%              -0.0012       1.32%          -0.0060      29.59%         -0.0191      22.93%

                                                                                                  Model C
         Mgmt/Tech/Arts         -0.0083       33.22%        0.0057        -12.77%          0.0020   -12.37%            0.0048        -5.40%         0.0083       -41.06%        0.0122       -14.62%
         Service                -0.0144       57.96%        -0.0106       23.89%           -0.0062 38.77%              -0.0278       31.43%         -0.0136      67.12%         -0.0235      28.24%
         Sales/Office           -0.0078       31.17%        -0.0009       2.07%            -0.0017 10.64%              -0.0101       11.42%         0.0128       -62.96%        -0.0060      7.20%
         Constr/Nat. Res.       0.0124        -49.72%       -0.0094       21.08%           0.0039   -24.36%            0.0002        -0.18%         -0.0195      96.24%         -0.0112      13.51%
App. 9




         Prod./Trans.           0.0086        -34.38%       -0.0044       10.00%           -0.0067 41.50%              -0.0024       2.71%          -0.0069      33.79%         -0.0169      20.31%
         Notes: This table reports the share of variation explained by sorting across five top-level categories in the Census occupational classification system: “Management, Business, Science, and Arts”,
         “Service”, “Sales and Office”, “Natural Resources, Construction, and Maintenance”, “Production, Transportation, and Material Moving”. A sixth category, “Military Specific Operations”, does
         not appear because the CPS is a survey of the civilian non-institutional population. The shares of the five categories of occupations add up to the share of “All Occupation" in Model B and
         Model C in Table 9.5. Entries in bold are statistically significant at the 5% level.
                                                                   Table 9.7: Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition for May

                                           Male/Female            Non-hispanic/Hispanic             White/Black                Older/Younger               HS/non-HS                   Coll/non-Coll
                                       Estimate    Share          Estimate     Share            Estimate    Share           Estimate    Share          Estimate   Share            Estimate     Share

          Raw Gap                      -0.0241      100.00%       -0.0405      100.00%          -0.0314       100.00%       -0.0796      100.00%       -0.0222       100.00%       -0.0755      100.00%

                                                                                                     Model A
          Explained                    0.0062       -25.58% -0.0251            61.87%           -0.0135 42.95%              -0.0307      38.56%        -0.0101       45.70%  -0.0342            45.22%
          demographic                  0.0035       -14.34% -0.0086            21.28%           -0.0071 22.78%              -0.0161      20.25%        0.0031        -13.79% -0.0003            0.40%
          Children under 6             0.0000       0.08%   0.0000             -0.10%           0.0000   -0.01%             0.0009       -1.19%        0.0000        0.22%   -0.0001            0.18%
          FacetoFace                   -0.0029      11.85%  0.0002             -0.40%           -0.0018 5.58%               -0.0029      3.61%         0.0019        -8.69%  -0.0008            1.07%
          Remote Work                  0.0121       -50.11% -0.0184            45.35%           -0.0087 27.75%              -0.0154      19.33%        -0.0230       103.87% -0.0428            56.72%
          Essential                    -0.0066      27.30%  0.0048             -11.84%          0.0021   -6.84%             0.0017       -2.15%        0.0071        -32.05% 0.0090             -11.87%
          State                        0.0001       -0.36%  -0.0031            7.59%            0.0020   -6.32%             0.0010       -1.28%        0.0009        -3.86%  0.0010             -1.26%
          Unexplained                  -0.0303      125.58% -0.0155            38.13%           -0.0179 57.05%              -0.0489      61.44%        -0.0120       54.30%  -0.0414            54.78%

                                                                                                     Model B
App. 10




          Explained                    -0.0118      48.73%        -0.0257      63.42%           -0.0106 33.63%              -0.0425      53.37%        -0.0074       33.44%        -0.0518      68.61%
          demographic                  0.0023       -9.46%        -0.0061      15.16%           -0.0040 12.89%              -0.0096      12.12%        0.0023        -10.18%       -0.0010      1.28%
          Children under 6             0.0000       -0.19%        -0.0001      0.23%            0.0000   0.00%              0.0017       -2.19%        -0.0003       1.31%         0.0000       -0.01%
          All Occupations              -0.0082      34.06%        -0.0228      56.24%           -0.0106 33.74%              -0.0375      47.09%        -0.0171       77.11%        -0.0610      80.75%
          Essential                    -0.0059      24.35%        0.0043       -10.56%          0.0019   -6.06%             0.0017       -2.17%        0.0061        -27.70%       0.0095       -12.52%
          State                        0.0000       -0.04%        -0.0010      2.35%            0.0022   -6.95%             0.0012       -1.49%        0.0016        -7.10%        0.0007       -0.89%
          Unexplained                  -0.0124      51.27%        -0.0148      36.58%           -0.0208 66.38%              -0.0371      46.63%        -0.0148       66.56%        -0.0237      31.39%

                                                                                                     Model C
          Explained                    -0.0148      61.40%        -0.0297      73.18%           -0.0119 37.85%              -0.0477      59.91%        -0.0086       38.80%        -0.0524      69.34%
          demographic                  0.0020       -8.17%        -0.0056      13.93%           -0.0034 10.96%              -0.0086      10.83%        0.0030        -13.59%       -0.0008      1.01%
          Children under 6             0.0001       -0.24%        -0.0001      0.30%            0.0000   0.01%              0.0021       -2.67%        -0.0002       1.03%         0.0000       -0.03%
          All Occupations              -0.0079      32.69%        -0.0149      36.67%           -0.0128 40.68%              -0.0316      39.69%        -0.0093       42.06%        -0.0459      60.79%
          Industry-Essential           0.0029       -12.00%       -0.0111      27.37%           0.0014   -4.45%             -0.0059      7.40%         -0.0161       72.72%        -0.0096      12.76%
          Industry-nonEssential        -0.0119      49.32%        0.0034       -8.38%           0.0009   -2.84%             -0.0051      6.41%         0.0130        -58.49%       0.0031       -4.06%
          State                        0.0000       -0.19%        -0.0013      3.28%            0.0020   -6.51%             0.0014       -1.76%        0.0011        -4.92%        0.0009       -1.13%
          Unexplained                  -0.0093      38.60%        -0.0109      26.82%           -0.0195 62.15%              -0.0319      40.09%        -0.0136       61.20%        -0.0232      30.66%
          Notes: This table shows Oaxaca decomposition of gap in the proportion of workers recently unemployed in May. Entries in bold are statistically significant at the 5% level. Model A includes two
          indexes describing occupational characteristics: the Face-to-Face index and Remote Working index. Model B includes a full set of 524 occupation dummies. Model C includes a full set of 524
          occupation dummies and 261 industry dummies. All models include basic socio-demographic controls, including age, age squared, gender, race, ethnicity, education, and state fixed effects. All
          regressions use CPS sample weights. In Models B and C, we reported the aggregated shares of explanation by the 524 occupations, while we list the shares of explanation by five occupation categories
          in Table 9.8. For Model C, we report the shares of explanation of industries in two groups: essential industry and non-essential industry.
                                            Table 9.8: Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition for May: Five Occupation Groups

                                     Male/Female             Non-hispanic/Hispanic              White/Black                Older/Younger                 HS/non-HS                   Coll/non-Coll
                                 Estimate    Share           Estimate     Share             Estimate    Share           Estimate    Share            Estimate   Share            Estimate     Share

          Raw Gap                -0.0241       100.00%       -0.0405       100.00%          -0.0314       100.00%       -0.0796       100.00% -0.0222             100.00%        -0.0755      100.00%

                                                                                                   Model B
          Mgmt/Tech/Arts         -0.0062       24.78%        0.0022        -4.96%           0.0025   -15.45%            -0.0029       3.29%          0.0060       -29.66%        0.0050       -6.04%
          Service                -0.0162       65.11%        -0.0111       24.97%           -0.0057 35.46%              -0.0257       29.11%         -0.0122      60.14%         -0.0265      31.83%
          Sales/Office           -0.0092       36.90%        -0.0004       0.96%            -0.0006 3.77%               -0.0107       12.15%         0.0118       -58.31%        -0.0067      8.11%
          Constr/Nat. Res.       0.0125        -50.11%       -0.0082       18.42%           0.0035   -21.98%            0.0009        -1.03%         -0.0136      66.88%         -0.0131      15.79%
          Prod./Trans.           0.0109        -43.69%       -0.0053       11.90%           -0.0103 63.94%              0.0010        -1.11%         -0.0092      45.27%         -0.0196      23.61%

                                                                                                   Model C
          Mgmt/Tech/Arts         -0.0073       29.34%        0.0044        -9.94%           0.0025   -15.51%            -0.0038       4.30%          0.0069       -33.82%        0.0101       -12.17%
          Service                -0.0137       54.78%        -0.0059       13.20%           -0.0062 38.71%              -0.0203       22.97%         -0.0079      39.01%         -0.0203      24.42%
          Sales/Office           -0.0084       33.66%        -0.0003       0.71%            -0.0014 8.47%               -0.0086       9.71%          0.0133       -65.47%        -0.0060      7.18%
          Constr/Nat. Res.       0.0112        -45.05%       -0.0076       17.10%           0.0033   -20.64%            0.0007        -0.74%         -0.0130      63.99%         -0.0118      14.23%
          Prod./Trans.           0.0102        -41.06%       -0.0055       12.38%           -0.0110 68.23%              0.0004        -0.49%         -0.0086      42.28%         -0.0179      21.52%
App. 11




          Notes: This table reports the share of variation explained by sorting across five top-level categories in the Census occupational classification system: “Management, Business, Science, and Arts”,
          “Service”, “Sales and Office”, “Natural Resources, Construction, and Maintenance”, “Production, Transportation, and Material Moving”. A sixth category, “Military Specific Operations”, does
          not appear because the CPS is a survey of the civilian non-institutional population. The shares of the five categories of occupations add up to the share of “All Occupation" in Model B and
          Model C in Table 9.7. Entries in bold are statistically significant at the 5% level.
