                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    SUPPLY AND DEMAND IN DISAGGREGATED KEYNESIAN ECONOMIES WITH
                 AN APPLICATION TO THE COVID-19 CRISIS

                                            David Baqaee
                                           Emmanuel Farhi

                                        Working Paper 27152
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27152


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2020




Emmanuel Farhi tragically passed away in July, 2020. Emmanuel was a one-in-a-lifetime friend
and collaborator. Revising this paper without him has been very diffcult. We thank Veronica De
Falco and Stephanie Kestelman for excellent research assistance. We thank Natalie Bau and
Jennifer La’O for their comments. The authors received support from NSF grant No. 1947611.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by David Baqaee and Emmanuel Farhi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Supply and Demand in Disaggregated Keynesian Economies with an Application to the Covid-19
Crisis
David Baqaee and Emmanuel Farhi
NBER Working Paper No. 27152
May 2020, Revised August 2020
JEL No. E0,E12,E2,E23,E24,E3,E52,E6,E62

                                           ABSTRACT

We study supply and demand shocks in a general disaggregated model with multiple sectors,
multiple factors, input-output linkages, downward nominal wage rigidities, credit-constraints, and
a zero lower bound. We use the model to understand how the Covid-19 crisis, an omnibus of
supply and demand shocks, affects output, unemployment, and inflation, and leads to the
coexistence of tight and slack labor markets. Negative sectoral supply shocks are stagflationary,
whereas negative sectoral demand shocks are deflationary. Furthermore, complementarities in
production amplify Keynesian spillovers from negative supply shocks but mitigate them for
negative demand shocks. In a stylized quantitative model of the US, we find supply and demand
shocks each explain about half the reduction in real GDP. Although there is as much as 7%
Keynesian unemployment, this is concentrated in certain markets. Hence, aggregate demand
stimulus is less than half as effective as in a typical recession where all labor markets are slack.


David Baqaee
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095
and CEPR
and also NBER
baqaee@econ.ucla.edu

Emmanuel Farhi
Harvard University
and CEPR
1    Introduction
Covid-19 is an unusual macroeconomic shock. It cannot easily be categorized as an
aggregate supply or demand shock. Rather, it is a messy combination of disaggregated
supply and demand shocks. These shocks propagate through supply chains to create
different cyclical conditions in different parts of the economy. Some sectors are tight,
constrained by supply constraints, and struggling to keep up with demand. Other sectors
are slack and shedding workers to reduce excess capacity because of lack of demand.
    To analyze this situation of divergent outcomes and take advantage of the available
disaggregated data, we use a general disaggregated model and aggregate up from the
micro to the macro level. We allow for an arbitrary number of sectors and factors as
well as unrestricted input-output linkages and elasticities of substitution. We incorporate
downward nominal wage rigidities, credit-constraints, and a zero lower bound on nominal
interest rates.
    We model the outbreak of the pandemic as a combination of supply and demand
shocks. We define demand shocks as changes in households’ expenditures for fixed
prices and income and supply shocks as changes in the economy’s production possibil-
ities. On the one hand, the epidemic set off demand shocks by changing final demand
within and across periods. Even fixing incomes and prices, households rebalanced their
current expenditures across sectors for fear of infection from consuming certain goods
and disliking the steps needed to consume other goods safely. Households also reduced
their current expenditures overall, deciding to postpone spending to the future when
conditions for consumption are back to normal. On the other hand, the epidemic also
triggered supply shocks that reduced the availability of some goods. For example, lock-
downs, social distancing in the workplace, and insurance and liability concerns reduced
the supply of labor that can safely be used and the productivity of different industries.
    In this paper, we provide local and global comparative statics with respect to these
shocks and study how the comparative statics depend on complementarities and credit-
constraints. We then use a calibrated version of the model to study the Covid-19 crisis,
decomposing the supply and demand sources of the recession and conducting counter-
factuals. We describe these contributions in turn.
    First, we provide general local comparative statics, characterizing the response of
aggregates such as output, inflation, and unemployment, as well as of disaggregated
variables. In particular, we show how the elasticities of substitution in production and in
consumption interact with the input-output network to redirect demand away from some
factors and towards others, causing Keynesian unemployment in labor markets where

                                             2
demand goes down more than supply.1
       In some special cases, we also provide global comparative statics. These global compar-
ative statics allow us to capture the nonlinearities of the model and in particular how the
shocks interact with each other and get amplified or mitigated. Under some conditions,
we show that as long as there are complementarities, the set of equilibria can be ranked so
that there is a unique best equilibrium with the minimal number of slack labor markets
and the minimal amount of Keynesian unemployment in each labor market.
       We show that complementarities in production amplify negative supply shocks to
one market by causing Keynesian spillovers in other markets. Intuitively, a negative
supply shock raises the price of the shocked sectors, and because of complementarities,
expenditures are redirected towards those sectors. This reduces demand in other sectors
and causes Keynesian unemployment. In contrast, the same complementarities that
amplify supply shocks also mitigate demand shocks. In response to a negative demand
shock, flexible factor prices fall, and because of complementarities, expenditures are
redirected away from flexibly-priced factors towards Keynesian factor markets, which
stabilizes those markets.
       In the best equilibrium, we show that output is monotone decreasing in negative supply
and negative demand shocks, whereas inflation is monotone increasing in negative supply
and monotone decreasing in negative demand shocks. Hence, although supply shocks
can generate Keynesian unemployment, such shocks are generically inflationary.
       The effects of both negative supply and demand shocks are stronger if unemployed
households are unable to borrow against their future income. In this case, unemployed
workers are forced to cut back their spending more aggressively than they would if they
could borrow. Therefore, credit-constraints magnify spending reductions given income
losses and act like endogenous negative demand shocks. As with exogenous demand
shocks, these endogenous demand shocks are also mitigated by complementarities.
       Although our model is disaggregated, under some conditions, it nevertheless admits
an aggregate supply (AS) and aggregate demand (AD) representation. We use this to
illustrate graphically how the equilibrium responds to shocks. A novelty of our model is
that supply shocks do not simply shift the AS and AD curves, but they also change their
shape, resulting in apparent instability of the AS-AD relationship. The unstable shape of
these curves reflects the nonlinearities arising from the interaction of complementarities
   1
   Keynesian unemployment measures the amount of slack in a given factor market. It captures under-
employment due to lack of demand for the good that the factor is producing because of downwardly rigid
wages. Measured unemployment in the data reflects not only Keynesian unemployment but other forms of
supply-driven underemployment due to the pandemic. See Section 2.2 for a discussion.



                                                  3
and occasionally-binding downward nominal wage rigidities.
   We use a parsimonious quantitative input-output model of the US economy to gauge
the importance of the various theoretical forces that we identify. We calibrate the model
to match the reduction in sectoral employment and nominal expenditures in May, 2020
compared to February, 2020. The benchmark model predicts that real GDP falls by 9%,
inflation is −1% and there is up to 7% Keynesian unemployment. Negative supply shocks
on their own reduce output by only 6%, cause mild Keynesian unemployment of around
1%, and imply inflation should be close to 7%. On the other hand, negative demand
shocks on their own reduce output by 5%, cause 10% Keynesian unemployment and
predict inflation of −4%. Hence, both supply and demand shocks are necessary to match
the data, which features large reductions in real GDP but only mild deflation.
   Furthermore, we use the model to classify sectoral labor markets as supply-constrained
(tight) or demand-constrained (slack). Supply-constrained sectors experienced mild infla-
tion, and demand-constrained sectors experienced mild deflation in both the model and
the data over our sample period.
   Using the model, we quantify the importance of complementarities. We find that
although complementarities amplify negative supply shocks, they also mitigate demand
shocks by roughly an equal amount, and therefore, do not have strong effects on the
overall aggregate response of inflation or output. However, complementarities change
the breakdown between the relative importance of supply versus demand.
   Separating demand shortfalls from supply constraints is important because they have
different implications for policy. Policies that boost demand, like lowering interest rates
or increasing government spending, exacerbate problems of inadequate supply, leading
to shortages and inflation. Similarly, policies that boost supply, like relaxing lock-downs
or providing liability exemptions, are ineffective at restoring activity when applied to
demand-constrained sectors.
   In this vein, we consider policy counterfactuals for social insurance and monetary
policy. The sectoral nature of the Covid-19 shock, which affects sectors in different ways,
blunts the power of untargeted aggregate demand stimuli like monetary policy. Compared
to a purely aggregate-demand-driven recession, monetary or untargeted fiscal stimulus
is less than half as effective in the current crisis since around half the labor markets are
supply-constrained. Realistic complementarities further sap the efficacy of aggregate
demand stimulus by dissipating more of it as inflation.
   We also study the importance of social insurance in stabilizing inflation, output, and
employment. Our baseline model has complete markets, and we quantify how credit-
constraints further depress output, inflation, and employment. For example, if 50% of

                                             4
unemployed workers become credit-constrained and receive no income support from
the government, then output falls by an additional 1%, and Keynesian unemployment
increases by an extra 2%. As with monetary policy, the importance of social insurance
depends on the strength of complementarities, and in a Cobb-Douglas model with weaker
complementarities, social insurance is three times more important.
   The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we set up the model, define
the equilibrium and notation, and discuss the shocks. In Section 3, we establish local
comparative static results for a general model with arbitrary elasticities of substitution.
In Section 4, we specialize the environment to Cobb-Douglas, give some examples, and
conduct some global (rather than local) comparative statics. We also show how the
disaggregated Cobb-Douglas model can be represented via an AS-AD diagram. In Section
5, we generalize the global comparative statics and discuss the way complementarities
can amplify supply shocks and mitigate demand shocks. In Section 6, we conduct a
quantitative exercise to understand the importance of the various mechanisms we have
emphasized for the Covid-19 crisis and their implications for policy. We touch upon some
extensions of the basic framework in Section 7 before concluding in Section 8.


Related Literature
The paper is part of the literature on economic effects of the Covid-19 crisis, as well as the
literature on multi-sector models with nominal rigidities.
   Guerrieri et al. (2020) show that negative supply shocks can have negative demand
spillovers, under the condition that the intersectoral elasticity of substitution is less than
the intertemporal one. They also show that this condition is weaker under incomplete
markets. Our results about supply shocks build on and are related to theirs. We show
that complementarities in the production network, rather than consumption, can also
amplify negative supply shocks, even if the intersectoral and intertemporal elasticities of
substitution in consumption are the same. Furthermore, we show that while complemen-
tarities amplify negative supply shocks, they also mitigate negative demand shocks. In
our quantitative exercise, a Cobb-Douglas model, without complementarities, predicts al-
most the same reduction in output and employment as a model with stronger intersectoral
complementarities because of these off-setting effects.
   Bigio et al. (2020) study optimal policies in response to the Covid-19 crisis in a two-
sector Keynesian model. We differ in both focus and framework, since we are not focused
on optimal policy and instead try to understand the importance of the production struc-



                                              5
ture.2 Fornaro and Wolf (2020) study Covid-19 in a New-Keynesian model where the
pandemic is assumed to have persistent effects on productive capacity in the future by
lowering aggregate productivity growth. The expected loss in future income reduces ag-
gregate demand. They show that a feedback loop can arise between aggregate supply and
aggregate demand if productivity growth in turn depends on the level of economic activ-
ity.3 We differ in that we focus on the effects of current disruptions. Caballero and Simsek
(2020) study a different kind of spillover, between asset prices and demand shortages.
       Our paper also relates to quantitative multi-sector models. Barrot et al. (2020) study
the effect of Covid-19 using a quantitative production network with complementarities
and detailed administrative data from France. Bonadio et al. (2020) study the effect of
Covid-19 in a quantitive international trade model. Bodenstein et al. (2020) analyze opti-
mal shutdown policies in a two-sector model with complementarities and minimum-scale
requirements. Our approach differs from these papers due to our focus on nominal rigidi-
ties and Keynesian effects. Brinca et al. (2020) use a statistical model to decompose sectoral
outcomes in the Covid-19 crisis into demand- and supply-side sources. Our classification
of demand and supply drivers are conceptually different to theirs for reasons we discuss
in Section 2. Kaplan et al. (2020) combine an SIR model with a multi-sector heterogeneous
agent New Keynesian model to study the economic impact of the pandemic.
       This paper is also related to other work by the authors, especially Baqaee and Farhi
(2020b). Whereas in this paper, we study how exogenous shocks interact with nominal
frictions and result in involuntary unemployment, Baqaee and Farhi (2020b) is a compan-
ion paper where we analyze the nonlinear mapping from changes in hours and household
preferences to real GDP. In this companion paper, we find that the negative supply and de-
mand shocks associated with Covid-19 are large enough that accounting for nonlinearities
is quantitatively important.
       Our analysis is also related to production network models with nominal rigidities, like
Baqaee (2015), who studies the effect of targeted fiscal policy and shocks to the sectoral
composition of demand in a production network with downward wage rigidity, Pasten
et al. (2017) and Pasten et al. (2019) who study propagation of monetary and TFP shocks
in models with sticky prices, Ozdagli and Weber (2017) who study the interaction of
monetary policy, production networks, and asset prices, and Rubbo (2020) and La’O and
Tahbaz-Salehi (2020) who study optimal monetary policy with sticky prices.
   2
     Bigio et al. (2020) study a fully dynamic model specified in continuous time, which allows them to
analyze how the effects unfold over time.
   3
     This could be because of reduced investment in research and development due to a reduced size of the
market à la Benigno and Fornaro (2018).



                                                   6
2        Setup
In this section, we set up the basic model. We break the description of the model in two.
First, we discuss the intertemporal problem of how households choose to spend their
income across periods. Second, we discuss the intratemporal problem of how a given
amount of expenditures is spent across different goods within a period. We then define
the equilibrium notion and discuss the shocks that we will be studying.


2.1       Environment and Equilibrium
There are two periods, the present denoted without stars, and the future denoted with
stars, and there is no investment.4 We take the price level in the future as given. As in
Krugman (1998) and Eggertsson and Krugman (2012), this is isomorphic to an infinite-
horizon model where after an initial unexpected shock in period 1, the economy returns
to a long-run equilibrium with market clearing and full employment.5 We denote the
supply of the future composite final-consumption good by Ȳ∗ , its price by p̄Y∗ , and future
final income and expenditure by Ē∗ = p̄Y∗ Ȳ∗ , which are all taken to be exogenous.
        There are a set of producers N and a set of factors G with supply functions L f ∈ [0, 1],
which exist in both the present and the future. Full employment occurs when L f = 1 for
every f ∈ G. We denote by N + G the union of these sets. We abuse notation and also
denote the number of producers and factors by N and G.


Consumers.         Consumers own the primary factors. When the quantity of employed
factor f falls, we assume this change comes about via the extensive margin. That is,
some fraction 1 − L f of the owners become unemployed while the remaining fraction L f
continue to receive payment. Of the households who are unemployed, some fraction φ f
can borrow against their income tomorrow. The rest, 1 − φ f , derive their entire income
from f , cannot borrow, and therefore cannot consume today.
        All households have the same intertemporal utility function

                                                              1−1/ρ
                                              y1−1/ρ − 1    y∗    −1
                                    (1 − β)              +β          ,
                                               1 − 1/ρ       1 − 1/ρ
    4
     We abstract from investment in the main body of the paper in order to keep the exposition manageable.
We show in Appendix E how our approach generalizes to environments with investment.
   5
     Our analysis extends to situations where the crisis lasts for multiple periods without change, as long as
we maintain the assumption that there is no investment and no credit constraints; see footnote 12 for more
information.



                                                      7
where ρ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES), β ∈ [0, 1] captures households’
time-preferences, and y and y∗ are current and future consumption.
    Since employed consumers and unemployed consumers that can borrow have the
same homothetic preferences, we can aggregate their demand and refer to them as the
representative Ricardian household. The rest of the households, who are unemployed and
cannot borrow, we call the hand-to-mouth (HtM) households. The intertemporal budget
constraint for the representative Ricardian household is

                          pY∗ y∗ X         X w∗f L∗f                         
                     p y+
                      Y
                                =  wf Lf +            1 − (1 − L f )(1 − φ f ) ,
                          1+i                1+i
                                      f ∈G             f ∈G


where (1 + i) is the nominal interest rate, the wage and quantity of factor f are w f , L f ,
w∗f , and L∗f in the current period and future period. The right-hand side of this equation
is the permanent income of the Ricardian household, and the second summand on the
right-hand side is the income of the Ricardian household in the future. Since some of
the income earned in the future goes to the HtM households, the term (1 − L f )(1 − φ f )
subtracts the income claimed by HtM households tomorrow from total future income.
We omit the HtM households’ budget constraint since they simply spend their exogenous
future income on the future good and cannot consume in the present.
    Now, we turn to the within-period problem. The consumption bundle in the present
period is given by
                                             Y = C(c1 , . . . , cN ; ωD ),

a homothetic final-demand aggregator of the final consumptions ci of the different goods
i. The parameter ωD is a preference shifter capturing changes in the sectoral composition
of final demand. The price pY of the consumption bundle Y is denoted by

                                         pY = P(p1 , . . . , pN ; ωD ).

where P is the dual price index of the quantity index D. We also denote by

                                                     E = pY Y

the present final expenditure. In the rest of the paper, we will refer to Y as output.6
   6
     As long there are no changes in the composition of final demand, ωD is constant, then changes in Y
also coincide with changes in real GDP. To define real GDP, we mimic the chain-weighted procedures used
by national incomePaccountants, local changes in real GDP (output) are defined by the Divisia quantity
index d log YGDP = i∈N (pi ci )/Ed log ci , and changes in the GDP deflator are given by the Divisia price index


                                                          8
Producers.      Producer i maximizes profits
                                                                        X                       X
                               πi =        max                pi yi −            p j xi j −                  w f Li f
                                      {yi },{xi j },{Li f }
                                                                           j∈N                  f ∈G


subject to production function
                                                  n o                            n       o          
                                        yi = Ai Fi xi j                          , Li f                  ,
                                                                        j∈N                   f ∈G


where Ai is a Hicks-neutral productivity shifter, yi is total output, and xi j and Li f are
intermediate and factor inputs used by i. Without loss of generality, we assume that Fi
has constant returns to scale.7


Market equilibrium.          Market equilibrium for goods is standard. The market for i is in
equilibrium if                                                  X
                                                       ci +             x ji = yi .
                                                                 j∈N

    Market equilibrium for factors is non-standard, the wages of factors cannot fall below
some exogenous lower bound.8 We say that factor market f is in equilibrium if the
following there conditions hold:

                            (w f − w̄ f )(L f − L̄ f ) = 0,                      w̄ f ≤ w f,                 L f ≤ L̄ f ,

where                                                                X
                                                              Lf =            Li f
                                                                       i∈N

is the total demand for factor f . The parameters w̄ f and L̄ f are exogenous minimum
nominal wage and endowment of the factor.
    In words, there are two possibilities. One possibility is w f ≥ w̄ f and employment of
the factor is equal to potential with L f = L̄ f . In this case, we say that the market is tight,
that it clears, and that it is supply-constrained. The other possibility is that w f = w̄ f and
d log pGDP = i∈N (pi ci )/(E)d log pi . Therefore, nominal GDP can be decomposed into changes in real GDP
              P
and changes in the price level d log E = d log YGDP + d log pGDP . Discrete changes in real GDP and the price
level are defined by integrating the Divisia indices. If the composition of final demand ωD changes, then
real GDP ∆ log YGDP and the consumption bundle ∆ log Y are only equal up to a first order approximation.
See Baqaee and Farhi (2020b) for more details. We return to these issues in the quantitative exercise in
Section 6.
    7
      Following the replication argument of McKenzie (1959), we can treat every production function as
though it has constant returns by adding producer-specific fixed factors to the model.
    8
      In Appendix F, we extend the model to allow for some downward wage flexibility.

                                                                       9
 wf




                                                            wf
                      Supply                                                    Supply




 wf

                                             Demand                                        Demand




                          Lf                      Lf                               Lf          Lf

                  (a) Factors in L                                      (b) Factors in K

                               Figure 2.1: Equilibrium in the factor markets.

employment of the factor is less than potential L f ≤ L̄ f . We then say that the market
is slack, that it does not clear, and that it is demand-constrained. In this case, we call the
underemployment L̄ f − L f of the factor Keynesian unemployment since it is caused by a lack
of demand for the good that the factor is producing given the rigid wage.
      We only consider two cases: the case where w̄ f is equal to its pre-shock market-clearing
value, denoting the set of such factors by L ⊆ G; and the case where w̄ f = −∞, making the
wage of f flexible and ensuring the market for f always clears, denoting the set of such
factors by K ⊆ G. For concreteness, we call K the capital factors and L the labor factors.
      Of course, these are just names, in practice, one may easily imagine that certain capital
markets could also be subject to nominal rigidities. This can be a way to model firm
failures: imagine firms take out within-period loans to pay for their variable expenses,
secured against their capital income. If the firm’s capital income declines in nominal terms,
then the firm defaults on the loan, exits the market, and its capital becomes unemployed
for the rest of the period. We build on this observation further in Appendix D, where we
formally introduce an extensive margin of firm exit. For the body of the paper, we treat
capital markets as being frictionless.
      We denote the endogenous set of supply-constrained factor markets by S ⊆ G. In
other words, f ∈ S if, and only if, L f = L̄ f . We denote the endogenous set of demand-
constrained factor markets by D ⊆ G. Hence, f ∈ D if, and only if, w f = w̄ f . Of course,
capital markets are always supply-constrained K ⊆ S, and demand-constrained sectors
are necessarily a subset of labor markets D ⊆ L. Figure 2.1 illustrates the supply and
demand curves in the factor markets.



                                                       10
Equilibrium.        Given a nominal interest rate (1 + i), factor supplies L̄ f , productivities Ai ,
and demand shifters ωD , an equilibrium is a set of prices pi , factor wages w f , intermediate
input choices xij , factor input choices Li f , outputs yi , and final demands ci , such that: each
producer maximizes its profits subject to its technological constraint; consumers maximize
their utility; and the markets for all goods and factors are in equilibrium. Without loss of
generality, we normalize Ȳ∗ = Ȳ = 1 and pY∗ = 1.


2.2     Supply and Demand Shocks
We provide comparative statics with respect to shocks, starting at an initial equilibrium
with full employment of all factors. A natural disaster, like the Covid epidemic, can be
captured as a combination of negative supply and demand shocks. We define a demand
shock to be a shock that changes the household’s expenditure shares on the different goods
(across sectors and over time) at given prices and incomes. We define supply shocks to be
shocks that change the possibilities to produce the different goods.


Supply shocks.         We define supply shocks to be changes in the economy’s production
possibility frontier, which could come in the form of either reduced factors or reduced
productivity. We call reductions in the available productive endowment of labor L̄ f
shocks to potential labor. These are reductions that would take place absent any nominal
frictions. These reductions could have different drivers. They could be driven directly by
government action, like mandated shutdowns and stay at home orders. They could also
be due to a reduced willingness to work by employees due to health concerns or policy
disincentives such as overly generous unemployment insurance. Finally, reductions in
potential labor could also be the result of a reorganization of production. For example,
firms could be forced to operate at lower capacity to reduce legal liability and implement
social distancing, such as a restaurant that can only safely serve a fraction of the customers
it used to serve. In this case, workers would be involuntarily unemployed due to a reduced
physical capacity to employ them and not because there is not enough demand for the
good that they produce. This type of supply-driven underemployment would occur even
in the absence of downward nominal wage rigidities. For this reason, we do not include
this form of underemployment in our definition of Keynesian unemployment.9
   9
     To model capacity constraints formally, imagine that L̄ f = min{L̃ f , S f }, where L̃ f is the physical endow-
ment of labor and S f is a “safety” input which, in the initial equilibrium, is not scarce. Since it is not scarce,
it commands a price of zero initially. However, the pandemic reduces the supply of S f so that it binds. At
this point, the supply of potential labor L̄ f falls one-for-one with S f . In this case, employers would refuse
to hire any additional workers since their marginal product is zero. A formal capacity constraint like this


                                                        11
    Similarly, the epidemic might have reduced the productivity Ai of the different pro-
ducers by changing the way firms can operate, for instance by reducing person-to-person
interactions.


Demand shocks.         Whereas supply shocks change household’s choices by changing prices
and incomes, demand shocks change household choices for fixed prices and income.10
Accordingly, the pandemic can change the current sectoral composition of final demand,
since at given prices and income, households may shift expenditure away from some
goods like cruises and air transportation, and towards other goods like groceries and
online retail. We model this as a change in the preference shifter ωD .
    Similarly, the pandemic can reduce households’ willingness to consume in the present
relative to the future: at given prices and income, households may choose to consume less
during the epidemic and more afterwards. We model this as an increase in the discount
factor β/(1 − β). In Section 4, we provide a simple microfoundation for these demand
shocks using a health-related disutility function.


2.3    Input-Output Definitions
To analyze the model, we define some input-output objects such as input-output matrices,
Leontief inverse matrices, and Domar weights associated with any equilibrium. To make
the exposition more intuitive, we slightly abuse notation by treating factors with the same
notation as goods. For each factor f , we interchangeably use the notation Li f or xi(N+ f ) to
denote its use by producer i, the notation L f or y f to denote total factor supply, and p f or
w f to refer to its price or wage. Furthermore, we denote final demand as an additional
good produced by producer 0 using the final demand aggregator. We interchangeably
use the notation ci or x0i to denote final consumption of good i. We write 1 + N for the
union of the sets {0} and N, and 1 + N + G for the union of the sets {0}, N, and G. With this
abuse of notation, we can stack every market in the economy into a single input-output
matrix that includes the household, the producers, and the factors.
is isomorphic to our formulation where we directly shock L̄ f in terms of real GDP, inflation, and hours
worked. The only difference is that the increase in the wage w f would not take place and would instead be
captured as a Ricardian rent by the firm.
   10
      Our notion of supply and demand shocks are defined in the context of a general equilibrium, and are
not the same as the one used by Brinca et al. (2020). They separate shocks based on whether they shift labor
supply or labor demand, but for us, a “supply” shock can shift either labor supply or labor demand. For
example, a capacity constraint placed on firms due to social distancing, described in the previous footnote,
would manifest as a reduction in labor demand, but be classified as a supply shock under our definition
since it reduces the production possibilities of the economy.



                                                    12
Input-output matrix.            We define the input-output matrix to be the (1+N +G)×(1+N +G)
matrix Ω whose ijth element is equal to i’s expenditures on inputs from j as a share of its
total income/revenues
                                                  p j xij      p j xi j
                                          Ωij ≡           =P              .
                                                  pi yi      k∈N+G pk xik

The input-output matrix Ω records the direct exposures of one producer to another.


Leontief inverse matrix.           We define the Leontief inverse matrix as

                                      Ψ ≡ (I − Ω)−1 = I + Ω + Ω2 + . . . .

The Leontief inverse matrix Ψ records instead the direct and indirect exposures through
the supply chains in the production network. This can be seen from the fact that (Ωn )ij
measures the weighted sums of all paths of length n from producer i to producer j.


Nominal expenditure and Domar weights. Recall that nominal expenditure is the total
sum of all final expenditures                     X               X
                                            E=          pi ci =         pi x0i .
                                                  i∈N             i∈N

We define the Domar weight λi of producer i to be its sales share as a fraction of GDP

                                                            pi yi
                                                    λi ≡          .
                                                             E

                      λi > 1 in general since some sales are not final sales but intermediate sales.
            P
Note that       i∈N
The Domar weight λ f of factor f is simply its total income share and factor income shares
sum to one f ∈G λ f = 1.
           P

   The accounting identity pi yi = pi x0i + j∈N pi x ji = Ω0i E + j∈N Ω ji λ j E links the Domar
                                           P                     P

weights to the Leontief inverse via
                                                            X
                                            λi = Ψ0i =            Ω0j Ψ ji ,
                                                            j∈N


where Ω0j = (p j x0j )/(              pk x0k ) = (p j c j )/E is the share of good j in final expenditure.
                            P
                              k∈N+G



2.4    Nested-CES Economies
For simplicity, we restrict attention to nested-CES economies. That is, we assume every
production function and the final demand function can be written as nested-CES functions

                                                          13
(albeit with an arbitrary set of nests).
         More precisely, any nested-CES economy can be written in standard form, defined by a
tuple (ω̄, θ), where ω̄ is a (1 + N + G) × (1 + N + G) matrix of input-output parameters and
θ is a (1 + N) × 1 vector of microeconomic elasticities of substitution. Each good i ∈ N is
produced with the production function
                                                                         θi
                                                               θi −1  θ −1
                                                              !          i
                                   yi Ai  X           xi j θi 
                                     =     
                                                  ω̄i j               ,
                                                                      
                                   yi Āi  j∈N+G       xi j          

where xij are intermediate inputs from j used by i. Final demand is produced by producer
0 using
                                                                       θ0
                                                             θ0 −1  θ −1
                                                   ω0j x0j θ0 
                                                            !          0
                                  y0  X
                                    =       ω̄0j                        ,
                                                   ω̄0j x0j
                                                                    
                                  y0  j∈N+G                        

where ω0j are sectoral demand shocks with                     ω0j = 1. In these equations, variables with
                                                      P
                                                          j
over-lines are normalizing constants.To simplify the notation below, we think of ω0 as a
1 × (1 + N + G) vector with k-th element ω0k .
         Through a relabelling, this structure can represent any nested-CES economy with an
arbitrary pattern of nests and elasticities. Intuitively, by relabelling each CES aggregator
to be a new producer, we can have as many nests as desired.11


3         Local Comparative Statics
In this section, we describe the comparative statics of the basic model and provide some
examples. Our results here are local (first-order) comparative statics. In Sections 4 and 5,
we provide global comparative statics in important special cases.
         Because of downward wage-rigidity, variables like aggregate output and inflation
are not differentiable everywhere. Therefore, our local comparative statics should be
understood as holding almost-everywhere. Furthermore, there are potentially multiple
equilibria, in which case, local comparative statics should be understood as perturbations
of a given locally-isolated equilibrium.
         We write d log X for the differential of an endogenous variable X understood as the
(infinitesimal) change in an variable X in response to (infinitesimal) shocks. For example,
    11
   Our results can easily be extended beyond the nested-CES case along the lines of Section 5 in Baqaee
and Farhi (2019a).



                                                     14
the supply shocks are d log Ai and d log L̄ f , and the shocks to the sectoral composition of
demand are d log ω0j . We sometimes write them in vector notation as d log A, d log L̄, and
d log ω0 . Similarly, for discrete changes in a variable, we write ∆ log X.
       We proceed in several steps. First, we derive an Euler equation for nominal expenditure
which gives changes in current nominal expenditure as a function of changes in the current
price index. Second, we derive an aggregation equation which gives changes in output as
a function of changes in nominal expenditure and changes in factor income shares. Third
and finally, we derive propagation equations which give changes in factor income shares
and changes in the price index as a function of changes in nominal expenditure. Putting
these steps together gives a complete characterization of local comparative statics.


3.1      Euler Equations for Consumption and Expenditure
The consumption Euler equation for the Ricardian households is
                                               !−ρ                                       
                      (1 − β)      pY                  Ȳ∗      X                      
                   Y=                                        1 −   λ∗
                                                                        (1 − L h )(1 − φ )
                                                                                        h 
                                                                                           .                (3.1)
                         β    p̄Y /(1 + i)           (1 + i)         h                    
                                                                  h∈G


Log-linearizing the Euler equation results in an AD curve that relates changes in output
d log Y to changes in the price index d log pY :

                                d log Y = −ρd log pY + d log ζ + d log Θ,                                    (3.2)

where d log ζ and d log Θ are intercepts. The first intercept term is

                                                             β              
                    d log ζ = −ρ d log(1 + i) + d log            − d log p̄Y∗ + d log Ȳ∗ .                  (3.3)
                                                             1−β

With some abuse of terminology, we call d log ζ an aggregate or intertemporal demand shock.
A positive aggregate demand shock can come about from a reduction in the nominal
interest rate or the discount factor, or an increase in future prices or output (a proxy for
forward guidance).12
  12
    If the crisis lasts for more than one period, and there are no credit-constraints, the Euler equation can still
be used to write output in each period P as a function of the price index in thatperiod and exogenous shocks.
                                                                      β
That is, ∆ log Yt = −ρ∆ log pYt − ρ Tj=1 ∆ log(1 + it+j−1 ) + ∆ log β∗t − ∆ log p̄Y∗ + ∆ log Ȳ∗ + d log Θ, where t
indexes time and ∗ is the terminal period when the economy recovers. Since this is the only dynamic
relationship, the rest of the analysis can be combined with this Euler equation instead to determine output
in each period before recovery. This approach is only tenable if the periods are short-lived however, since
we assume that the nominal wage constraint is exogenous.



                                                        15
   The second intercept is
                                                                           
                                                Eλ∗ L f (1 − φ f )d log L f
                                     d log Θ =                              ,
                                               1 − Eλ∗ (1 − L f )(1 − φ f )

where the expectation uses the factor income shares in the future, λ∗ , as the probability
distribution. Note that without HtM households, φ f = 1 for every f , this term is always
zero. We call d log Θ the endogenous aggregate demand shock. This term captures the fact
that reductions in employment today reduce spending today, since 1−φ f of type f workers
become constrained. Therefore, as pointed out by Guerrieri et al. (2020), a supply-shock
driven reduction in employment can feed back into reduced nominal demand because
some households are HtM.
   Since E = pY Y, changes in nominal expenditure d log E are similarly given by

                        d log E = d log(pY Y) = (1 − ρ)d log pY + d log ζ + d log Θ.                                    (3.4)

Recall that ρ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES). When ρ > 1, increases in
prices d log pY > 0 reduce nominal expenditure as consumers substitute towards the future.
Conversely, when ρ < 1, increases in prices d log pY > 0 increase nominal expenditure as
consumers substitute towards the present. When ρ = 1, and there are no HtM households,
changes in nominal expenditure are exogenously given by the shocks d log E = d log ζ.
Although our propositions allow for arbitrary values of ρ, we will focus primarily on the
case where ρ = 1, which is a focal point for the empirical literature on the IES.


3.2     Aggregation Equation for Output
Next, we express changes in output as a function of changes in nominal expenditure and
changes in factor shares.

Proposition 1 (Aggregation). Changes in output are given by
                  X                     X
      d log Y =         λi d log Ai +          λ f d log L f ,
                  i∈N                   f ∈G
                  X                     X                         X             n                                    o
             =          λi d log Ai +          λ f d log L̄ f +          λ f min d log λ f + d log E − d log L̄ f , 0 .
                  i∈N                   f ∈G                      f ∈L
                  |                {z                     }       |                        {z                       }
                             ∆ potential output                                         ∆ output gap


   The first expression for d log Y shows that a version of Hulten’s (1978) theorem holds

                                                                 16
for this economy. In particular, to a first-order, changes in output can only be driven by
changes in the productivities d log Ai weighted by their producer’s sales share λi , or by
changes in the quantities of factors d log L f weighted by their income shares λ f .13
       The second expression uses the fact that while changes in capitals f ∈ K are exogenous
with d log L f = d log L̄ f , changes in labors f ∈ L are endogenous with d log L f = d log L̄ f +
    n                                   o
min d log λ f + d log E − d log L̄ f , 0 ≤ d log L̄ f . Here we have used the observation that
factor f is demand-constrained, with d log w f = 0 and d log L f = d log λ f + d log E if, and
only if, changes in nominal expenditure on this factor d log λ f + d log E are below changes
in its potential supply d log L̄ f .
       The first term in the second expression is the change in potential output and corre-
sponds to the change in output that would occur in a neoclassical version of the model
with flexible wages and full employment of all factors. The second term is the the nega-
tive output gap that can open up in the Keynesian version of the model with downward
nominal wage rigidities because of Keynesian unemployment in the different factor mar-
kets. These Keynesian spillovers depend on endogenous changes in nominal expenditure
d log E (pinned down by the Euler equation for expenditures) and factor income shares
d log λ f (pinned down by the propagation equations in the next subsection). It is only
through the determination of these endogenous sufficient statistics that the structure of
the network and the elasticities of substitution matter.
       Without delving into the details of the disaggregated model, we can already make an
observation about the way inflation responds to shocks.

Corollary 1 (Inflation). At the full-equilibrium steady-state, the change in the price level is given
by                                                                                  
                                                1         1  X                     
                  d log pY = d log E − d log Y = d log ζ −    λ f φ f d log L f  .
                                                                                     
                                                ρ         ρ                          
                                                                    f ∈G

       Hence, reductions in employment are stagflationary unless they are accompanied by
exogenous negative aggregate demand shocks. In particular, negative supply shocks or
shocks to the sectoral composition of demand are both inflationary. This corollary follows
from combining the Euler equation (3.4) with Proposition 1.
  13
     This expression also shows that changes in the sectoral composition of demand within the period
d log ω0 , or changes in aggregate demand d log ζ, can only change output through changes in the quantities
of factors.




                                                    17
3.3      Propagation Equations for Shares, Prices, and Factor Employment
We now show how changes in factor income shares d log λ f are determined. For a matrix
M, we denote by M(i) its i-th row by M(j) its j-th column. We write CovΩ(j) (·, ·) to denote the
covariance of two vectors of size 1 + N + G using the j-the row of the input-ouput matrix
Ω(j) as a probability distribution.

Proposition 2 (Propagation). Changes in sales and factor shares are given by

                                       Ψ(k)
                                                !
      d log λk = θ0 CovΩ(0) d log ω0 ,
                                        λk
                                                                                                         
                 X                           X                  X                              Ψ(k) 
               +      λ j (θ j − 1)CovΩ(j)     Ψ(i) d log Ai −   Ψ( f ) d log λ f − d log L f ,
                                                                                                         
                  j∈1+N
                                              
                                             i∈N
                                                                                                   λk 
                                                                    f ∈G


almost everywhere, where changes in factor employments are given by
                               
                                            d log L̄ f ,                           for      f ∈ K,
                   d log L f = 
                               
                                   n                               o
                                min d log λ f + d log E, d log L̄ f ,
                                                                                   for      f ∈ L.

   To understand these equations, it helps to break them down into forward and backward
propagation equations. Forward propagation equations describe changes in prices:
                                            X                      X
                             d log pk = −         Ψki d log Ai +          Ψk f d log w f ,
                                            i∈N                    f ∈G


with the change in the wage given by d log w f = d log λ f + d log E − d log L f . Changes in
prices propagate downstream (forward) through cost functions. A negative productivity
shock ∆ log Ai to a producer i upstream from k increases the price of k in proportion to
how much k buys from i directly and indirectly as measured by Ψki . Similarly an increase
d log w f = d log λ f − d log L f + d log E in the wage of factor f increases the price of k in
proportion to the direct and indirect exposure of k to f .
   Backward propagation equations describe changes in sales or factor shares given
changes in prices:
                                                 X                                       
        d log λk = θ0 CovΩ(0) d log ω0 , Ψ(k) /λk +  λ j (θ j − 1)CovΩ(j) −d log p, Ψ(k) /λk .
                                                         j∈1+N


Changes in sales propagate upstream (backward) through demand. The first term on
the right-hand side θ0 CovΩ(0) (d log ω0 , Ψ(k) /λk ) on the right-hand side is the direct effect of


                                                        18
shocks to the sectoral composition of final demand on the sales of k. These shocks directly
increase the share of k if they redirect demand towards goods j that have high direct and
indirect exposures to k relative to the rest of the economy as measured by Ψ jk /λk to k .
   The second term j∈1+N λ j (θ j − 1)CovΩ(j) (−d log p, Ψ(k) /λk ) on the right-hand side cap-
                     P

tures the changes in the sales of i from substitutions by producers j downstream from k. If
producer j has an elasticity of substitution θ j below one so that its inputs are complements,
then it shifts its expenditure towards those inputs l with higher price increases d log pl ,
and this increases the demand for k if those goods l buy a lot from k directly and indirectly
relative to the rest of the economy as measured by Ψlk /λk . These expenditure-switching
patterns are reversed when θ j is above one (the inputs of j are substitutes). When θ j is
equal to one (the inputs of j are Cobb-Douglas) these terms disappear.
    Combining the backward and forward propagation equations yields Proposition 2.
Note that once a factor market f becomes slack, the change in its income share d log λ f
becomes irrelevant for changes in all the other sales and factor shares since they then
translate one for one into changes in employment of the factor d log L f and leave its wage
unchanged with d log w f = 0.


4     Cobb-Douglas Example
To better understand how the economy responds to supply and demand shocks, in this
section, we focus on the Cobb-Douglas special case: ρ = θ j = 1 for every j ∈ N. Hence,
intertemporal and intersectoral preferences are log, and production functions are Cobb-
Douglas. We discuss how the results change when we deviate from the Cobb-Douglas
assumption in Section 5.


4.1   A Microfoundation for Demand Shocks
When household preferences are Cobb-Douglas, there is a simple microfoundation for the
demand shocks motivated by health concerns. To see this, consider households with log
preferences                                                      
                                X                                   X
                     (1 − β)    Ω̄0i log ci − H ({ci }i∈N ) + β   Ω̄0i log c∗i ,
                               i∈N                                      i

where β ∈ [0, 1] captures households’ time-preferences, and ci and c∗i are current and future
consumption of good i. The function H ({ci }i∈N ) is a homothetic aggregator that captures
health concerns of the household associated with consumption today. We assume there


                                                    19
are no health concerns in the future. We let the disutility of consumption due to health
concerns be                                          X
                                   H ({ci }i∈N ) =         κi log ci ,
                                                       i

where κi ≥ 0 captures the riskiness of consuming good i. As κi increases, households
choose to spend a smaller fraction of their permanent income on purchasing i. We call an
increase in κi an individual negative demand shock for sector i (in contrast to aggregate
demand shocks which affect spending on all goods produced this period).
   The health-risk parameters κ then map into shocks to both the intersectoral composi-
tion of demand
                                                         Ω̄0i − κi
                              ∆ log ω0i = ∆ log                         ,
                                                     (1 − j∈N κ j )Ω̄0i
                                                         P

and shocks to aggregate demand

                                                 β                          X
              ∆ log ζ = −∆ log(1 + i) − ∆ log       + ∆ log Ē∗ + ∆ log(1 −     κ j ).
                                                1−β                         j∈N


For future reference, when we refer to an aggregate demand shock, we mean a change in
∆ log ζ that keeps the intersectoral composition of final demand ∆ log ω0 = 0 constant.


4.2   Local Comparative Statics
Using Propositions 1 and 2, we analyze negative supply shocks d log L̄ f ≤ 0 and negative
demand shocks dκi < 0. For simplicity, set the share of potentially HtM households in
every sector to be the same φi = φ. Recall that S and D are the equilibrium sets of supply-
and demand-constrained factors. We give comparative statics for a given S and D. We
then give conditions for these sets of supply- and demand-constrained factors to indeed
arise in equilibrium. We start by considering supply shocks.


Supply Shocks. Consider negative supply shocks on their own. In response to negative
supply shocks, aggregate expenditures fall in the present, since some households become
HtM. This reduction in spending reduces employment in demand-constrained factor
markets and depresses output.
   To see this, define the average negative labor shock to the supply-constrained factors

                                                X λf
                                  d log L̄S =        d log L̄ f ,
                                                  λS
                                                f ∈S



                                                 20
where λS =                λ f . Similarly, the average employment change in the demand-constrained
               P
                   f ∈S
factors is
                                       X λf             X λf
                          d log LD =        d log L f <      d log L̄ f = d log L̄D ,
                                         λD               λD
                                       f ∈D                 f ∈D

where λD =                  λ f . Keynesian unemployment is given by d log LD − d log L̄D . Using
                 P
                     f ∈D
Proposition 1, we can write

             d log Y = λS d log L̄S + λD d log λD + λD d log E = λS d log L̄S + λD d log E.

The second equality follows from Proposition 2 which implies that there are no changes
in the share of factors d log λ f = 0. Reductions in nominal spending d log E reduce output
by causing Keynesian unemployment.
   Using the Euler Equation (3.4), starting at the full employment allocation, the change
in nominal spending today is

                                                                            (1 − φ)λS d log L̄S
               d log E = (1 − φ)λS d log L̄S + (1 − φ)λD d log E =                              .
                                                                              1 − (1 − φ)λD

Hence, negative supply shocks reduce nominal GDP by reducing the income of credit-
constrained consumers directly and indirectly through a Keynesian-cross type effect.
Combining these equations results in the following.

Proposition 3 (Supply shocks). Suppose ρ = θ0 = θ j = 1, and φ j = φ for all j ∈ N. Then, in
response to negative labor supply shocks d log L̄ we have

                                                                         λS
                     d log Y = λS d log L̄S + λD d log LD =                      d log L̄S .
                                                                   1 − (1 − φ)λD

   The direct impact on output of the negative shock to the supply-constrained factors
is given by λS d log L̄S , and the amplification of this shock through Keynesian channels is
given by the multiplier 1/[1 − (1 − φ)(1 − λS )]. Naturally, amplification is stronger, the
lower is the social insurance parameter φ < 1. Amplification is also stronger when the
share of the supply-constrained factors λS is low.
   We now go back and check that our conjectured set of supply-constrained factors is in-
deed the equilibrium set of supply-constrained factors. A factor f is demand-constrained
in equilibrium if, and only if, f ∈ L and

                                       (1 − φ)
                                                  λS d log L̄S < d log L̄ f
                                    1 − (1 − φ)λD

                                                       21
That is, as long as the negative shock to factor f is sufficiently small in magnitude compared
to the average shock affecting the supply-constrained part of the economy. This condition
is harder to satisfy the smaller is the set of supply-constrained factors λS and the higher is
the market completeness parameter φ. In particular, if we assume that there are no credit-
constrained households φ = 1, then this condition cannot be satisfied and all factors are
supply-constrained. In this case, Keynesian frictions would not be triggered.


Demand Shocks.           To understand demand shocks, starting at the full employment steady-
state without supply shocks, we consider an aggregate demand shock. After that, we
consider individual demand shocks.

Proposition 4 (Aggregate demand shocks). Suppose ρ = θ0 = θ j = 1, and φ j = φ for all
j ∈ N. For an aggregate demand shock, d log ζ, the change in output is

                                                                        λD
                     d log Y = λD d log LD = λD d log E =                       d log ζ.
                                                                  1 − (1 − φ)λD

       The last equality uses (3.4). Hence, as long as there are some HtM households φ , 1,
aggregate demand shocks are also amplified by a multiplier 1/(1 − (1 − φ)λD ), for similar
reasons to supply shocks.14
       Next consider some individual demand shocks dκi , starting at the full employment
steady-state without supply shocks. In this case, reduced demand for good i will ripple
up the supply chain and differentially affect different factor markets. To see this, note that
in demand constrained sectors, employment falls according to the reduction in nominal
spending
                                                                                                     
                                      X                                X         L h
                                                                                                         
d log Li = d log λi +d log E = d log      Ψ ji Ω̄0j − κ j +d log 1 −   λ∗h (1 − ∗ )(1 − φ) < 0,
                                                            
                                        
                                          j
                                                                                          Lh
                                                                                  h


where the second equality uses the Euler equation for expenditures (3.4). Intuitively,
there are two reasons why nominal spending on factor i can fall. First, as emphasized in
Baqaee (2015), a negative demand shock dκ j > 0 to consumption good j affects demand
for factor i by j’s network-adjusted factor intensity Ψ ji > 0. Intuitively, Ψ ji is the fraction
  14
    For supply shocks, the details of the production network do not show up in the results, and only the factor
shares mattered. This is a manifestation of a more general result, shown in Appendix C, which establishes
that as long as all elasticities of substitution are uniform, for negative supply shocks and aggregate demand
shocks, initial factor shares are a global sufficient statistic for the production network. The Cobb-Douglas
economy is just an example of this more general result because all the elasticities of substitution are equal
to one. This sufficient statistic result does not hold for individual demand shocks.


                                                       22
of j’s revenues that are ultimately paid out to factor i, both directly and indirectly. This
is the first summand. The second summand captures the fact that demand shocks to any
demand-constrained factors will depress the income of credit-constrained consumers, and
through this, lower overall expenditures. The equation above is a linear system in d log L,
so solving through gives
                                                                                   
                                      Ψ ji dκ j      1 − φ X           Ψ
                                     P                             P
                                 −       j                             j   j f dκ j 
                    d log Li =                  −           Lf                     ,
                                                                                    
                               λi (1 − h κh )  φ                 λi (1 − h κh ) 
                                      P                                   P
                                                             f ∈D


the first summand is the direct effect of the negative demand shock and the second
summand is the negative spillovers from HtM households. In the complete markets case,
with φ = 1, only the direct effect matters. However, when there are credit-constrained
consumers, the indirect effect also matters.
   Combining these observations with Proposition 1 allows us to state the following.

Proposition 5 (Individual demand shocks). Suppose ρ = θ0 = θ j = 1, and φ j = φ for all
j ∈ N. For individual demand shocks, dκ, the change in output is
                                                                                    
                              1          X  X               1−φ X  Li X             
             d log Y = −                         Ψ         +               Ψ            .
                                       
                                                      dκ                        dκ
                                                                                      
                                                   ji    j                   ji    j
                                        
                         (1 − h∈N κh )  i∈D j∈N              φ i∈D Li j∈D
                                                                     ∗
                             P                                                         

   The first term is the direct effect of the negative demand shock and the second term
are the Keynesian spillovers from the presence of HtM households.


4.3   Global Comparative Statics
In general, the equilibrium of the model may not be unique. However, there is a simple-
to-compute unique “best” equilibrium. We can also provide global comparative statics
for this equilibrium. To state our result, we endow RG with the partial ordering x ≤ y
if and only if x f ≤ y f for all f ∈ G. Recall that we use ∆ to denote discrete changes in a
variable to distinguish them from infinitesimal local changes denoted by d.

Proposition 6 (Ranking equilibria). Suppose that ρ = θ0 = θ j = 1 for every j ∈ N. Then there
is a unique best equilibrium: for any other equilibrium, ∆ log Y and ∆ log L are lower than at the
best equilibrium.

   Proposition 6 provides a straightforward way to compute this best equilibrium using
a greedy algorithm along the lines of Vives (1990) or, more recently, Elliott et al. (2014).

                                                    23
We can find the best equilibrium as follows. Solve the model assuming all factor mar-
kets are supply-constrained. If one of the wages is below the minimum, call this market
demand-constrained and set its wage equal to its lower bound. Recompute the equi-
librium assuming that these factor markets are demand-constrained. Continue in this
manner until the wage in every candidate supply-constrained market is above its lower
bound.
       For the best equilibrium, we can conduct global comparative statics for both supply
and demand shocks.

Proposition 7 (Global comparative statics). Under the assumptions of Proposition 6, in the
best equilibrium, the following holds:

   1. Real GDP ∆ log Y and employment ∆ log L are increasing and the price level ∆ log pY is
         decreasing in supply shocks ∆ log L̄.

   2. Real GDP ∆ log Y, employment ∆ log L, and the price level ∆ log pY are increasing in
         exogenous aggregate demand shocks ∆ log ζ.

   3. Employment ∆ log L is decreasing in individual demand shocks ∆κi .

       The global comparative static results in Proposition 7 show that the local-comparative
static results hold globally. Furthermore, as anticipated in Section 3, (1) shows that
negative labor shocks in some factor markets raise the overall price level and, if there
are HtM households, create Keynesian unemployment in other factor markets. On the
other hand, (2) shows that negative aggregate demand shocks, whether driven by policy,
expectations about the future, or health concerns can create Keynesian unemployment
whilst lowering the overall price level. Finally, (3) shows that individual demand shocks
lower employment globally.15


4.4      Intuition Using AS-AD Representation
The intuition for Proposition 7 can be more effectively illustrated via an AS-AD repre-
sentation. The best equilibrium of the model is the point at which an aggregate supply
and aggregate demand curve intersect. This representation is useful for comparing the
  15
    Following Section 4.1, an aggregate demand shock is driven by health-concerns if ∆κi = Ω̄0i κ for any
κ > 0. In this case, health-concerns reduce expenditures today without changing the sectoral composition
of household spending. For technical reasons, we do not characterize changes in output and inflation when
the sectoral composition of final demand changes. This is because when the sectoral composition of final
demand changes, changes in real GDP can no longer be measured using ∆ log Y globally (only locally). See
the path-dependence problem discussed in Baqaee and Farhi (2020b).

                                                   24
behavior of our model to the classic single-sector analysis. To draw this representation,
for technical reasons, we require that demand shocks are uniform across sectors κi = Ω̄0i κ,
so that they do not change sectoral composition of final demand.16
       To derive the AS curve, fix some level of output Y. There is a price level pY (Y) such
that: given the implied level of expenditure E(Y) = pY (Y)Y, the wage of every factor is
consistent with the amount of expenditures on that factor; and these wages give rise to
prices that are consistent with the AS curve pY (Y). To derive the AD curve, we invert
the consumption Euler equation (3.1) to express pY (Y) as a function of Y, and use the
reductions in employment consistent with the AS curve.
       An example is plotted in Figure 4.1 at the initial equilibrium in the absence any
exogenous shock.17 The downward slope of the left-side of the AS curve depends on
the downward flexibility of factor prices. If the set of capitals is empty (K = ∅), then the
AS curve is horizontal to the left. If the set of labors is empty (L = ∅), then the AS curve
is vertical to the left. Of course, in the case when there are no potentially-sticky factor
markets, we recover the neoclassical model.
       The shape of the AD curve depends on the share of HtM households φ. When there are
no HtM households, φ = 1, the AD curve is just given by ∆ log pY = −∆ log Y. However,
when there are HtM households, the AD curve becomes kinked. When output is higher
than potential, no household is losing income, and so the AD curve is the same as the
one with only Ricardian households. However, when output is below potential, the AD
curve becomes flatter. Intuitively, when output is below potential, unemployment lowers
nominal expenditures, and hence, for a given amount of output Y, reduces the price level.



4.4.1     Negative Supply Shock

As discussed earlier, negative supply shocks in one market can spill over into other markets
if there are credit-constrained households. This negative spillover is larger, the larger is
the share of households that can potentially become constrained. Figure 4.2 represents a
negative supply shock using an AS-AD diagram with and without HtM households.
       Start without HtM households. Initially, the AS curve is horizontal to the left since,
  16
      As explained before, if demand shocks are not uniform, then discrete changes in real GDP ∆ log YGDP
and the price level ∆ log pGDP , defined as integrals of the relevant Divisia index, cannot be recovered from
∆ log Y and ∆ log pY .
   17
      To plot the examples throughout this section, we simplify the structure of the economy somewhat by
assuming there exists a retailer that produces the composite consumption good for the household. This
rules out shocks to the sectoral composition of demand, since the only consumption good is produced by
this retailer.


                                                     25
                 pY
                                           Aggregate Supply
                        φ=孴

                      φ<孴




                      K =⾚
                                                                  Aggregate Demand
                                      ≠⾚
                                  L
                             K,
                                           L =⾚

                                              Y                         Y

Figure 4.1: AS-AD representation of the equilibrium without shocks. The K = ∅ case is when all factors
have downwardly rigid wages, and L = ∅ case is when all factors have flexible wages. The complete
markets case is φ = 1, and φ < 1 is the case with some credit-constrained households.


in this example, there are no capitals (K = ∅). The initial level of output is given by Ȳ
and the new level of labor available in the shocked sector is given by L̄0f . Unlike standard
models, in response to the negative supply shock, the shape of the AS curve changes. The
negative supply shock shifts the AS curve backwards, but it still intersects the AD curve
at a point where output is equal to potential.
   Now consider the panel with HtM households. In this case, the AS curve looks the
same as before. However, now the AD curve also responds. In particular, the AD curve
moves down and becomes kinked at the new level of potential output. The reason the AD
curve moves is that the negative supply shock, by causing some constrained households
to lose their jobs, reduces nominal expenditures. Whenever output is below potential,
this is achieved via lower employment, and hence even lower expenditures, which lowers
the AD curve further. Hence, with HtM households, output is now below potential in
response to negative supply shocks, but we nevertheless have inflation as predicted by
Proposition 7.


4.4.2   Negative Aggregate Demand Shock

Figure 4.3 plots the response of the economy to a negative aggregate demand shock
instead, which shifts the AD curve down. Without HtM households, the AD curve
would follow the dashed trajectory, lowering output below potential and (weakly) lower
inflation. However, with HtM households, the AD curve is flatter when output is below


                                                  26
 pY                     Aggregate Supply                                      Aggregate Supply




                                                            pY
 w                                                          w


                                      Aggregate Demand                                           Aggregate Demand


         L’f                Y’    Y                Y             L’f     Y’       Y’    Y              Y
               (a) Without HtM Households                              (b) With HtM Households

Figure 4.2: AS-AD representation of the equilibrium with supply shocks. For this illustration, assume
K = ∅.


potential, and this feedback loop further strengthens the effect of initial negative demand
shock, reducing output even further.


4.4.3    Interaction of Supply and Demand Shocks

We end our discussion of the Cobb-Douglas model by considering simultaneous negative
supply and demand shocks. For simplicity, we assume there are no HtM households
in Figure 4.4. Assuming away HtM households is also likely to be consistent with the
first few months of the Covid outbreak in the United States, where massive government
support prevented personal incomes from declining in nominal terms.
      In Figure 4.4, a negative supply shock shifts the AS curve to the left and a negative
demand shock pushes the AD curve down. With supply shocks only, output would fall
and inflation would rise. In conjunction with negative demand shocks, output falls even
farther and inflation is brought down.
      The figure shows that since the reduction in output is partly driven by supply shocks,
and some factor markets are supply-constrained, positive aggregate demand stimulus
is less potent than it would be in the absence of negative supply shocks. This simple
observation will turn out to be a quantitatively important reason to expect aggregate
demand stimulus to be less potent during the Covid crisis.




                                                       27
                                        Aggregate Supply




                pY



                 w

                                                               Aggregate Demand


                                 Y’                Y                   Y

Figure 4.3: AS-AD representation of the equilibrium with demand shocks. We assume K = ∅. The
dashed lines are the AD curve without HtM households.


5     Complementarities in Production
At the sectoral level, there is strong empirical evidence that elasticities of substitution in
production are well below one. In this section, we generalize and extend Section 4 beyond
the unit-elasticity Cobb-Douglas assumption. First, we show that the global comparative
statics in Section 4 extend to the case with complementarities. Then we show that com-
plementarities have ambiguous effects on supply and demand shocks: complementarities
amplify Keynesian spillovers from supply shocks, but mitigate Keynesian spillovers from
demand shocks. Therefore, in the presence of both types of shocks, it is not a priori clear
whether complementarities amplify or mitigate shocks.


5.1    Global Comparative Statics
We begin by proving that the set of equilibria can still be ranked.

Proposition 8 (Ranking equilibria with complementarities). Suppose that ρ = θ0 = 1 and
θ j = θ < 1 for every j ∈ N. Then there is a unique best equilibrium: for any other equilibrium,
∆ log Y and ∆ log L are lower than at the best and higher than at the worst.

    We consider comparative statics in the supply shocks ∆ log L̄ and exogenous demand
shocks ∆ log ζ either due to policy or health concerns.

Proposition 9 (Global comparative statics with complementarities). Under the assumptions
of Proposition 8, in the best equilibrium, the comparative statics in Proposition 7 still hold.

                                                 28
                                              Aggregate Supply




                     pY




                                                              Aggregate Demand
                                                                              Y

        Figure 4.4: Negative supply shock coupled with a negative aggregate demand shock.

   The key difference between Proposition 9 and the Cobb-Douglas version in Proposi-
tion 7 is that complementarities can amplify negative supply shocks through Keynesian
spillovers even without HtM households. Intuitively, if two factors i and j supply the same
downstream producer k, so Ψki , 0 and Ψk j , 0, then complementarities in k’s production
function will cause negative supply shocks to i to spillover into reduced demand for j.
This can cause factor j to become demand-constrained.
   Formally, under the assumptions of Proposition 8, using Proposition 2, for k , j, we
can write

            d log λk (1 − θ)                      (1 − θ) X                      d log λ f
                                                                                           !
         λk           =      EΩ(0) (Ψ(k) Ψ(j) ) −           EΩ(0) (Ψ(k) Ψ( f ) )             .
            d log L j   θ                            θ                           d log L j
                                                            f ∈S


Terms of the form EΩ(0) (Ψ(k) Ψ( j) ) are non-negative, and they are equal to zero if, and only
if, k and j share no downstream consumers (directly or indirectly) except the household.
   The intuition for this equation is the following: the first term captures how an increase
in the quantity d log L j of factor j raises the income share of k as long as demand for k and
j are not orthogonal EΩ(0) (Ψ(k) Ψ(j) ) , 0. The second term shows that even if k and j are
orthogonal, in that they share no downstream consumers directly or indirectly, the shock
to j can change factor prices for supply-constrained factors f , and changes in f ’s factor
price can then be transmitted to k, if f and k are not orthogonal.


Benefits of Flexibility and Reallocation. Proposition 9 also implies that wage flexibility
and factor reallocation are desirable in the best equilibrium. These two corollaries may


                                                  29
at first seem obvious, but they are by no means universally valid. Since the model
with nominal rigidities is inefficient, the theory of the second best means that seemingly
desirable attributes like flexibility and reallocation can actually turn out to be harmful
in general. However, these propositions guarantee that neoclassical intuitions about
flexibility and reallocation are still empirically relevant.
   To show that wage flexibility is desirable, we take a factor f ∈ L and remove its
downward wage rigidity constraint by moving it to K . This amounts to creating a more
flexible economy.

Corollary 2. Under the assumptions of Proposition 8, for the best equilibrium, ∆ log Y and ∆ log L
are higher in the more flexible than the less flexible economy.

   In addition to the fact that flexibility is desirable, we can also prove that reallocation
is desirable. We consider two factors h and h0 that are paid the same wage at the initial
equilibrium and that have the same minimum nominal wage. The idea is that these two
factors are really the same underlying factor, but that frictions to reallocation prevent
one from being used in place of the other. We then consider an economy where these
reallocations are allowed to take place.

Corollary 3. Under the assumptions of Proposition 8, the best equilibrium of the no-reallocation
economy has lower output ∆ log Y and employment ∆ log L than the best equilibrium of the
reallocation economy.


5.2    Amplification and Mitigation of Shocks
As mentioned before, complementarities amplify negative supply shocks and mitigate
negative demand shocks. To see this clearly, assume there is full social insurance φ = 1
and a single final good (the same intuition holds in the absence of these assumptions).
Using Propositions 1 and 2, we have the following.

Proposition 10 (Supply and demand shocks with complementarities). Suppose there is one
final consumption good, the elasticity of substitution in production is θ j = θ < 1, and there are no
credit constraints φ = 1. Then, in response to negative labor supply shocks d log L̄ and aggregate
demand shocks d log ζ, we have

                                          λ f d log L̄ f
                               P
                                                     (1 − θ)λS
                                                                     !
                                   f ∈S
           d log Y =                       + 1−                        (1 − λS )d log ζ,
                     1 − (1 − θ) (1 − λS )      1 − (1 − θ)(1 − λS )

where λS =              λf .
             P
                 f ∈S


                                                           30
    The first term is the response of real GDP to supply shocks and the second term is the
response to aggregate demand shocks. We start by discussing the supply shocks. The
denominator 1/(1 − (1 − θ)(1 − λS )) captures the amplifying effect of complementarities.
In particular, complementarities across producers can transmit negative supply shocks
in one factor market as negative demand shocks to other factor markets. This negative
spillover is larger, the stronger are the complementarities.
    The intuition is the following: negative supply shocks raise the wages of some factors,
redirect demand towards them, and deprive other factor markets of demand who then be-
come constrained. The amount of Keynesian unemployment in the demand-constrained
factor markets increases as we lower the elasticity of substitution θ. In fact, the amplifi-
cation from complementarities 1/(1 − (1 − θ)(1 − λS )) take a similar functional form to the
amplification from incomplete markets in Proposition 3.
    Now consider the second term, which is the response of real GDP to negative aggregate
demand shocks. Fixing expenditure shares, the negative aggregate demand shock reduces
output because it reduces employment in the demand-constrained sectors and this effect
is equal to (1 − λS )d log ζ. The term in brackets in front captures the mitigating effect of
complementarities.
    The intuition is the following: in response to a reduction in aggregate demand, the
price of supply-constrained sectors falls. Due to complementarities, this causes expendi-
tures to switch towards the demand-constrained factor markets, whose prices cannot fall,
and this substitution boosts employment in those factor markets. Intuitively, with com-
plementarities, factor markets with flexible prices, for example capital markets, absorb
part of the negative demand shock and redirect demand to demand-constrained sectors.
    For brevity, we include more detailed derivations in Appendix H. In this appendix, we
also show how the result in Proposition 10 can be demonstrated graphically using AS-AD
diagrams.


6    Quantitative Application
We now turn to a quantitative calibration. We use a parsimonious stylized quantitative
model to disentangle supply and demand shocks, consider the model’s predictions about
prices, and answer counterfactual questions about the importance of complementarities,
the degree of social insurance, and the potency of aggregate demand stimulus. We
calibrate our model to match the peak to trough reductions in employment from February,
2020 to May, 2020. We show that complementarities amplify supply shocks and mitigate


                                             31
demand shocks to roughly off-setting effects. We also show that social insurance is
crucial for ameliorating the effects of the crisis, significantly raising output, prices, and
employment. Finally, we show that the sectorally disparate nature of the Covid-19 crisis
has sapped the potency of aggregate demand stimulus compared to a traditional demand-
driven recession.


6.1   Calibration
We start by describing our calibration of the model and of the shocks.


Calibrating the economy.      There are 66 sectors and sectoral production functions use
labor, capital, and intermediates. The share parameters of the functions are calibrated so
that at the initial pre-shock allocation, expenditure shares match those in the input-output
tables from the BEA. We focus on the short run and assume, following Baqaee and Farhi
(2019a), that labor and capital cannot be reallocated across sectors. We construct the input-
output matrix using the 2015 annual U.S. input-output data from the BEA, dropping the
government, non-comparable imports, and second-hand scrap industries. The dataset
contains industrial output and inputs for 66 industries.
   We set the elasticity of substitution between labor and capital to 0.5, between value-
added and intermediate inputs to 0.6, across intermediates to 0.2. We set the elasticity of
substitution across final uses to be θ0 = 1.0. We also set the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution ρ = 1.0. These numbers are broadly in line with estimates from Atalay (2017),
Herrendorf et al. (2013), Oberfield (2013), and Boehm et al. (2019).
   We assume that sectoral labor markets feature downward nominal wage rigidity,
whereas sectoral capital markets have flexible rental rates. Goods prices are set com-
petitively and flexibly. Finally, since personal incomes did not decline, due to large
government transfer programs, we assume full social insurance and set the fraction of
households that become HtM to zero for the initial calibration.


Calibrating the shocks.    Covid-19 set off an array of supply and demand shocks. We
model the Covid-19 crisis using a combination of shocks to potential labor supplies and
shocks to the sectoral composition of demand across sectors and time periods. We begin by
describing how we calibrate demand shocks, and then describe how we calibrate supply
shocks.
   Since both the intertemporal ρ and intersectoral θ0 elasticities of substitution are equal
to one for the household, realized changes in household spending patterns can be directly

                                             32
fed into the model as demand shocks (because household expenditure shares do not
depend on relative prices).
       Given the demand shocks, in principle, if the model is perfectly correctly specified,
we can directly feed changes in hours by sector as the primitive supply shocks. This is
because if a labor market is supply constrained, then the only way to match hours in
that market is via a reduction in potential employment. On the other hand, if a labor
market is demand constrained and has Keynesian unemployment, then any reduction in
potential labor supplied up to the realized reduction in hours will have no effect on any
outcome. This also means that there is ambiguity about how large supply shocks are
in demand-constrained sectors. We resolve this ambiguity by setting supply shocks in
demand-constrained sectors to zero.18
       We describe our data sources for the primitive supply and demand shocks. Data
on the sectoral composition of demand comes from the May, 2020 release of personal
consumption expenditures from the BEA. Since personal consumption is about 66% of
final demand, we downweight these shocks by 2/3. This is equivalent to assuming that the
sectoral composition of other components of final demand has not changed. The primitive
demand shock to the intertemporal composition of demand (aggregate demand) is chosen
to deliver 9.3% reduction in nominal GDP implied by downweighting the reduction in
PCE. To calibrate the primitive supply shocks, we compute changes in hours worked by
sector from the May, 2020 BLS Economic News release. Figure A.1 in Appendix A shows
the sectoral supply and demand shocks.
       Of course, since our model is quite stylized with mostly uniform elasticities of substi-
tution, this procedure results in a reasonable but imperfect fit to the employment data.
In this calibration, the (size-weighted) average error in hours in non-healthcare sectors is
2.3%.19 Having calibrated the model, we show predicted changes in macro aggregates,
decompose the importance of different shocks, and consider the model’s out-of-sample
performance.
  18
      This choice does not matter for our baseline in terms of aggregate and sectoral output, inflation,
and employment but it maximizes the amount of Keynesian unemployment. This choice also affects our
counterfactual with only supply shocks.
   19
      Our simulations predict counterfactually large reductions in employment by hospitals and ambulatory
health care services. However, despite large reductions in expenditures on these sectors (from reduced
elective procedures, etc.), in the data, healthcare industries do not show large reductions in employment.
Presumably, this reflects the fact that the excess capacity in the healthcare industry is not wasted. Healthcare
workers are instead engaged in non-market activities related to the pandemic. Due to the unique role these
sectors play in the pandemic, we exclude them here.




                                                      33
6.2      Role of Supply and Demand Shocks


                          0                                                8                                                             12
                                                                                                      6.74
                                                                           6                                                             10               9.68
                          -2




                                                                                                                Keynesian Unemployment
                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                         8
              Real GDP




                          -4                                                                                                                  6.72




                                                               Inflation
                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                         6
                                           -5.48                           0
                          -6
                                                     -6.32                      -0.55                                                    4
                                                                           -2
                          -8
                                                                           -4                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                    1.28
                               -8.84                                                        -4.08

                         -10                                               -6                                                            0
                                Baseline




                                                                                 Baseline




                                                                                                                                               Baseline
                                            Demand




                                                                                             Demand




                                                                                                                                                           Demand
                                                      Supply




                                                                                                       Supply




                                                                                                                                                                     Supply
Figure 6.1: Real GDP, inflation, and Keynesian unemployment as a function of shocks for the model with
complementarities. The “Baseline” line includes negative demand and supply shocks. The “Supply” bar
only includes the sectoral supply shocks. The “Demand” bar only includes the demand shocks.


       Figure 6.1 displays the baseline calibration and decomposes it into only supply or only
demand shocks. The “Baseline” is the model which includes both the negative demand
and negative sectoral supply shocks. The “Supply” bar features only the negative sectoral
supply shocks whereas the “Demand” bar features only the demand shocks.


Real GDP. Figure 6.1 shows that negative demand shocks lead to a 5.5% reduction of real
GDP and negative supply shocks reduce real GDP by 6.3%.20 Because of nonlinearities,
the effect of the shocks together (-8.9%) is not the same as the sum of the two shocks.
Intuitively, reductions in demand in sectors experiencing large negative supply shocks do
not reduce output by as much, as illustrated in Figure 4.3.


Inflation.         Although the supply shocks on their own generate large reductions in output,
Figure 6.1 shows that they also generate very substantial amounts of inflation around 7%.
Meanwhile, the demand shocks, on their own, generate substantial deflation of around
4%. The baseline model, on the other hand, predicts an inflation rate of around −0.6%. The
baseline model performs relatively well, since most price indices show either moderate
inflation or moderate deflation. For instance, CPI inflation for this period was −0.9%
  20
    We measure real GDP and the change in inflation using chained Tornqvist approximations to the Divisia
index along a linear path.


                                                                                            34
while PCE inflation was −0.7%.21 Both supply and demand shocks are needed to make
sense of the large output reduction and moderate inflation observed in the data.
       At a more disaggregated level, we compare the change in prices in the model to
realized changes in producer prices over the sample period. In the model, demand-
constrained sectors experience −5.3% inflation and supply-constrained sectors experience
inflation of 1.0%. In the data, those sectors that are demand-constrained (according to
the model) experienced inflation of −2.4% whereas those identified as supply-constrained
had inflation of 1.0%. Figure A.2 in Appendix A shows a scatter plot of prices in the model
against the data at the sectoral level.
       Since we do not use any information about prices in calibrating the model, the model’s
performance in terms of prices is an out-of-sample test. Despite being highly stylized, the
model performs a reasonable job of separating demand- and supply-constrained sectors
although it somewhat overpredicts the magnitude of disaggregated price changes. This
may be due to the fact that some capital markets also have nominal rigidities, as explained
in Section 2, or that goods prices are also sticky.


Unemployment.            We measure Keynesian unemployment by the reduction in hours in
labor markets that are demand-constrained.22 This means that we assume that demand-
constrained sectors received no negative supply shocks. Therefore, Figure 6.1 is the
                                                                                                      23
maximum amount of Keynesian unemployment consistent with the model.
       Figure 6.1 shows that the negative demand shocks, on their own, generate about 9.7%
Keynesian unemployment. The “Supply” bar in the figure shows that sectoral supply
shocks, on their own, generate 1.3% Keynesian unemployment. Since this calibration
has complete markets, this amplification effect is entirely due to complementarities, as
discussed in Section 5.2. Together, the supply and demand shocks generate around 7%
Keynesian unemployment, which is less than demand shocks on their own, since some of
the sectors hit with negative demand shocks are supply-constrained once we account for
the negative supply shocks.
  21
      The PCE is computed as a Fisher index and it therefore has changing weights reflecting the changing
sectoral composition of final demand (unlike the CPI) and is therefore consistent with our model. On
the other hand, the PCE does not capture changes in product variety, which could be of concern during
lockdowns. Jaravel and O’Connell (2020) show that disappearing goods increased the effective inflation
rate in the UK by around 80 basis points. This bias is not large enough to significantly affect our conclusions.
We refer the reader to Section D for an extension
                                             P of the model which allows for disappearing P           varieties.
   22
      Keynesian unemployment is defined as f ∈L (λ̄ f /λ̄L )(∆ log L̄ f − ∆ log L f ) ≥ 0, where λ̄L = f ∈L λ̄ f . This
captures the percentage underutilization of efficiency units of labor across labor markets.
   23
      In principle, these labor markets may have also experienced negative supply shocks. These reductions
in potential output, however, are unobservable since supply is rationed, and, as explained above, we assume
that these shocks are not present.


                                                         35
6.3      Tightness and Slackness Across Sectors
Although almost all sectors experienced reductions in hours, in some sectors, these re-
ductions are due to supply constraints whilst in others they are due to demand shortfalls
(see Figure A.3 for a complete description). In the baseline, 30 factor markets are demand-
constrained and 36 factor markets are supply-constrained.
       Supply-constrained sectors include food products and beverages (−8%), food services
and accommodations (−39%), construction (−9%), and motion pictures (−54%). We inter-
pret the reduction in hours in these sectors to be driven by state-mandated lockdowns,
social distancing orders that limited capacity, and employers’ fears of being held legally
liable should their employees get sick. These restrictions and fears were severe during
March and early April. As social distancing orders are lifted in May and June, some of
these industries, may go from being supply-constrained to being demand-constrained
instead. Recall that supply-constrained does not necessarily imply that the reductions are
driven by reductions in labor supply or workers’ willingness to work. Rather, a supply-
constrained sector is one where an increase in nominal demand for the good the sector
produces would not translate into increased employment.
       Demand-constrained sectors include transportation industries, like air transportation
(−40%), water transportation (−43%), rail transportation (−19%), and petroleum and coal
(−21%) and oil and gas extraction (−18%).24 These are industries which experienced sharp
reductions in nominal spending, either directly by the household, or indirectly through
the supply chain.


6.4      Role of Complementarities
Figure 6.2 displays aggregate outcomes in a version of the model where we set all elas-
ticities of substitution σ = ρ = θ j = 1 — that is, the Cobb-Douglas model in Section 4.



Real GDP, inflation, and unemployment. In the Cobb-Douglas model, real GDP de-
clines by around 8% in response to the shocks, which is similar to the response of the
benchmark model. However, the breakdown between supply and demand is quite differ-
ent. The supply shocks, on their own, reduce real GDP by only 4.8% (compared to 6.3%
  24
    Our simulations also show that healthcare related industries, like hospitals and ambulatory health care
services also experienced reductions in employment of (−19%) and (−16%). However, presumably, this
excess capacity in the healthcare industry is not wasted but engaged in non-market activities related to the
pandemic.



                                                    36
                          0                                                8                                                             12
                                                                                                                                                          11.05
                                                                           6                                                             10
                                                                                                      5.07




                                                                                                                Keynesian Unemployment
                          -2
                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                          8
                                                                                                                                              7.16
              Real GDP
                          -4




                                                               Inflation
                                                                           2
                                                     -4.78                                                                                6
                                                                           0
                          -6               -5.92
                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                           -2   -1.22

                          -8
                               -8.15                                       -4                                                             2
                                                                                            -3.58

                                                                                                                                                                    0
                         -10                                               -6                                                             0
                                Baseline




                                                                                 Baseline




                                                                                                                                               Baseline
                                            Demand




                                                                                             Demand




                                                                                                                                                           Demand
                                                      Supply




                                                                                                       Supply




                                                                                                                                                                    Supply
Figure 6.2: Real GDP, inflation, and Keynesian unemployment as a function of shocks without comple-
mentarities. The “Baseline” line includes negative demand and supply shocks. The “Supply” bar only
includes the sectoral supply shocks. The “Demand” bar only includes the demand shocks.


in the benchmark) while the demand shocks reduce real GDP by 5.9% (compared to 5.5%
in the benchmark). Hence, as explained in Section 5.2, complementarities amplify the
importance of supply shocks and mitigate the effect of demand shocks, and these effects
seem to be roughly off-setting one another.
   With only sectoral supply shocks, Keynesian unemployment is now 0% (instead of
1.3% in the benchmark). This follows from the discussion in Section 4: this version of the
model has complete markets and no complementarities, so supply shocks in one sector
do not change nominal spending on other sectors, and hence do not have Keynesian
spillovers.


6.5   Policy Implications
We end this section by considering some policy counterfactuals. Two important policy
tools used to combat adverse effects of the Covid pandemic have been stimulative mon-
etary policy and increased social insurance, in the form of transfers like unemployment
benefits. We discuss both of these in turn.


Implications for aggregate demand management. Sectorally disparate supply and de-
mand shocks blunt the power of aggregate demand stimulus. Conventional monetary
policy, forward guidance, and untargeted fiscal policy boost aggregate demand. How-
ever, with heterogeneous supply and demand shocks, reversing the decline in aggregate


                                                                                            37
demand is not enough to offset the negative effect of the shocks.
   To see this, we consider the reduction in real GDP in response to a pure negative
demand shock, holding fixed the sectoral composition of final demand and setting supply
shocks to zero. In the Cobb-Douglas model, the negative aggregate demand shock associ-
ated with Covid, on its own, reduced real GDP by around 5%. Therefore, a large enough
aggregate demand stimulus can raise real GDP by around 5% fully offsetting the negative
aggregate demand shock. However, with the full set of supply and demand shocks, the
same sized aggregate demand stimulus raises real GDP from −8.2% to −5.8%. In other
words, the same aggregate demand stimulus only raises real GDP by around 2.2%. Hence,
the presence of sectoral shocks cuts the potency of aggregate demand stimulus by half in
the Cobb-Douglas model.
   In the model with complementarities, this effect is even more extreme. Whereas
the aggregate demand shock on its own reduces output by 3.9%, with the full set of
sectoral supply and demand shocks, reversing the reduction in aggregate demand through
stimulus only boosts output by around 1.1%. Hence, the potency of the aggregate demand
stimulus is cut almost by a factor of four in the model with complementarities. Intuitively,
this is because the increase in aggregate demand raises the price of supply-constrained
factors, and complementarities then cause expenditures to switch towards these factors
and away from demand-constrained ones. This reduces the stimulative effect of aggregate
demand stimulus.
   If we think of the model without sectoral shocks as a typical recession, this means
that aggregate demand stimulus is significantly less effective in the Covid-19 recession
than in a typical recession. The reason is that without sectoral shocks, the reduction
in aggregate demand renders all labor markets demand constrained, and starting from
there, an increase in aggregate demand increases employment in all labor markets. By
contrast, with sectoral shocks, some labor markets are supply constrained, and starting
from there, an increase in aggregate demand is partly dissipated in wage increases in
supply-constrained labor markets (the more so, the stronger the complementarities across
sectors).


Reduced Social Insurance.      Figure 6.3 shows how aggregate outcomes change in the
model with complementarities and in the Cobb-Douglas model as we vary the share of
households that are potentially HtM. As expected from Figure 6.3, the presence of HtM
households amplifies the reduction in real GDP, reduces inflation, and causes Keynesian
unemployment. For example, in the Cobb-Douglas model, when every single unem-
ployed agent becomes HtM, real GDP falls by 13% rather than 8%, with very significant

                                            38
deflation of 8% rather than 1%, and Keynesian unemployment of 15% rather than 7%.
This underscores the important role that transfers have played in mitigating the nega-
tive demand effects associated with the Covid-19 crisis. In the absence of these policies,
employment and output would be significantly lower.
              These numbers are smaller with complementarities, since the endogenous negative
aggregate demand shock associated with HtM households is partially absorbed by supply-
constrained factor markets. Specifically, in response to the negative endogenous aggregate
demand shock, the price of capital declines, which triggers substitution away from capital
and towards labor due to complementarities. This is a quantitatively significant stabilizing
force in the model. Nevertheless, even in the model with complementarities, social
insurance is still very important.

            -0.08                                               -0.01                                                             0.16
                                                                                                                                                         Cobb-Douglas
           -0.085                                                                                                                 0.15                   Complementarities
                                                                -0.02
            -0.09                                                                                                                 0.14




                                                                                                         Keynesian Unemployment
                                                                -0.03
           -0.095                                                                                                                 0.13
                                                                -0.04
             -0.1                                                                                                                 0.12
Real GDP




                                                    Inflation




           -0.105                                               -0.05                                                             0.11

            -0.11                                                                                                                  0.1
                                                                -0.06
           -0.115                                                                                                                 0.09
                                                                -0.07
            -0.12                                                                                                                 0.08
                                                                -0.08
           -0.125                                                                                                                 0.07

            -0.13                                               -0.09                                                             0.06
                    0   0.2   0.4   0.6   0.8   1                       0   0.2   0.4    0.6   0.8   1                                   0   0.2   0.4    0.6     0.8        1
                              HtM Share                                           HtM Share                                                        HtM Share


Figure 6.3: Real GDP, inflation, and Keynesian unemployment in the Cobb-Douglas model and the model
with complementarities as a function of the share of potentially HtM workers.




7               Extensions
In this section, we briefly summarize extensions of the basic framework that appear in
the appendix. Appendix D extends the framework to cover capital market imperfections
and bankruptcies. In this appendix, we show that firm exits act like endogenous negative
productivity shocks. Accordingly, they are amplified by input-output linkages (just as
exogenous productivity shocks are amplified by input-output linkages). Furthermore,
exits change relative prices, and these relative price changes can redirect the flow of
spending and cause Keynesian spillovers, much as negative supply shocks. Finally, we
also show how exits can result in scarring effects since firms that exit today may not be

                                                                                    39
replaced in the future, this lowers output in the future, which reduces aggregate demand
today via the Euler equation (a mechanism emphasized by Fornaro and Wolf, 2020).
Appendix E generalizes the results in Section 3 to environments with investment and
establishes global comparative statics. Finally, Appendix F extends our results to the case
where wages are semi-flexible.


8     Conclusion
This paper analytically characterizes and numerically quantifies the impact of different
supply and demand shocks in a general disaggregated model with multiple sectors,
factors, and input output linkages, as well as occasionally-binding downward nominal
wage rigidity, credit-constraints, and a zero lower bound.
    Separating supply and demand sources for the crisis are important since they have
different implications for the effects of policy. Nevertheless, the analysis in this paper
is purely positive. For a normative analysis, we would have to take a stance on the
health-related externalities of production and consumption. In particular, it may be that
implementing the flexible price allocation is not necessarily optimal one once we account
for these externalities. Nevertheless, the results of any normative analysis would rely on
understanding the positive forces analyzed in this paper.


References
Atalay, Enghin, “How important are sectoral shocks?,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2017, 9
  (4), 254–80.
Baqaee, David and Emmanuel Farhi, “The Macroeconomic Impact of Microeconomic Shocks: Beyond
  Hulten’s Theorem,” Econometrica (Forthcoming), 2019.
   and , “Entry versus Rents,” Technical Report 2020.
   and , “Nonlinear Production Networks with an Application to the Covid-19 Crisis,” Technical Report
  2020.
Baqaee, David Rezza, “Targeted Fiscal Policy,” 2015.
  , “Cascading failures in production networks,” Econometrica, 2018, 86 (5), 1819–1838.
   and Emmanuel Farhi, “The Microeconomic Foundations of Aggregate Production Functions,” Journal of
  the European Economic Association, 2019, 17 (5), 1337–1392.
Barrot, Jean-Noel, Basile Grassi, and Julien Sauvagnat, “Sectoral effects of social distancing,” Available at
  SSRN, 2020.
Benigno, Gianluca and Luca Fornaro, “Stagnation traps,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2018, 85 (3),
  1425–1470.




                                                     40
Berman, Abraham and Robert J Plemmons, “Nonnegative matrices,” The Mathematical Sciences, Classics in
   Applied Mathematics,, 1979, 9.
Bigio, Saki, Mengbo Zhang, and Eduardo Zilberman, “Transfers vs Credit Policy,” Technical Report 2020.
Bodenstein, Martin, Giancarlo Corsetti, and Luca Guerrieri, “Social Distancing and Supply Disruptions
   in a Pandemic,” 2020.
Boehm, Christoph E, Aaron Flaaen, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, “Input linkages and the transmission of
   shocks: Firm-level evidence from the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2019,
   101 (1), 60–75.
Bonadio, Barthélémy, Zhen Huo, Andrei A. Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, “Global Supply Chains
   in the Pandemic,” Technical Report 2020.
Brinca, Pedro, Joao Duarte, and Miguel Faria e Castro, “Measuring Sectoral Supply and Demand Shocks
   during COVID-19,” Technical Report 2020.
Caballero, Ricardo J and Alp Simsek, “A Model of Asset Price Spirals and Aggregate Demand Amplifica-
   tion of a’COVID-19’Shock,” Available at SSRN 3576979, 2020.
Eggertsson, Gauti B and Paul Krugman, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fisher-Minsky-
   Koo Approach,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1469–1513.
Elliott, Matthew, Benjamin Golub, and Matthew O Jackson, “Financial Networks and Contagion,” Amer-
   ican Economic Review, 2014, 104 (10), 3115–53.
Fornaro, Luca and Martin Wolf, “Covid-19 coronavirus and macroeconomic policy,” 2020.
Guerrieri, Veronica, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and Iván Werning, “Macroeconomic Implications
   of COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages?,” Technical Report, National
   Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Herrendorf, Berthold, Richard Rogerson, and Akos Valentinyi, “Two perspectives on preferences and
   structural transformation,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (7), 2752–89.
Hulten, Charles R, “Growth accounting with intermediate inputs,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1978,
   pp. 511–518.
Jaravel, Xavier and Martin O’Connell, “Inflation Spike and Falling Product Variety during the Great
   Lockdown,” 2020.
Kaplan, Greg, Benjamin Moll, and Gianluca Violante, “Pandemics according to HANK,” 2020.
Krugman, Paul R, “It’s baaack: Japan’s slump and the return of the liquidity trap,” Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity, 1998, pp. 137–205.
La’O, Jennifer and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, “Optimal Monetary Policy in Production Networks,” Technical
   Report 2020.
McKenzie, Lionel W, “On the existence of general equilibrium for a competitive market,” Econometrica:
   journal of the Econometric Society, 1959, pp. 54–71.
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts, “Comparing equilibria,” The American Economic Review, 1994, pp. 441–459.
Oberfield, Ezra, “Productivity and Misallocation During a Crisis: Evidence from the Chilean Crisis of 1982,”
   Review of Economic Dynamics, January 2013, 16 (1), 100–119.
Ozdagli, Ali and Michael Weber, “Monetary policy through production networks: Evidence from the stock
   market,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.
Pasten, Ernesto, Raphael Schoenle, and Michael Weber, “Price Rigidity and the Granular Origin of
   Aggregate Fluctuations,” 2017.
   ,    , and     , “The propagation of monetary policy shocks in a heterogeneous production economy,”


                                                    41
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 2019.
Rubbo, Elisa, “Networks, Phillips Curves and Monetary Policy,” Technical Report 2020.
Tarski, Alfred, “A Lattice Theoretical Fixed Point Theorem and its Applications,” Pacific Journal of Mathe-
  matics, 1955, 5 (2), 285–309.
Vives, Xavier, “Nash equilibrium with strategic complementarities,” Journal of Mathematical Economics, 1990,
  19 (3), 305–321.




                                                    42
Appendix A                  Additional Graphs

                25                                                          12
                                        Household spending                                                        Employment

                                                                            10
                20

                                                                                8
                15

                                                                                6

                10
                                                                                4

                  5
                                                                                2


                  0                                                             0
                   −1    −0.8   −0.6   −0.4    −0.2          0   0.2                −0.6          −0.4         −0.2      0




Figure A.1: Reduction in nominal household spending (left panel) and hours worked (right panel) as
fractions by sector in May, 2020 compared to February, 2020.




                0.2




                0.1




                 0




               -0.1




               -0.2




               -0.3




               -0.4
                 -0.25      -0.2       -0.15          -0.1       -0.05      0              0.05          0.1      0.15       0.2




Figure A.2: Changes in model implied prices are on the x-axis and changes in producer
prices are on the y-axis. The red line is the 45-degree line.



                                                                       43
                                                                                                                                                                                                 -60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                Accommodation
                                                                                                                                                          Administrative and support services
                                                                                                                                                                               Air transportation
                                                                                                                                                               Ambulatory health care services




“demand-driven.”
                                                                                                                                           Amusements, gambling, and recreation industries
                                                                                                                                                      Apparel and leather and allied products
                                                                                                                                                       Broadcasting and telecommunications
                                                                                                                                                                             Chemical products
                                                                                                                                                            Computer and electronic products
                                                                                                                                              Computer systems design and related services
                                                                                                                                                                                     Construction
                                                                                                                          Data processing, internet publishing, and other information services
                                                                                                                                                                           Educational services
                                                                                                                                          Electrical equipment, appliances, and components
                                                                                                                                                                     Fabricated metal products
                                                                                                                                                                                          Farms
                                                                                                                          Federal Reserve banks, credit intermediation, and related activities
                                                                                                                                                    Food and beverage and tobacco products
                                                                                                                                                                     Food and beverage stores
                                                                                                                                                            Food services and drinking places
                                                                                                                                                        Forestry, fishing, and related activities
                                                                                                                                                    Funds, trusts, and other financial vehicles
                                                                                                                                                                 Furniture and related products
                                                                                                                                                                  General merchandise stores
                                                                                                                                                                                        Hospitals
                                                                                                                                                                               Housing Services
                                                                                                                                                      Insurance carriers and related activities
                                                                                                                                                                                  Legal services
                                                                                                                                                                                       Machinery
                                                                                                                                                  Management of companies and enterprises
                                                                                                                                                                     Mining, except oil and gas
                                                                                                                                                                  Miscellaneous manufacturing
                                                                                                                                Miscellaneous professional, scientific, and technical services
                                                                                                                                                Motion picture and sound recording industries
                                                                                                                                                               Motor vehicle and parts dealers
                                                                                                                                                Motor vehicles, bodies and trailers, and parts
                                                                                                                                                                  Nonmetallic mineral products
                                                                                                                                                         Nursing and residential care facilities
                                                                                                                                                                          Oil and gas extraction
                                                                                                                                                                              Other Real Estate
                                                                                                                                                                                      Other retail
                                                                                                                                                           Other services, except government
                                                                                                                                                   Other transportation and support activities
                                                                                                                                                                Other transportation equipment
                                                                                                                                                                                 Paper products
                                                                                                                           Performing arts, spectator sports, museums, and related activities
                                                                                                                                                                  Petroleum and coal products
                                                                                                                                                                         Pipeline transportation
                                                                                                                                                                  Plastics and rubber products
                                                                                                                                                                                 Primary metals
                                                                                                                                                         Printing and related support activities
                                                                                                                                    Publishing industries, except internet (includes software)
                                                                                                                                                                              Rail transportation
                                                                                                                                 Rental and leasing services and lessors of intangible assets
                                                                                                                                           Securities, commodity contracts, and investments
                                                                                                                                                                               Social assistance
                                                                                                                                                                   Support activities for mining
                                                                                                                                                          Textile mills and textile product mills
                                                                                                                                                 Transit and ground passenger transportation
                                                                                                                                                                           Truck transportation
                                                                                                                                                                                         Utilities
                                                                                                                                                                     Warehousing and storage
                                                                                                                                               Waste management and remediation services
                                                                                                                                                                           Water transportation
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Supply-Driven




                                                                                                                                                                                Wholesale trade
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Demand-Driven




                                                                                                                                                                                 Wood products
Figure A.3: Model implied percentage reduction in hours by sector from February to May 2020. Sectors below capacity are
Appendix B                 Proofs
Proof of Proposition 1. By Shephard’s lemma, changes in the price of good i are given by
                                                         X                            X
                       d log pi = −d log Ai +                   Ωij d log p j +               d log w f ,
                                                          j∈N                          f ∈G


solving this system gives
                                              X                            X
                            d log pi = −             Ψij d log A j +               Ψi f d log w f .
                                               j∈N                          f ∈G


Furthermore,
                                d log w f = d log λ f + d log E − d log L f .

Hence, the change in real GDP is given by
                                    X
         d log Y = d log E −                   Ω0j d log p j ,
                                  j∈mathcalN
                                  X                          X
                 = d log E +            Ψ0j d log A j −                Ψ0 f d log w f ,
                                  j∈N                           f ∈G
                                  X                          X                                            
                 = d log E +            Ψ0j d log A j −                Ψ0 f d log λ f + d log E − d log L f ,
                                  j∈N                           f ∈G
                                  X                        X                                         
                 = d log E +            λ j d log A j −            λ f d log λ f + d log E − d log L f ,
                                  j∈N                       f ∈G
                     X                       X
                 =         λ j d log A j +          λ f d log L f ,
                     j∈N                     f ∈G


using the fact that Ψ0i = λi and                    λ f = 1. To complete the proof, note that
                                         P
                                             f ∈G


                      d log L f = min{d log L̄ f , d log λ f + d log E − d log L̄ f }.

                                                                                                                

Proof of Proposition 2. This follows from an application of Proposition 9 in Baqaee and
Farhi (2019a).                                                                                                  

Proof of Proposition 6. This is a special case of Proposition 8.                                                

Proof of Proposition 7. This is a special case of Proposition 9.                                                



                                                             45
Proof of Proposition 8. Define the function Φ(L0 ) 7→ L by

                                                    w1−σ
                                                            
                                                      f
                                X                          
                      w f L0f =      Ψ j f  P              p c ,
                                                                j j
                                 j∈N              k Ψ   w1−σ 
                                                      jk k

                       p j c j = Ω̄0i − κi E,
                                                

                              (1 − β) i (1 − κi ) Ē∗ X ∗ L0h
                                     P                                                 !
                       E=                                          λ̄h ∗ (1 − φh ) + φh ,
                                      β                1+i             Lh
                                                               h

                        w̃ f = min{w f , w f }1( f ∈ L) + w f 1( f ∈ K ),
                                                              w̃1−σ
                                                                                    
                                    1 X
                                                             f                    
                        L f = min             Ψ                           p c , L̄   .
                                                       P                            
                                                  j f                         j j    f
                                                            k Ψ jk w̃k
                                    w̃ f
                                                       
                                                                    1−σ   
                                                                                      
                                                                                       
                                                                                       
                                          j∈N


An equilibrium is when L0 = L. We show that Φ is an increasing function mapping
Q
  f ∈G [0, L̄ f ] into itself.
   By Lemma 1, w−i is increasing and wi is decreasing in L0i . This means that w̃−i is
increasing in L0i and w̃i is decreasing in i if wi > wi . Hence, L−i is increasing in L0i ,and Li is
increasing in L0i . This proves that Φ is a monotone function, and so we can apply Tarski
(1955).                                                                                           

Lemma 1. For the following system of equations

                                                            w1−σ
                                                                      
                                                              f
                                            X                        
                                 wf Lf =     Ψ j f  P                Ω E,
                                                                          0j
                                         j∈N              k Ψ jk w 1−σ 
                                                                   k


w−i is increasing and wi is decreasing in Li .

Proof. Start by noting that
                                                         X
                            CovΩ(0) (Ψ( f ) , Ψ(k) ) =         Ω0l Ψl f [Ψlk − λk ] ,
                                                           l




                                                         46
Using this fact, and Proposition 2, we can simplify
                          Xh                                                     i                     
λk d log λk = −(θ − 1)           −λ f λk − CovΩ(0) (Ψ( f ) , Ψ(k) ) + 1( f = k)λk d log λ f − d log L f
                          f ∈G
              Xh                                                                         i                     
          =          (1 − θ)1( f = k)λk − (1 − θ)λ f λk − (1 − θ)CovΩ(0) (Ψ( f ) , Ψ(k) ) d log λ f − d log L f
              f ∈G
                                                                                
            X                                           X                                        
          =    (1 − θ)1( f = k)λ − (1 − θ)λ λ − (1 − θ)
                                k          f k            Ω   Ψ
                                                              0l l f  Ψ kf − λk 
                                                                                  d log λ − d log L
                                                                                          f          f
              f ∈G                                                        l
                                                                    
            X                                 X                                         
          =      (1 − θ)1( f = k)λ − (1 − θ)
                                   k              Ω0l Ψl f Ψk f  d log λ f − d log L f
            f ∈G                                  l
            Xh                                  h                      ii                     
          =         (1 − θ)1( f = k)λk − (1 − θ) EΩ(0) (Ψ( f ) Ψ(k) ) d log λ f − d log L f
              f ∈G
              Xh                                 h                    ii                    
          =          (1 − θ)1( f = k)λk − (1 − θ) EΩ(0) (Ψ( f ) Ψ(k) ) d log λ f − d log L f
              f ∈G
                Xh       h                    ii                   
          =−      (1 − θ) EΩ(0) (Ψ( f ) Ψ(k) ) d log λ f − d log L f + [(1 − θ)λk ] d log λk − d log Lk
                                                                                                        
                f ∈G
                          Xh                         i                    
          = −(1 − θ)             EΩ(0) (Ψ( f ) Ψ(k) ) d log λ f − d log L f + [(1 − θ)λk ] d log λk − d log Lk
                                                                                                               
                          f ∈G


Let
                                                                Ψ(k)
                                                  "                   #
                                           Bk f = EΩ(0) (Ψ( f )      )
                                                                λk
We know that                                      X
                                                          Bk f = 1.
                                                      f

Hence, letting x = d log λ/d log Li be a column vector and ei the ith basis vector, we can
write

                 θx = −(1 − θ)Bx − (I − (1 − θ)B) ei
                     x = − (θI + (1 − θ)B)−1 (I − (1 − θ)B) ei = −A (I − (1 − θ)B) ei .

By Lemma 2, A = (θI + (1 − θ)B)−1 is an M-matrix, hence by A5 of Theorem 6.2.3 of
Berman and Plemmons (1979), −A (I − (1 − θ)B) ei has the same signs as − (I − (1 − θ)B).
Since − (I − (1 − θ)B) has negative diagonal and positive off-diagonal elements, this means
that xi is negative and x−i is positive, as needed.                                                         




                                                           47
Lemma 2. The matrix defined in Lemma 2

                                         A = (θI + (1 − θ)B)−1

is an M-matrix.

Proof. By Theorem 6.2.3 of Berman and Plemmons (1979), it suffices to prove that A−1 has
all positive elements and that A is a Z-matrix. The fact that A−1 has all positive elements
is immediate from its definition. To show that A is a Z-matrix, note that we can write

                                      A = (θI + (1 − θ)B)−1 ,
                                         = (I − (1 − θ)(I − B))−1 ,
                                           X∞
                                         =     (1 − θ)n (I − B)n .
                                             n=0


Hence, since I − B is an M-matrix, (1 − θ)(I − B)X does not change the sign of the columns of
X for any X. Hence, by induction, and the fact that M-matrices are closed under addition,
we have that A has the same sign as the elements of (I − B),and hence A is a Z-matrix. 

Proof of Proposition 9. To prove the statements regarding ∆ log L, we use Theorem 3 from
Milgrom and Roberts (1994). Since ∆ log Y is a monotone function of ∆ log L, this also
establishes the results about real GDP. It remains to prove the claims regarding inflation.
To prove that labor supply shocks (on their own) are inflationary, we need to show that
the price level pY is decreasing in by L̄. To do so, consider some negative labor shocks then

                  ∆ log pY = ∆ log E − ∆ log Y
                                       X
                           ≥ ∆ log E −     λ̄ f ∆ log L f
                                             f
                                                                        ! X
                                        X       L   h
                                                                          
                           = ∆ log      λ̄∗h ∗ (1 − φh ) + φh  −            λ̄ f ∆ log L f
                                                  Lh
                                          h                                     f
                                                     
                                       X Lh  X
                           ≥ ∆ log      λ̄∗h ∗  −      λ̄ f ∆ log L f
                                                 Lh
                                          h               f
                                                                      
                                      X                               X
                           = ∆ log      λ̄∗h exp(log Lh /L∗h ) −       λ̄ f ∆ log L f
                                          h                                  f
                             X                          X
                           ≥     λ̄h ∆ log Lh −
                                   ∗
                                                          λ̄ f ∆ log L f = 0,
                               h                       f



                                                      48
as long as λ̄∗ = λ̄. The second line follows from the fact that log Y is log-concave (see
Baqaee and Farhi, 2019b).
   To prove that aggregate demand shocks, like forward guidance shocks, (on their own)
are deflationary, we need to show that the price level pY is increasing E∗ /(1 + i). To do so,
consider some shock then

     ∆ log pY = ∆ log E − ∆ log Y
                          X
              ≥ ∆ log E −     λ̄ f ∆ log L f
                               f
                                                                                 ! X
                           (1 − β) i (1 − κi ) Ē∗ X
                                    P
                                                                  L h
                                                                                      
               = ∆ log                                   λ̄∗h ∗ (1 − φh ) + φh  −   λ̄ f ∆ log L f
                                     β            1+i             Lh
                                                           h                              f
                                  ! X
                              Ē∗
               ≥ ∆ log             −      λ̄ f ∆ log L f
                             1+i
                                       f
                                  ! X                        !
                              Ē∗                        Ē∗
               ≥ ∆ log             −      λ̄ f ∆ log
                             1+i                      1+i
                                      f

               ≥ 0.

                                                                                                             


Appendix C               The Case of Uniform Elasticities
In this section, we show that when θ0 = θ j = θ for every j, for both aggregate demand
shocks and factor supply shocks, the details of the production network are summarized
by the initial factor shares. The Cobb-Douglas economy in Section 4 is an example of this
mmore general phenomenon. Formally, this can be stated as follows.

Proposition 11 (Global Sufficient Statistics). Suppose that the intertemporal elasticity of sub-
stitution is ρ and that the elasticities of substitution in production and in final demand are all the
same with θ j = θ for every j ∈ 1 + N. Suppose that there are only factor supply shocks ∆ log L̄
and aggregate demand shocks ∆ log ζ but no productivity shocks and no shocks to the sectoral
composition of demand. Then

                   ∆ log Y(∆ log L̄, ∆ log ζ, Ω̄) = ∆ log Y(∆ log L̄, ∆ log ζ, Ω̄0 )

for every Ω̄ and Ω̄0 as long as λ̄ f = Ψ̄0 f = Ψ̄00 f = λ̄0f for every f ∈ G. More generally, given
the shocks, the initial factor income shares λ̄ f are sufficient statistics for equilibrium changes

                                                     49
in aggregate output ∆ log Y, the aggregate price index ∆ log pY , factor wages ∆ log w f , factor
quantities ∆ log L f , and factor income shares ∆ log λ f .

   In other words, with factor supply shocks and aggregate demand shocks, as long as
the consumption and production elasticities are the same, the model with a production
network is ismorphic to a model without production networks (note that this does not hold
for shocks to the composition of demand). Hence, proving propositions in an environment
without intermediates also proves it when there are intermediates.


Appendix D               Extension: Bankruptcies
The paper so far has abstracted from capital market frictions and bankruptcies. In this
section, we briefly discuss how our results can be extended to the case with these frictions.
We begin by generalizing our comparative statics to a case with firm exits. We then make
three observations: (1) in a production network, the negative effects of demand shocks
are amplified if there are exits because of an intermediate-input multiplier; (2) exits,
by acting as endogenous negative supply shocks, can change the flow of spending and
cause Keynesian spillovers outside of the Cobb-Douglas case; and, (3) firm failures, by
potentially destroying intangible firm-specific capital, can reduce output in the future,
and by lowering output in the future, reduce aggregate demand today through the Euler
equation.


D.1     Local Comparative Statics with Bankruptcies
To capture firm failures, we modify the general structure described in Section 2 as follows.
We assume that output in sector i ∈ N is a CES aggregate of identical producers j each with
constant returns production functions yik = Ai fi (xkij ), where xkij is the quantity of industry
j’s output used by producer k in industry i. Assuming all firms within an industry use
the same mix of inputs, sectoral output is

                                       Z    σi −1
                                                    ! σσ−1i           1
                                                       i
                                             σi                     σ −1
                                yi =       yik dk             = Mi i Ai fi (xi j ),        (D.1)


where xij is the quantity of input j used by industry i, Mi is the mass of producers in
industry i, σi > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across producers, and Ai is an exogenous
productivity shifter. From this equation, we see that a change in the mass of operating
firms acts like a productivity shock and changes the industry-level price. Therefore, if

                                                      50
shocks outside sector i trigger a wave of exits, then this will set in motion endogenous
negative productivity shock (1/(σi − 1))∆ log Mi in sector i.
       Suppose that each firm must maintain a minimum level of revenue in order to continue
operation.25,   26
                     We are focused on a short-run application, so we do not allow new entry,
but of course, this would be important for long-run analyses.27
       The mass of firms that operate in equilibrium is therefore given by

                                                   λi E
                                                       (           )
                                          Mi = min        M̄i , M̄i ,
                                                   λ̄i Ē

where M̄i is the exogenous initial mass of varieties, λi E is nominal revenue earned by
sector i and λ̄i Ē is the initial nominal revenue earned by i. If nominal revenues fall relative
to the baseline, then the mass of producers declines to ensure that sales per producer
remain constant. In order to capture government-mandated shutdowns of certain firms,
we allow for shocks that reduce the exogenous initial mass of producers ∆ log M̄i ≤ 0.
       We can generalize Propositions 1 and 2 to this context. The only difference is that we
must replace d log Ai by d log Ai + (1/(σi − 1))d log Mi , where

                      d log Mi = d log M̄i + min{d log λi + d log E − d log M̄i , 0}.

       This backs up the claim that the d log Mi ’s act like endogenous negative productivity
shocks. They provide a mechanism whereby a negative demand shock, say in the com-
position of demand or in aggregate demand d log ζ, triggers exits which are isomorphic
to negative supply shocks.
       As in the other examples, the general lesson is that the output response, to a first-
order, is again given by an application of Hulten’s theorem along with an amplification
effect which depends on how the network redistributes demand and triggers Keynesian
unemployment in some factors and firm failures in some sectors.
       Having generalized the local comparative statics, we now make three observations
about the way bankruptcies can propagate and affect aggregates. In order to simplify the
  25
      One possible micro-foundation is each producer must pay its inputs in advance by securing within-
period loans and that these loans have indivisibilities: only loans of size greater than some minimum level
can be secured. This minimum size is assumed to coincide with the initial costs λ̄i Ē/M̄i of the producer.
   26
      Another possible micro-foundation is as follows. Producers within a sector charge a CES markup
µi = σi /(σi − 1) over marginal cost. These markups are assumed to be offset by corresponding production
subsidies. Producers have present nominal debt obligations corresponding to their initial profits (1 −
1/µi )λ̄i Ē/M̄i . The same is true in the future. If present profits (1 − 1/µi )λi E/Mi fall short of the required
nominal debt payment (1 − 1/µi )λ̄i Ē/M̄i , then the firm goes bankrupt and exits. Alternatively, we can
imagine that there is no future debt obligation but that firms cannot borrow.
   27
      See Baqaee (2018) and Baqaee and Farhi (2020a) for production networks with both entry and exit.

                                                        51
exposition, we abstract away from HtM households for the rest of the section.


D.2     Intermediate Multiplier of Bankruptcies
If there are increasing returns, then firm failures can also affect supply today directly.
As the economy scales down, marginal cost goes up. Our formulation of industry-level
production functions (D.1) have this property due to the love-of-variety effect. Hence,
firm exits act like negative TFP shocks, and if there are intermediate inputs, then these
endogenous negative TFP shocks are amplified.
   To see this, consider a Cobb-Douglas model where ρ = θ0 = θ j = 1 and negative
demand shocks. In this case, since there are no HtM households, the effect on output is
given by
                            X      1             X         1
                d log Y =       λi    d log Mi =     λi         (d log λi + d log E).
                         i∈N
                                σ i−1
                                                 i∈N
                                                         σi−1

Using the fact that d log λi + d log E = − j∈N Ψ ji dκ j /λi , we can write
                                           P

                                               X        1 X
                                 d log Y = −                    Ψ ji dκ j .
                                               i∈N
                                                     σi − 1 j∈N

Hence, the higher is the use of intermediate inputs, the larger are the elements of the
Leontief inverse Ψ, and the larger is the negative effect on output. Intuitively, a reduction
in demand causes exits at every step in the supply chain, and so the longer the supply
chains, the more costly the exits.


D.3     Bankruptcies and Expenditure Switching
In the previous example, we deliberately chose a Cobb-Douglas economy since the expen-
diture shares do not respond to relative prices. If the elasticities of substitution are not all
equal to one, the endogenous TFP shocks associated with exits, by changing expenditure
shares and the flow of spending, can trigger additional cascades of unemployment and
failure.
   To make this concrete, consider a simple example economy without intermediate
inputs where each sector uses only its own labor. Assume that there are no shocks to
aggregate demand (d log ζ = 0). Set the intertemporal elasticity of substitution ρ = 1
and share of HtM households 1 − φ = 0 to ensure that nominal expenditure is constant
(d log E = 0). We also assume that there are no exogenous shocks to productivities
(d log Ai = 0), no shocks to potential labor (d log L̄ f = 0), and no shocks to the sectoral

                                                     52
composition of demand (d log ω0j = 0). Finally, we assume that all sectors have the same
within-sector elasticity of substitution σi = σ > 1.
   We focus on exogenous shocks d log M̄i ≤ 0 capturing government-mandated shut-
downs. We show how endogenous failures can amplify these negative supply shocks.
The insights are more general and also apply to shocks to potential labor. Similarly, fail-
ures can be triggered by negative aggregate demand shocks, and the resulting endogenous
negative supply shocks can result in stagflation with simultaneous reductions in output
and increases in inflation.
   We start by analyzing the case where sectors are complements, and then consider the
case where they are substitutes. For brevity, we jump directly to the final result and leave
the derivations in a different appendix — Appendix G.


Shut-down shock with complements.               Assume that sectors are complements (θ < 1)
and consider the government-mandated shutdown of some firms in only one sector i. The
change in output is given by
                                                                σ
                        1                     (1 − θ)(1 − λi ) σ−1              1
        d log Y = λi       d log M̄i +                                       i     d log M̄i .
                       σ−1                                         1 λi        σ−1
                                                                         λ
                                       1 − (1 − θ)(1 − λi ) 1 − σ−1  1−λi


The first term on the right-hand side is the direct reduction in output from the shut-down in
sector i. The second term capture the further indirect equilibrium reduction in output due
to firm failures and Keynesian unemployment in the other sectors. Intuitively, the shut-
down in sector i raises the relative price of i, and because of complementarities, demand
in the rest of the sectors falls. This reduction in nominal spending causes unemployment
and additional exits in the other sectors.


Shut-down shock with substitutes.           Consider the same experiment as above but assume
now that sectors are substitutes (θ > 1). Shut-downs in i raise the price of i relative to other
sectors, and cause substitution away from i. As long as the elasticity of substitution within
the sector σ > 1 is large enough and the elasticity of substitution across sectors θ > 1 is not
too large, the shut-down in sector i causes unemployment in sector i, but no additional
firm failures in sector i. Furthermore, the other sectors maintain full employment and
experiences no failures. In this case the response of output is given by

                                1              (θ0 − 1)(1 − λi )    1
                d log Y = λi       d log M̄i +                   λi   d log M̄i ,
                               σ−1              1 − (θ0 − 1)λi σ − 1



                                                  53
where the first term on the right-hand side is the direct effect of the shutdown and the
second term is the amplification from the indirect effect of the shutdown which results in
Keynesian unemployment in i.


D.4       Scarring Effect of Bankruptcies
One of the primary concerns about firm failures is that it results in the destruction of
irreversible investments. This lowers output in the future, and through the Euler equation,
depresses spending today.28 In other words, the destruction of irreversible investments
can act like an endogenous negative aggregate demand shock. To see this, for simplicity,
assume there are no HtM agents and suppose that when firms exit in the first period
d log M, they do not return in the next period.
       In particular, by the Envelope theorem, output in the future falls by

                      X      λ∗i                  X      λ∗i                   X      λ∗i
         d log Y∗ =                  d log Mi =                  d log M̄i +                  d log λi + d log E .
                                                                                                                
                      i∈N
                            σi − 1                      σi − 1                 i∈D
                                                                                     σi − 1
                                                  i∈S


The endogenous changes in d log Y∗ then mean that the previously exogenous aggregate
demand shock d log ζ, defined by (3.3) now contains an endogenous term

                                                          1                      
                      d log ζ = −ρ d log(1 + i) +             d log β − d log p̄Y∗ + d log Y∗ .
                                                          1−β

However, the rest of the model remains the same. We can combine the Euler equation in
(3.4), with the aggregation and propagation equations in Propositions 1 and 2 (remember-
ing that d log Ai should be replaced by d log Ai + d log Mi /(σi − 1)).
       Intuitively, the effect of these failures is very similar to the presence of HtM house-
holds in terms of its implications for the AD curve. That is, failures shift the AD curve
downwards and flatten its slope, much as incomplete markets do in Figure 4.2b.


Appendix E Extension: Investment
To model investment, we add intertemporal production functions into the model. An
investment function transforms goods and factors in the present period into goods that can
be used in the future. In this case, instead of breaking the problem into an intertemporal
  28
    This mechanism is the same as the one emphasized by Benigno and Fornaro (2018), except here it
corresponds to the destruction of irreversible investment instead of reduced investment in innovation.



                                                               54
and intratemporal problem, we must treat both problems at once. In this section, we
first discuss the general local comparative statics with investment, extending the results
in Section 3, then we discuss a special case with simple sufficient statistics and global
comparative statics, extending the results in Section 5.1.
   In the body of the paper, we assumed that prices in the future pY∗ were fixed, which
meant that nominal expenditures in the future were also fixed pY∗ Y∗ = E∗ . In the version
of the model with investment, output in the future Y∗ is not exogenous, so assuming pY∗ is
no longer equivalent to assuming E∗ is fixed. Therefore, we consider both situations.


E.1      General local comparative statics
When we add investment to the model, we can still use Proposition 1 without change.
However, we can no longer use the Euler equation to pin down nominal expenditures
today, since nominal GDP today includes investment expenditures and output tomorrow
can no longer taken to be exogenous. Instead, to determine d log E, we must use a version
of Proposition 2. For this subsection, we assume that nominal expenditures in the future
period are fixed and we denote the future period by ∗.
   In particular, let λIi denote the intertemporal sales share — expenditures on quantity i
as a share of the net present value of household income. Furthermore, let Ω̄I represent the
intertemporal input-output matrix, which includes the capital accumulation equations.
Then, letting intertemporal consumption be the zero-th good, and abstracting from shocks
to the sectoral composition of demand for simplicity, we can write
                                                                                                             
                    X                             X                  X                              Ψ I 
                                                                                                          (k) 
      d log λIk =        λIj (θ j − 1)CovΩI,(j)    ΨI(i) d log Ai −   ΨI( f ) d log λIf − d log L f , I 
                                                                                                             
                     j                         i∈N
                                                   
                                                                     f ∈G
                                                                                                        λ k


almost everywhere, where changes in factor employments are given by
                                
                                            d log L̄ f ,                  for f ∈ K ,
                    d log L f = 
                                
                                    n                                  o
                                 min d log λIf − d log λI∗ , d log L̄ f , for f ∈ L.
                                


This follows from the fact that nominal expenditures on each factor f is given by d log λIf +
d log EI , where EI is the net-present value of household income. However, since nominal
expenditures in the future are fixed, we have d log E∗ = d log λI∗ + d log EI = 0. This allows
us to write nominal expenditures on each factor as d log λIf − d log λI∗ .




                                                         55
E.2    Global Comparative Statics
We can extend the results in Section 5.1 to the model with investment. To do so, we
assume that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution ρ is the same as the intersectoral
elasticities of substitution ρ = θ j = θ for every j ∈ N. In this case, the initial factor shares
are, once again, a sufficient statistic for the production network. In particular, Proposition
11 still applies. Furthermore, we can also prove that the set of equilibria form a lattice
under some additional assumptions.

Proposition 12. Suppose that the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, the elasticities of substi-
tution in production and in final demand are all the same θ. Suppose that there are only shocks to
potential factor supplies ∆ log L̄. If future nominal expenditure is fixed, then assuming in addition
that θ < 1, there is a unique best and worst equilibrium: for any other equilibrium, ∆ log L are
lower than at the best and higher than at the worst. Furthermore, both in the best and in the worst
equilibrium, ∆ log L are increasing in ∆ log L̄.

   Intuitively, a negative shock to potential factor supply today potentially reduces output
tomorrow by reducing resources available for consumption tomorrow. Since nominal
expenditures tomorrow are fixed, this raises the price level tomorrow. If the elasticity
of substitution θ is less than one, then the increase in the price level tomorrow reduces
expenditures on non-shocked factor markets and potentially causes them to become slack.
   In Proposition 12, we assume that nominal expenditures in the final period are fixed.
If instead we assume that the nominal price level in the future is fixed, rather than
nominal expenditures, then Proposition 12 applies regardless of the value of the elasticity
of substitution θ.


Appendix F Extension: Semi-Flexible Wages
In practice, we might imagine that wages can fall albeit not by enough to clear the market.
The possibility that wages may fall obviously has important implications for inflation.
Indeed, we show that with shocks to the sectoral composition of demand, and even
without shocks to aggregate demand, we can get simultaneous reductions in output and
inflation.
   For each factor f ∈ L, suppose the following conditions hold
                                       γ f
                                      wf
                                Lf           ,   if w f ≤ w̄ f ,
                                    =
                                     
                                      w̄ f
                                L̄ f 
                                     
                                           1   , if w f > w̄ f .

                                                   56
The parameter γ f controls the degree of downward wage flexibility. If γ f = ∞, then the
wage is perfectly rigid downwards. If γ f = 0, then the wage is fully flexible, and we
recover the neoclassical case.
                                          ! γ1                                                        ! γ1
                           w f      L  f     f 
                                                                                             Lf        f        wf
                                  −              L − L̄ f = 0,           L f ≤ L̄ f ,                      ≤         .
                               w̄ f   L̄ f                                                      L̄ f               w̄ f
                            


F.1     Generalizing the Results
The only change to Proposition 1 is that we now have

             X                      X                          X        γf          n                                    o
 d log Y =         λi d log Ai +            λ f d log L̄ f +                 λ f min d log λ f + d log E − d log L̄ f , 0 ,
             i∈N
                                                                      1 + γf
                                     f ∈G                      f ∈L


and the only change to Proposition 2 is that we now have

                                     γf
                                                              
                                            d log λ f + d log E +                  1
                                                                                          d log L̄ f           if      f ∈D
              d log L f =          1+γ f                                         1+γ f
                          
                                                                                                                              (F.1)
                          
                                                           d log L̄ f                                          if f ∈ S.
                          
                          


F.2     Illustrative Example
We now construct an example showing how allowing for some degree of downward wage
flexibility allows the model to generate a recession and deflation at the same time, without
relying on aggregate demand shocks. We return to the example of Section 5. However,
this time, suppose that wages have some degree of downward flexibility 0 < γ < ∞
common across all factor markets f ∈ L.
      We now get
                                        d log Y = λS d log L̄S + λD d log LD ,

where λD =                λ f = 1 − λS is the total share of the demand-constrained factors and
              P
                   f ∈D
d log LD is the “representative” employment reduction in the demand-constrained sectors

                                            X λf              X λf
                      d log LD =                 d log L̄ f <      d log L̄ f = d log L̄D .
                                              λD                λD
                                            f ∈D                           f ∈D


In turn, this employment reduction is given as a function of the change d log λS in the
share of the supply-constrained sectors by

                                                     γ                 1
                           λD d log LD = −              λS d log λS +     λD d log L̄D ,
                                                    1+γ               1+γ

                                                                      57
and the the change d log λS in the share of the supply-constrained sectors is given by
                                                                h                                 i
                              λS d log ω0S − (1 − θ)λS (1 − λS ) d log L̄S −       1
                                                                                  1+γ
                                                                                      d log L̄D
           λS d log λS =                              γ                                               .
                                                1−   1+γ
                                                         (1   − θ)(1 − λS )

Starting with the last equation, we see that once again, the share of supply-constrained
factors increases if the shock to the sectoral composition of demand redirects expenditure
towards these factors or if the labor shocks for those factors is larger than the ones hitting
the demand-constrained factors. This reduces the shares of demand-constrained factors,
creates unemployment, and further reduces output through Keynesian effects. Indeed,
putting everything together, we get



  d log Y = λS d log L̄S
               γ                                                                          γ
                                                                      
              1+γ
                  (1   − θ)λS (1 − λS )d log L̄S + 1 −     1
                                                          1+γ
                                                              (1   − θ) λD d log L̄D −   1+γ
                                                                                             θλS d log ω0S
          +                                        γ                                                         .
                                             1−   1+γ
                                                      (1   − θ)(1 − λS )

   The difference between the case where wages have some downward flexibility (γ < ∞)
and the case where they do not (γ = ∞) is that now the wages of the demand-constrained
factors falls, and this mitigates the increase in unemployment and the reduction in output.
However, there is also a countervailing amplification effect: the labor supply shocks
to the demand-constrained factors now also matter. This is because these shocks now
reduce the wages of the demand-constrained factors, which further redirects expenditure
away from them because of complementarities, and further reduces employment of the
demand-constrained factors. Of course, allowing for some degree of wage flexibility can
endogenously change the sets of supply-constrained and demand-constrained factors,
and so we do not push the comparison any further.
   Instead, we turn our attention to inflation. Using d log pY = d log E − d log Y, the effect
on inflation is

                                   1                             1
                   d log pY = −       d log λS − λS d log L̄S −     λD d log L̄D .
                                  1+γ                           1+γ

The first term is negative, since the share of supply-constrained factors expands in response
to the negative demand shock, capturing the fact that as demand switches to supply-
constrained factors, the price of sticky sectors starts to decline, generating deflation. In
the simple case where there are no negative supply shocks d log L̄ = 0 but the sectoral


                                                     58
composition of demand has shifted, we get that output and inflation both fall.


Appendix G               Derivations for Example with Failures
Preliminaries.     Changes in the sales of i are given by
                                                               X              
                       d log λi = (1 − θ0 )(1 − λi ) d log pi −   λ j d log p j ,       (G.1)
                                                                j∈N


where changes in the price of i depend on changes in the wage in i and on the endogenous
reduction in the productivity of i driven by firm failures

                                                         1
                                d log pi = d log wi −       d log Mi .                  (G.2)
                                                        σ−1

The change in wages in i are given by

                               d log wi = max{d log λi − d log L̄i , 0},                (G.3)

and changes in the mass of producers in i are given by

                                d log Mi = min{d log λi , d log M̄i }.                  (G.4)

We consider the effect of shutdown shocks d log M̄i starting with the case where sectors
are complements and then the case where they are substitutes. The effect of negative labor
shocks d log L̄i is similar.


Shut-down shock with complements.               Assume that sectors are complements (θ < 1)
and consider the government-mandated shutdown of some firms in only one sector i. We
can aggregate the non-shocked sectors into a single representative sector indexed by −i.
We therefore have d log M̄i < 0 = d log M̄−i .
   The closures of firms in i raise its price (d log pi > 0), which because of complementari-
ties, increases its share (d log λi > 0). It therefore does not trigger any further endogenous
exit in this shocked sector (d log Mi = d log M̄i ). In addition, the wages of its workers
increases (d log wi > 0). The shock reduces expenditure on the other sectors (d log λ−i < 0),
and this reduction in demand triggers endogenous exits (d log M−i < 0), pushes wages
against their downward rigidity constraint (d log w−i = 0) and creates unemployment
(d log L−i < 0), both of which endogenously amplify the reduction in output through


                                                  59
failures and Keynesian effects.
   Using equations (G.1), (G.2), (G.3), and (G.4), we find

                                        (1 − θ)(1 − λi )                   1
                d log λi = −                                                  d log M̄i > 0,
                                                            1 λi          σ−1
                                                                     
                               1 − (1 − θ)(1 − λi ) 1 −    σ−1 1−λi


                                                         λi
                         d log M−i = d log L−i = −            d log λi < 0,
                                                       1 − λi
and finally
                                                              σ
                      1                     (1 − θ)(1 − λi ) σ−1             1
        d log Y = λi     d log M̄i +                                    λi     d log M̄i .
                     σ−1                                            λ       σ−1
                                                         
                                     1 − (1 − θ)(1 − λi ) 1 − σ−11    i
                                                                   1−λi


The first term on the right-hand side is the direct reduction in output from the shut-down
in sector i. The second term capture the further indirect equilibrium reduction in output
via firm failures and Keynesian unemployment in the other sectors.


Shut-down shock with substitutes.           Consider the same experiment as above but assume
now that sectors are substitutes (θ > 1). We conjecture an equilibrium where sales in sector
i do not fall more quickly than the initial shock d log λi −d log M̄i > 0. Sector i loses demand
following the exogenous shutdown of some of its firms, and this results in unemployment
in in the sector (d log Li < 0) but no endogenous firm failures (d log Mi = d log M̄i ) . On the
other hand, sector −i maintains full employment and experiences no failures.
   To verify that this configuration is indeed an equilibrium, we compute

                                         (θ − 1)(1 − λi ) 1
                            d log λi =                        d log M̄i .
                                          1 − (θ − 1)λi σ − 1

We must verify that
                                       0 > d log λi > d log M̄i .

The first inequality is verified as long as θ > 1 is not too large. The second inequality is
verified if σ > 1 is large enough and θ > 1 is not too large.
   If these conditions are violated, then we can get a jump in the equilibrium outcome.
Intuitively, in those cases, the shutdown triggers substitution away from i, and that
substitution is so dramatic than it causes more firms to shutdown, and the process feeds on
itself ad infinitum. Any level of d log Li < 0 and d log Mi < d log M̄i can then be supported
as equilibria. Although we do not focus on it, this possibility illustrates how allowing for


                                                  60
                 pY
                            θ=0       θ<1 θ=1 θ>1 θ=∞

                                                            Aggregate Supply




                                                                    Aggregate Demand



                                L’f                     Y                      Y

Figure H.1: The effect of the same negative supply shock to a factor for different values of
the elasticity of substitution θ.


firm failures with increasing returns to scale can dramatically alter the model’s behavior.
     Assuming the regularity conditions above are satisfied, the response of output is given
by

                                 1              (θ0 − 1)(1 − λi )    1
                 d log Y = λi       d log M̄i +                   λi   d log M̄i ,
                                σ−1              1 − (θ0 − 1)λi σ − 1

where the first term on the right-hand side is the direct effect of the shutdown and the
second term is the amplification from the indirect effect of the shutdown which results in
Keynesian unemployment in i.


Appendix H             More on Complementarities
In this appendix, using AS-AD diagrams, we illustrate how complementarities amplify
negative supply shocks and mitigate negative demand shocks.


H.1     Amplification of Supply Shocks
Figure H.1 represents a supply shock to some factor f using an AS-AD diagram. The AS
curve is horizontal to the left since there are no capitals (K = ∅). The initial level of output
is given by Ȳ and the new level of labor available in the shocked sector is given by L̄0f . The
negative supply shock shifts the AS curve to the left.



                                                   61
   In the figure, we draw the new AS curve for different values of the elasticity of sub-
stitution θ. As we lower the elasticity of substitution θ, the kink point at which the AS
curve becomes vertical shifts north-westwards. As long as θ > 1, the second kink is below
the AD curve, and so the equilibrium is the same as the neoclassical one, because the AS
and AD intersect along the neoclassical portion of the AS curve. Intuitively, when θ is
above one, no factor market becomes demand-constrained and so downward nominal
wage rigidity is never triggered. Once the elasticity of substitution has been lowered to
θ = 1, the Cobb-Douglas case, the second kink exactly intersects the AD curve. When θ
goes below one, the second kink moves above the AD curve, downward nominal wage
rigidities are triggered, and the equilibrium has lower output and higher inflation than
the neoclassical model. Finally, as θ goes to zero and we approach the Leontief case, the
second kink point moves directly above the first kink point, and so the reduction in output
in the neoclassical model and Keynesian model become the same again.
   The mechanism is Figure H.1 is only operative if there are some factors that are
supply-constrained. If every factor is demand-constrained, then this amplification effect
is non-functioning. Also, note that greater reductions in output must be accompanied
with more inflation.


H.2    Mitigation of Demand Shocks
Whereas complementarities amplify negative supply shocks, the same forces act to miti-
gate negative aggregate demand shocks. To see this, consider Figure H.2, where we draw
how the equilibrium responds to a negative demand shock as we lower the elasticity of
substitution. The AS curve is upward sloping whenever Y is less than Ȳ if there are some
factors with flexible prices.
   In response to a reduction in aggregate demand, the price of supply-constrained sec-
tors falls. Due to complementarities, this causes expenditures to switch towards the
demand-constrained factor markets, whose prices cannot fall, and this substitution boosts
employment in those factor markets. Intuitively, with complementarities, factor markets
with flexible prices, for example capital markets, can absorb the negative demand shock
and redirect demand to demand-constrained sectors.
   The mechanism is Figure H.2 is only operative if there are some factors that are
supply-constrained. If every factor is demand-constrained, then this shock absorber effect
is non-functioning.




                                            62
                                  Aggregate Supply
               pY




               w


                    θ=1                              Aggregate Demand

                    θ<1
                                              Y             Y

Figure H.2: The effect of the same negative demand shock for different values of the
elasticity of substitution θ with θ0 < θ.




                                         63
