NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

USING DISASTERS TO ESTIMATE THE IMPACT OF UNCERTAINTY
Scott R. Baker
Nicholas Bloom
Stephen J. Terry
Working Paper 27167
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27167

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020

We would like to thank the National Science Foundation, the Sloan Foundation, and the Hariri
Institute for Computing for their financial support. We appreciated feedback from discussants
Jonathan Goldberg, Ayhan Kose and Aart Kray, seminar participants at the AEA, Chicago,
Harvard, Maryland, IMF, NBER, Princeton, SITE, Stanford, Texas and the World Bank. This
paper builds on an unpublished 2013 paper “Does Uncertainty Reduce Growth? Using Disasters
as Natural Experiments” by Baker and Bloom. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom, and Stephen J. Terry. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Using Disasters to Estimate the Impact of Uncertainty
Scott R. Baker, Nicholas Bloom, and Stephen J. Terry
NBER Working Paper No. 27167
May 2020
JEL No. C23,D8,D92,E22
ABSTRACT
Uncertainty rises in recessions and falls in booms. But what is the causal relationship? We
construct cross-country panel data on stock market levels and volatility and use natural disasters,
terrorist attacks, and political shocks as instruments in regressions and VAR estimations. We find
that increased volatility robustly lowers growth. We also structurally estimate a heterogeneous
firms business cycle model with uncertainty and disasters and use this to analyze our empirical
results. Finally, using our VAR results we estimate COVID-19 will reduce US GDP by 9% in
2020 based on the initial stock market returns and volatility response.

Scott R. Baker
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
s-baker@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Stephen J. Terry
Department of Economics
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
stephenjamesterry@gmail.com

Nicholas Bloom
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
nbloom@stanford.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27167

1

Introduction

A rapidly growing literature investigates the relationship between uncertainty and
growth. One unifying fact emerges. Both macro and micro uncertainty move countercyclically, rising steeply in recessions and falling in booms.1
However, the extent to which this relationship is casual remains far from clear.
Does uncertainty drive recessions, do recessions drive uncertainty, or does another
factor drive both? Since theoretical models of uncertainty and economic activity
predict eﬀects in both directions, identifying the direction of causation ultimately
requires an empirical approach.2
Identifying the causal direction of this relationship proves diﬃcult because most
macro variables move together over the business cycle. Such challenges should appear familiar because, as Kocherlakota (2009) aptly noted, “The diﬃculty in macroeconomics is that virtually every variable is endogenous.” As a result, prior work on
uncertainty typically either assumes the direction of causation or relies on timing for
identification within a VAR framework. Because of the contemporaneous movement
of macro variables and the forward-looking nature of investment and hiring, such
approaches may face challenging identification problems.3
1

See, for example, evidence of counter-cyclical volatility in: macro stock returns in the US in
Schwert (1989), in firm-level stock asset prices in Campbell et al. (2001) and Gilchrist, Sim, and Zakrajsek (2012); in plant, firm, industry and aggregate output and productivity in Bloom et al. (2018),
Kehrig (2015) and Bachmann and Bayer (2013) Bachmann and Bayer (2014); in price changes in
Berger and Vavra (2018); and in consumption and income in Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2004),
Meghir and Pistaferri (2004) and Guvenen, Ozkan, and Song (2014). Other papers find that GDP
and prices forecasts have a higher within-forecaster dispersion and cross-forecaster disagreement in
recessions, for example, Bachmann, Elstner, and Sims (2013), Popescu and Smets (2009) and Arslan
et al. (2015); that the frequency of the word “uncertainty” close to the word “economy” rises steeply
in recessions (e.g. Alexopoulos and Cohen (2009)), and that a broad uncertainty factor indicator is
counter-cyclical (Jurado, Ludvigson, and Ng 2015).
2
Models predicting impacts of uncertainty on economic activity include eﬀects via: (a) risk aversion; (b) via the concavity of the production function (for example Oi (1961), Hartman (1972) and
Abel (1983)); (c) real-options eﬀects (for example Bernanke (1983), Bertola and Caballero (1994),
Dixit and Pindyck (1994), Hassler (1996), Gilchrist and Williams (2005), Sim (2006)); (d) via financial contracting frictions (for example, Arellano, Bai, and Kehoe (2019), and Narita (2011)), and (e)
via search frictions Leduc and Liu (2016) and Schaal (2017). There are also models predicting eﬀects
of economic activity on uncertainty, for example on information collection in Van Nieuwerburgh and
Veldkamp (2006) and Fajgelbaum, Schaal, and Taschereau-Dumouchel (2017), on noise-trading in
Albagli (2011), on R&D in Decker, D’Erasmo, and Moscoso Boedo (2016), on experimentation in
Bachmann and Moscarini (2011) and on policy in Bianchi and Melosi (2014).
3
For example, Bloom (2009), Christiano, Motto, and Rostagno (2014), Arslan et al. (2015), Basu
and Bundick (2017), Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2011) and Alexopoulos and Cohen (2009) report
a large impact of uncertainty on recessions in their VARs, while Bachmann and Bayer (2013) and

2

In this paper we take what we believe is a more robust approach, involving two
steps. First, we combine measures of aggregated/macro stock-market volatility (i.e.
the volatility of the market as a whole) with measures of micro stock-returns volatility (i.e. the dispersion across individual firm returns). Given the emphasis in the
literature on the importance of both macro and micro uncertainty, we take the principal component factor of our macro and micro proxies as our baseline measure of
uncertainty.
Second, we exploit the large number of exogenous shocks that occur in a quarterly panel of up to sixty countries since 1970. These exogenous shocks are natural
disasters, terrorist attacks, political coups, and revolutions. We use these shocks to
instrument for changes in the level and volatility of stock market returns as a way to
separate the eﬀects of our exogenous shocks into first- and second-moment components. The identifying assumption is that some shocks – like natural disasters – lead
primarily to a change in stock market levels and more closely map to first-moment
shocks, while other events like coups lead more to changes in stock market volatility,
implying they are more of a second-moment shock. A series of instrumental variables
estimators exploits these diﬀerences to separate the impact of first- vs second-moment
shocks on the economy.
To refine this analysis, we weight each event by the increase in daily count of
articles mentioning the aﬀected country in Access World News in the fifteen days
after the event compared to the fifteen days before the event. For example, we would
use the 322% increase in the count of the word “Japan” in fifteen days after the March
11th 2011 earthquake compared to the fifteen days before to weight this shock. This
ensures that only events that are unanticipated are included, since anticipated events
like elections and major sports events do not generate jumps in coverage on the day
they occur. Moreover, the largest and most newsworthy shocks will get the largest
weight, which should be correlated with their economic impact.
To highlight how our identification strategy focuses on surprise events, Figure 1
shows the average increase in newspaper coverage of the countries in which the shocks
occurred for fifteen days before and after they occurred. This shows these events lead
to a jump in newspaper coverage on the day of the event, with an average increase of
39% over the fifteen days after the event. For comparison Figure 2 shows the media
coverage around general elections, showing no jump in the days after compared to
Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng (2019) report the reverse (a large eﬀect of recessions on uncertainty).

3

the days before the event.4
Using this strategy of weighting events by their increase in media coverage, we
find a significant causal impact of both first- and second-moment eﬀects on economic
activity. In the year following a shock, we estimate a one standard deviation increase
in our first moment proxy and a one standard deviation increase in our second moment
proxy lead to an approximately 2% increase and a 7% decrease in GDP growth,
respectively. That is, first- and second-moment eﬀects are both significant drivers of
growth.
There are clearly some potential issues with this identification strategy. One of
these is whether our particular stock market uncertainty measure is a good indicator of
second-moment shocks to business conditions. As alternative estimation approaches,
we also try using solely cross-firm stock returns dispersion or solely broad stock index
volatility, finding similar results. In addition, we construct alternative versions of our
main instruments where we include shocks to geographically neighboring economies
and trade partners, finding that these also tend to drive similar eﬀects.
A second concern is whether these events are really shocks or are endogenous
events. For example, maybe some revolutions were predicted in advance or natural
disasters arising from human actions (like deforestation) could be foreseen. To address
this, we test our shock instruments directly and find while these have extremely high
predictive power for future economic outcomes like stock returns and GDP growth, we
cannot find any predictive power for these shocks using lagged stock returns and GDP
growth. Moreover, as shown in Figure 1, there is no increase in newspaper mentions
of these countries in the days leading up to the day of the event, suggesting they were
not anticipated in the short run, either. We also run various over-identification tests
in our regressions and find no evidence to reject the instruments. Hence, while some
of the shocks may be predictable in the very long run (for example, global warming
may increase large hurricanes), over the short time horizon of our analysis they appear
to be unpredictable.
Third, our stock market levels and volatility indicators proxy for a range of channels of economic impact, e.g. the destruction of capital (e.g. buildings and equipment)
after a natural disaster and the closure of the banking system after a revolution. We
see these as all part of the first- and second-moment impacts of these shocks. But it
4

We also did similar analysis for other predictable but media-important events like the World
Cup and Super Bowl, also finding no significant jump in coverage around the event.

4

is worth noting that in obtaining causal identification of the impact of first and second moment eﬀects of exogenous shocks on the economy, we are conflating all these
channels together.
Finally, our results are only valid to the extent that they identify the first and
second moment impact of our shocks in the countries and years that they occur.
This is a classic local average treatment eﬀect (LATE) issue (Imbens and Angrist
1994), in that our identification is driven by the variation in our instrument which
comes mainly in developing or less developed countries, which experience many more
shocks than developed countries. As robustness, we also re-estimate our results using
a variety of sample splits and specifications. We find very similar results for countries
above and below median income levels and for diﬀerent time periods.
Moving on from our univariate IV regressions, we also we use the disaster shocks
as external instruments in a vector autoregression (VAR) following the approach of
Mertens and Ravn (2013) or Stock and Watson (2018). This approach is, essentially,
a multivariate dynamic generalization of our baseline univariate strategy. We uncover
a negative impact of volatility shocks on growth which proves robust across a range
of alternative VAR specifications and subsamples.
To validate our empirical identification strategy, we build a rich quantitative business cycle model with firm heterogeneity and incorporate disaster shocks. In the
model, an uncertainty shock causes a drop in GDP growth because individual firms
pause their hiring and investment activity, freezing in the face of increased volatility
and adjustment costs. Disaster shocks in the model lead to flexibly parameterized
shifts in the levels and the volatility of the exogenous productivity processes at the
micro and macro levels. We structurally estimate this model, which must be numerically solved and simulated, by choosing the disaster mappings in an indirect inference
procedure which targets our baseline IV regressions. In our simulated data, both the
IV regressions and our IV-VAR based on disaster instruments correctly uncover the
negative impact of uncertainty on GDP growth.
Finally, armed with our validated empirical estimates, we then turn to the disruptions in the stock market occurring with the COVID-19 pandemic in early 2020. The
stock market experienced both a sharp drop in average returns together with a spike
in volatility.5 Our empirical strategy exploits historical events which bundle together
5

While the stock market recovered somewhat in April 2020 we did not include this rebound as it
reflects the response of fiscal and monetary policy.

5

first- and second-moment innovations. We feed both the early 2020 levels drop in
the US stock market, over two standard deviations by our measure, as well as the
concurrent volatility jump of over one standard deviation, into our IV-VAR. We forecast a drop of about 7% (or 28% in annualized terms) in US GDP growth in 2020Q2,
followed by a slow recovery of GDP growth. There is wide uncertainty around our
forecast. The globally widespread lockdowns and quarantines lack an equivalent in
our sample, and the uncertainty inherent in the future path of the pandemic may
also prove longer lasting than a conventional volatility shock. All in all, however, our
estimates suggest a substantial near-term decline in US GDP growth.
This paper links closely to the broader literature on volatility and growth. Ramey
and Ramey (1995)’s paper looked at a cross-country panel data and found a strong
negative relationship between growth and volatility. Other related growth papers include Barro (1991) who finds a negative relationship between growth and political instability, Koren and Tenreyro (2007) who find strongly negative correlations between
growth and the volatility of country-level macro shocks, and Engel and Rangel (2008)
who show a negative correlation between GARCH measures of heteroskedasticity and
growth in cross-country panels. Carrière-Swallow and Céspedes (2013) demonstrate
that this relationship appears much stronger for emerging countries with less developed financial systems relative to the United States. The challenge with this literature
is identifying the nature of causality underlying these relationships between growth
and volatility.
Our use of disaster instruments also clearly relates to a rich literature in economics
and finance. Early work by Rietz (1988) and Barro (2006) emphasizing the implications of disasters for financial markets has been followed by wide investigation of
their broader impact (Barro and Ursúa 2012; Gabaix 2012; Gourio 2012; Nakamura
et al. 2013). We view our work as complementary to the disaster literature, although
our focus is not on the impact of disasters per se. We instead exploit them as a
useful source of variation in levels and volatility, variation which proves key to our
identification strategy.
The analysis of the COVID-19 shock in our paper also links to a rapidly growing
body of work on the economics of the pandemic. Some of that work combines epidemiological structures with economic models (Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and Trabandt
2020; Atkeson 2020). Other papers focus on measuring the asset market and firmlevel disruptions associated with the pandemic (Alfaro et al. 2020; Baker et al. 2020b;
6

Hassan et al. 2020). Historical variation from past epidemics informs other papers
(Correia, Luck, and Verner 2020). Finally, a group of projects links uncertainty to
the pandemic (Baker et al. 2020a; Leduc and Liu 2020; Ludvigson, Ma, and Ng 2020).
Our approach is complementary to and incorporates many of these streams of work,
combining an economic model with historical disaster and asset price variation to
inform an uncertainty-based analysis of the pandemic.
In Section 2 we describe our economic and disaster data. In Section 3 we run
instrumental variable regressions and estimate our vector autoregression to uncover
the impact of uncertainty on GDP growth. In Section 4 we introduce and structurally
estimate our business cycle model, validating the disaster instruments identification
strategy. Section 5 provides forecasts of US GDP growth in the wake of the COVID19 shock. We conclude in Section 6. Online appendices provide more detail on our
empirical and model analysis.

2

Data

In the data we use up to 60 countries in our analysis, spanning the time period 19702019. These nations are selected as countries with more than $50 billion in nominal
GDP in 2008. We require that a country has at least 5 years of daily stock returns
data from a national index to be included. While a number of countries have data
beginning in the 1940s, most countries have relatively complete data starting only
in the 1970s or later. Thus, we construct our sample from 1970 onwards in order to
avoid early years that would span only a few countries in our panel. The data can be
divided into disaster shock data and economic data, which we now discuss in turn.
Each are summarized in Table 1 and discussed further in Appendix A.

2.1

Disaster Shock Data

To obtain the causal impact of first- and second-moment shocks on GDP growth
we want to instrument using arguably exogenous shocks. This leads us to focus on
natural disasters, terrorist attacks, and political shocks, which are typically exogenous
at least in the short run. This approach has some precedent in the literature, such as
the paper by Jones and Olken (2005) looking at successful assassinations of national
leaders as an instrument for leadership change and Hoover and Perez (1994) who
7

use oil-price shocks as instruments for aggregate productivity shocks. Furthermore,
others have found strong eﬀects of political ‘shocks’ on markets and asset prices (e.g.
Zussman, Zussman, and Nielsen (2008)).
As we discuss below, the exogeneity of many of these shocks is disputable in
the long run. For example, faster economic growth may increase the chances of a
natural disaster through reduced forest cover but reduce the chances of a revolution
by lowering poverty rates. To address this concern, we do three things.
First, we focus only on short-run impacts of shocks. At these short-run frequencies
it is easier to argue shocks are exogenous. For example, while some commentators
expected revolutions in the Middle East at some point, the start of the Arab Spring
in December 2010 was unexpected.
Second, we weight shocks by the increase in media coverage 15 days after the event
compared to 15 days before the event. This should remove anticipated shocks in that
the media coverage running up to them would be smoothly increasing. Figure 1 shows
this media coverage on average for all shocks combined, displaying a large jump after
the shocks and no obvious run-up in coverage before the event. In comparison, Figure
2 shows the media coverage in the one month around general elections with no jump
in the 15 days after the event.
Third, we confirm econometrically these events appear to be surprises. In Table
A1 we report forecasting specifications for these events, and they are not anticipated
by the market in advance. This is perhaps not surprising - natural disasters are
notoriously hard to predict, while coups and terrorist attacks by their nature tend to
be planned in secret. Revolutions also appear hard to predict, presumably because
otherwise they could be diverted by the government in power.
One initial issue is that the number of events covered by natural, political and
terrorist disasters is extremely large, typically with several events per week around
the world. So, we need to apply a filter to focus only on major events. With this aim,
we include a shock only if it fulfills at least one of the following conditions: 1) more
than 0.001% of the population in deaths, 2) more than 0.01% of GDP in damages, or
3) a successful coup or regime change.6
Table 1 contains some summary statistics on our full country sample for economic
6

Our results are robust to modification of filters for both deaths and monetary damages, or by
utilizing a filter that is measured in absolute rather than relative terms. These conditions are shocks
that kill more than 100 people or do more than $1 billion in damages.

8

and shock variables. We have around 7000 quarterly observations for the 60 countries
with GDP growth and stock returns data, with over 700 shocks occurring over this
period. We now discuss the definitions of each of the groups of shocks in turn.
Natural Disasters: Our natural disaster data has been obtained from the Center
for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED).7 This dataset contains over
15,000 extreme weather events such as, droughts, earthquakes, insect infestations,
pandemics, floods, extreme temperatures, avalanches, landslides, storms, volcanoes,
fires, and hurricanes from 1960 to 2019. The dataset includes the categorized event,
its date and location, the number of deaths, the total number of people aﬀected by
the event, and the estimated economic cost of the event. The CRED dataset also
includes industrial and transportation accidents which we exclude in our analysis.
Terrorist Attacks: To define terrorist events we use the Center for Systemic Peace
(CSP): High Casualty Terrorist Bombing list, which extends from 1993-2019 and
includes all terrorist bombings which result in more than 15 deaths.8 This data
includes the location and date of each event as well as the number of deaths and an
indicator for the magnitude of the attack ranging from 1 to 6.
Political Shocks: For political shocks, we utilize data from the Center for Systemic
Peace (CSP): Integrated Network for Societal Conflict Research. To define political
shocks, we include all successful assassination attempts, coups, revolutions, and wars,
from 1970-2019.
We include two types of political shocks, each derived from the CSP’s categorization of political shocks which is based on the types of actors and motives involved.
The first is composed of coup d’états and other regime changes. Coup d’états are defined as forceful or military action which results in the seizure of executive authority
taken by an opposition group from within the government. This opposition group is
already a member of the country’s ruling elites, rather than, for example, an underground opposition group. Typically, these are coups brought by the military or former
7

See http://www.emdat.be/database CRED is a research center which links relief, rehabilitation,
and development. They help to promote research and expertise on disasters, specializing in public
health and epidemiology. Their EM-DAT database is an eﬀort to provide a standardized and comprehensive list of large-scale disasters with the aim of helping researchers, policy-makers, and aid
workers better respond to future events.
8
See http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscr/inscr.htm The CSP is a research group aﬃliated with
the Center for Global Policy at George Mason University. It focuses on research involving political
violence in the global system, supporting research and analysis regarding problems of violence in
societal development. The CSP established the Integrated Network for Societal Conflict Research
in order to coordinate and standardize data created and utilized by the CSP.

9

military oﬃcers in government in a right-wing action against left-wing governments.
Our second type of political shock denotes a revolutionary war or violent uprising,
excluding ethnic conflict which the CSP considers as a separate class. These are
composed of events featuring violent conflict between a country’s government and
politically organized groups within that country who seek to replace the government
or substantially change the governance of a given region. These groups were not
previously part of the government or ruling elite and generally represent left-wing
rebels overthrowing a right-wing or military regime.
Within each category, by country and quarter, we give a value of one if a shock
has occurred and a zero otherwise. This means that if a country has, for example,
three earthquakes in one quarter, it still receives a value of one. When using the
media-weighted shocks, we use the shock with the highest jump in media citations
for that category in that quarter. The reason is to avoid double counting recurring
but linked events within a quarter – such as an earthquake with multiple aftershocks.

2.2

Economic Data

Output Data: Real GDP is obtained from the Global Financial Database for all but
15 countries. GDP data for Mexico, Venezuela, Chile, Greece, and Singapore was
obtained from the IMF Statistics division. GDP data for Pakistan was obtained from
the World Bank. Saudi Arabian GDP data was obtained from the World Development
Indicators Database. GDP data for Bangladesh, Kenya, Kuwait, Serbia, and Vietnam
was obtained from the World Economic Outlook database. We proxy for GDP data
with industrial production for Poland, Romania, and Nigeria. Real GDP data is
denominated in the local currency and its reference year varies. As we deal with
percentage changes, the diﬀerent denominations and base years of diﬀerent countries
do not matter, in practice.
We use yearly real GDP growth by quarter (year-on-year growth) as our dependent
variable to remove seasonality and reduce the impact of high frequency measurement
errors.
Annual population data was obtained from the Global Financial Database. Population data is taken from national estimates and represents annual December 31st
population levels. Data on monthly Consumer Price Indexes is obtained for all countries from a variety of sources, primarily the GFD, OECD, and the IMF.

10

Macro Uncertainty Proxy – Stock Market Index Data: Data on stock indices was
obtained from the Global Financial Database, using the broadest general stock market
index available for each country. Wherever possible we used daily data, but for six
countries we used weekly or monthly data in the 1980s and early 1990s to construct
stock returns and volatility indices when daily data was not available.9 Our results
are robust to the exclusion of observations taken from non-daily stock data and to
excluding all observations from these countries. All stock indices in our analysis are
normalized by the country level CPI data to obtain real returns.
In the empirical specifications, we generate yearly stock returns in each quarter,
defined as the cumulative return over the proceeding four quarters, in order to match
the timing of our yearly GDP growth rates. This serves as our first-moment series.
A measure of average yearly volatility is created by taking the average of quarterly
standard deviations of daily stock returns over the previous four quarters.
Micro Uncertainty Proxy – Cross Sectional Firm Return Data: As a micro-focused
measure of first- and second-moment shocks, we look at returns across individual
firms. We employ data from the WRDS international equity database, using data
from all countries in our sample which have daily data from greater than 10 listed
firms (comprising 39 of the 60 countries in our main sample). We then use the
standard deviation of quarterly returns across firms to construct our second-moment
series.
‘Overall’ uncertainty: As our overall or ‘micro + macro’ measure of uncertainty we
take the principal component factor (PCF) of our macro uncertainty (stock market
index) and micro uncertainty (firm dispersion of returns) measures. Because there are
only two variables in this PCF analysis, this is equivalent to normalizing both measures to a zero mean and unit standard-deviation series and taking the average (and
then renormalizing the final index to a unit standard-deviation). As such it places
equal weight on macro and micro variations in stock returns, so we also investigate
the impact of other weightings which tend to yield relatively similar results because
macro and micro stock returns and volatility are quite highly correlated.10
9
10

These countries are Saudi Arabia, Mexico, South Africa, Ireland, Russia, and Turkey.
Our macro and micro stock-returns and volatility correlations are 0.73 and 0.48 respectively.

11

2.3

Newspaper Citations

Two natural concerns are that the shocks we utilize as instruments are either not
unexpected or relatively small in magnitude. In order to help alleviate both of these
potential problems, we turn to a measure of unexpectedness and impact derived from
news article mentions of the countries in question.
Using the Access World News Newsbank service, we construct an “attention” index
surrounding each event. We limit our attention to English-language newspapers based
in the United States which number approximately 2,500 in our sample period. Blogs
and other online news sources are excluded from the search.
For each event we search the Access World News archive using the name of the
country the event occurred in. We then observe a 15-day period on either side of
the day of each event, counting the number of articles written each day about the
country. Figure 1 reports the average number of articles on the country surrounding
the event, where each event’s coverage has been normalized to 1 in the 15 days prior
to the event. For events in the United States, our search is the state in which the
event primarily took place.
We use this data to construct a measure of the jump in attention paid to the
country subsequent to an event or disaster. This will help to distinguish events which
were both unexpected and large enough in magnitude to plausibly aﬀect national
returns or volatility from those which were not. For example, if we observe a similar
number of articles regarding the country before and after the event date, we can
assume that the event was predicted ahead and/or it was not that important. In
contrast, observing a large jump in news articles just after the event makes it likely this
was (at least in part) both unexpected and important enough to command additional
news attention.
The way we define our jump in coverage index is to compute the percentage
increase in the number of articles written in the 15 days after the event compared to
the 15 days before the event. We choose this narrow 15-day window either side of the
event to maximize our ability to detect discrete jumps in coverage (longer windows
will also increase the measured impact of gradual trends) and to minimize the chances
of feedback from economic impacts of event onto our index. As an illustration of this
approach if we see 15 articles written about a country in the 15 days prior to the
event and 30 articles written about a country in the 15 days following an event, we
would assign this event a weight of 1 as it reflects a 100% jump in citations. Results
12

are robust to using narrower or wider windows, like 5 or 30 days, surrounding the
event.

3

The Impact of Uncertainty on Output

We display results from our primary specifications in Table 2. Column (1) gives results
from an OLS regression of national GDP growth on our overall (macro and micro)
stock market returns and volatility measures. We find a significant positive coeﬃcient
on stock return levels and a significant negative coeﬃcient on stock market volatility.
However, we worry about a high degree of endogeneity in these OLS results, so we
proceed to our IV regressions in columns (2)-(5). Here we instrument for stock returns
and volatility with our set of scaled natural and political disaster shocks. This set
consists of four series defined above: natural disasters, political shocks, revolutions,
and terrorist attacks. Intuitively, our empirical identification strategy exploits the
fact that each category of these political and disaster shocks generates a distinct
combination of levels vs volatility eﬀects.
The first shock type corresponds to natural disasters. In practice, such events
often generate adverse short-term impacts on the economy but not much change in
volatility. For example, the 1995 Japan Kobe earthquake led to a 19% drop in the
stock-market but little increase in quarterly stock-market volatility.
The second shock type represents coups, typically the takeover of a government by
a right leaning military group. On average these lead to positive jumps in the market
together with increased uncertainty. For example, after Musharraf led a military coup
against the elected government in Pakistan in 1999 the stock market rose by 15% and
quarterly volatility increased by nearly 200%.
The third shock type approximates a revolution - a change of power instigated
by a group outside the government – which is often associated in the data with a
large drop in markets together with much higher volatility. For example, after the
revolution in Indonesia in 1998, the stock-market fell by 66% and quarterly volatility
was 219% above average.
The final shock type corresponds a terrorist attack, often associated with a negative impact on the economy and increased uncertainty. For example, after the 9/11
terrorist attacks in the US the stock-market fell by 12% and quarterly volatility rose
by 300%.
13

By comparing the response of the economy across these diﬀering bundles of firstand second-moment events, our IV estimation isolates the separate roles of shifts in
levels vs uncertainty in driving economic activity. Column (2) reports our baseline
IV estimates. Before discussing the second stage results, we first check the first-stage
results. The F-tests on the set of disaster shocks are reassuring. In terms of specification tests, the Sargan over-identification test is not rejected in any specification,
suggesting that the impacts of these four types of disaster shocks are fully captured
by stock-market levels and volatility. That is, we cannot reject the null that observing
the impact of these disaster shocks on stock market levels and volatility is a suﬃcient
statistic for their one-year impact on GDP growth.
In terms of the first stage results for volatility, we find that there is a significant positive eﬀect for political shocks and revolutions, and terrorist attacks, but no
significant impact for natural disasters. This suggests that while sudden changes in
government or terrorism increase uncertainty, natural disasters do not. This may be
driven by the fact that the outcome of a natural disaster is a more known quantity
than the other components and so does not have the same level of second moment
impact.
Looking at the first stage for levels, we find negative eﬀects for revolutions and
terrorist attacks, but, perhaps surprisingly, large and positive eﬀects of political shocks
on stock market returns. This stems from the nature of these political shocks, which
are generally right-wing military coups that take power from left-wing governments.
In contrast, revolutions are generally left-wing groups overthrowing military or rightwing governments. Intriguingly we find negative but only marginally significant eﬀects
of natural disasters on stock market returns. One possible explanation is because
increased foreign aid and reconstruction following natural disasters oﬀsets some of
the capital destruction they cause (Fomby, Ikeda, and Loayza 2013). Restricting
estimates to the largest natural disasters (e.g. increasing the threshold at which
we include a natural disaster in our estimates) does increase the impact of natural
disasters on stock market levels, but at the cost of excluding many diasters across a
wide range of countries.
Turning to the second stage results, we see a significant causal impact of both first
and second moment eﬀects on economic activity. The magnitudes of the impacts are
large. All of the first and second moment series are scaled to have unit standard deviation for easy interpretation. In column (2), for example, we find that a one-standard
14

deviation first-moment shock increases GDP by about 1.7% over the following year
(about a half a standard deviation of GDP growth) and a one standard-deviation
second moment shock reduces GDP by about 6.5% (about 3 standard deviations of
GDP growth).
In columns (3) - (5), we decompose our combined macro+micro measure of first
and second moment shocks into the individual components. Columns (3) and (4) look
at only the volatility of daily aggregate stock-market indices to measure uncertainty
(with either the full macro sample or the set of observations that is consistent with
the ‘micro’ measure). Column (5) instead uses the micro measure, i.e., the cross
sectional variance of quarterly returns across individual companies. We find qualitatively similar results in the same direction as in column (2), though point estimates
shift somewhat.
Interestingly, all IV specifications give point estimates higher than those found in
the corresponding OLS regressions. We posit that this could be due to a number of
factors. The first is endogeneity, where for example positive first moment shocks could
generate increased stock-market volatility and second-moment shocks could have first
moment eﬀects on stock returns. This causes OLS coeﬃcients to be downward biased
for both the levels and volatility terms. The second is measurement error stemming
from noise trading and the imperfect match in economic coverage between real activity
and stock-market returns.11 Finally, an element of the Latent Average Treatment
Eﬀect (LATE) may be present. Our disaster shock instruments are more prevalent
among the poorer countries in our sample where the impact of volatility may be
higher than in rich countries.
From these results, we can discern three primary points. The first is that we find
both first- and second-moment shocks matter to growth. This is consistent with the
finance literature which uses a diﬀerent empirical strategy to come to the conclusion
that first- and second-moment eﬀects are both important for determining asset prices
11

As mentioned earlier, stock market indices cover publicly quoted firms global activities while
GDP figures cover all firms’ domestic activities. These can diﬀer for at least two reasons. The first
is that many large companies have much of their operations abroad, so for that example firms like
General Electric, British Petroleum and Nissan have more than 50% of their employees abroad but
their full market capitalization is captured in their domestic stock-market indices. Second, almost
all small and medium companies, and even many large companies are privately held so that stockmarket indices do not cover them. Beyond this other diﬀerences arise due from, for example, timing
(Calendar year versus account years) and accounting rules (Census versus GAAP rules on capital
equipment depreciation).

15

(e.g. Bansal and Yaron (2004)).
Second, the causal eﬀect of uncertainty on growth appears higher than OLS estimates suggest, likely due to factors such as measurement error and endogeneity,
consistent with our simulation results in the next section.
Finally, we find that our strategy passes the Sargan over-identification test, suggesting that we cannot reject the null that controlling for the first two moments of
business condition shocks (here, stock returns and stock volatility) is suﬃcient to
capture the full short-run eﬀect of such shocks.

3.1

Robustness and Heterogeneity

In this section we investigate the robustness of these results to allowing for crosscountry spillover eﬀects, including higher moments in the estimation, to diﬀerent
measures of first and second moments, and to a variety of sample splits.
To start, Table 3 reports the results of two exercises which construct alternative
disaster instrument series. These checks are motivated by the idea that a nation’s
economic conditions may depend not only upon their own shocks but also those of
“nearby” nations, defining nearby-ness according to a range of diﬀerent metrics. First,
in a set of trade-weighted exercises, we construct new disaster instruments for each
country equal to the sum of the domestic disaster series plus other nations’ disaster series weighted by the bilateral trade to GDP ratio. Second, in a set of inverse
distance-weighted exercises, we construct a new set of disaster instruments for each
country equal to the sum of the domestic disaster series plus other nations’ disaster series, with weights linearly declining in distance. Columns (1) - (2) report IV
regressions based on these two new instrument definitions with our composite uncertainty series used as an endogenous variable. We obtain results which are comparable
to those in the baseline Column (2) of Table 2. Columns (3) - (4) use the new instruments in an IV regression using the macro uncertainty definition, again finding
similar results to the relevant specification, in this case Column (3) of Table 2. Then,
Columns (5) - (6) repeat the IV regression with each new disaster series for the micro
uncertainty measure, with results comparable to Column (5) in Table 2. For each of
the two spillover-based instrument definitions, and for each of the uncertainty series
we consider, we robustly recover precise negative impacts of uncertainty on growth.
We now move on to a distinct set of robustness checks in Table 4. Column (1)

16

gives our baseline IV regression for comparison. In column (2), we weight by country
population, allowing for more weight to be given to larger countries. We find largely
similar and still significant results. Column (3) shows results when we exclude our
media-citation weighting of the disaster shocks, simply leveraging the disasters that
drove larger increases in coverage greater than the median shock. Here, we do not see
a significant impact of levels shocks on GDP, though we do uncover a less precisely
estimated but still significant negative eﬀect of uncertainty on growth. We take this
as evidence that the media scaling provides valuable information about how impactful
these disasters are on business conditions and economic activity of the countries in
question.
In column (4), we include the third moment of our main returns proxy, skewness,
and find little additional explanatory power.12 However, it should be noted that
the first moment or levels series and the third moment or skewness series are quite
correlated in this sample. Therefore, column (5) omits the levels term, uncovering
a negative impact of both increased uncertainty and declines in skewness on GDP
growth. Such patterns are consistent with the patterns related to skewness in Salgado,
Guvenen, and Bloom (2020).
Finally, in column (6) we examine to what extent our results are heterogeneous
across countries. We include interactions with being a “rich” country, defined as
being above the sample-average GDP per capita of $25,000. Interestingly, we find no
significant interaction (albeit with a large magnitude suggestive of a smaller impact
of uncertainty in developed countries).13

3.2

Vector Autoregression

In this section, we adapt our disaster instruments approach to the analysis of growth
and uncertainty in a structural vector autoregression (VAR) analysis.
We consider a parsimonious three-variable VAR using the same series we’ve analyzed so far: GDP growth, the first moment of stock returns, and the second moment
12

One point to clarify, however, is that this does not mean that disaster shocks’ higher moments do
not matter, but rather that these are not time-varying. This is in fact consistent with the frameworks
of, for example, Nakamura et al. (2013) and Gourio (2012), who model higher moments as important
but time stationary, even if some of the first and second moments vary over time.
13
In an exercise along these lines, Karaman and Yıldırım-Karaman (2019) considers various measures of financial development, applying our methodology and finding evidence of heterogeneity or
a more muted impact of uncertainty in contexts with more financial development.

17

of stock returns. VAR analyses are attractive because they account for a flexible set
of dynamic relationships between the included variables, but a classic identification
problem presents itself. In particular, we wish to uncover the causal impact of a structural shock to second moments on GDP growth. However, if there are endogenous
links between the included series, the observed or reduced-form innovations to second
moments will in general reflect a combination of the underlying structural shocks
to first and second moments in the model. Although the dynamics are generalized
in the VAR context, the intuitive problem is the exact same challenge faced in our
univariate OLS analysis: a given correlation pattern between second-moment shocks
and growth can reflect endogenous links between the series or an underlying causal
link.
One classic econometric solution to the VAR identification problem is to impose
recursive or timing assumptions on the underlying shocks to endogenous series. However, given the forward looking nature of stock-returns and (at least) the investment
component of GDP the timing assumptions are not ideal.
Therefore, we rely on an alternative identification strategy which can be thought of
as a generalization of our univariate disaster instruments approach. In particular, we
follow a version of the IV-VAR approach in Stock and Watson (2018) or Mertens and
Ravn (2013). We exploit the observed covariances of reduced-form shocks or observed
innovations in our VAR system with the set of disasters introduced above, the VAR
equivalent of our univariate first-stage regressions. If a given disaster is associated
with stable mappings to first and second moments, these extra covariances allow us
with a straightforward GMM exercise to piece apart the underlying shocks to first and
second moments and the response of growth to a second-moment or uncertainty shock.
Appendix C contains more information on the details of the underlying econometric
approach, which we adapt to our panel structure of cross-country data.
Using our IV-VAR identification strategy to analyze our empirical sample of GDP
growth, stock returns, and volatility, Figure 3 plots the impulse response of GDP
growth to a second-moment shock. A one-standard deviation increase in uncertainty
here leads to an immediate drop of just over 3.5% in GDP growth. Figure 4 – which
adds the response computed under a range of alternative sample cuts, lag lengths,
and specifications – demonstrates that the negative impact of second-moment shocks
on GDP growth is robust in this IV-VAR analysis.
To summarize, a VAR extension of our disaster instrument IV regressions uncovers
18

a negative impact of volatility shocks on growth in our empirical sample.

4

Model and Simulation

We introduce a heterogeneous firms business cycle model with micro and macro productivity fluctuations. The model features time variation in the uncertainty or volatility of shocks, building on Khan and Thomas (2008) and Bloom et al. (2018). Given
our empirical sample of nations, we use a small open economy model with fixed prices.
To validate our empirical identification strategy, we link fluctuations in simulated disaster shocks to movements in the level and volatility of shocks in the model. We then
run counterparts to our disaster instruments empirical regressions on simulated data,
structurally estimating the parameters governing disaster shocks in our quantitative
model via indirect inference targeting these regressions. This is similar to the “identified moments” approach outlined by Nakamura and Steinsson (2018) of matching
a model to causally identified empirical moments. The results demonstrate that in
this conventional model of uncertainty fluctuations and firm investment, a disaster
instruments approach correctly uncovers the impact of uncertainty on growth. We
also show that the IV-VAR estimates align closely in the data and the model, further
validating the ability of our empirical strategy to correctly uncover the impact of
uncertainty on growth.

4.1

Uncertainty at the Firm Level

The model centers on a unit mass of ex-ante identical firms, each of which produces
a homogeneous output good y by combining capital k and labor n as inputs
y = zAk ↵ n⌫
with decreasing returns to scale or ↵ + ⌫ < 1. Time is discrete. A firm’s productivity
is subject to both micro shocks z and macro shocks A. Using 0 to denote future
periods, each process follows an AR(1) in logs

ln A0 = ⇢A ln A +
ln z 0 = ⇢z ln z +
19

A
z

"A

"z

where the innovations "A and "z are independently distributed N (0, 1). Because of
the high correlation of micro and macro uncertainty we assume that the micro ( z 2
z
A
{ Lz , H
}) and macro ( A 2 LA , H
) volatilities of shocks both move according to
a common two-point Markov chain for uncertainty S 2 {L, H} with P(S 0 = H|S =
L) = ⇡L,H and P(S 0 = H|S = H) = ⇡H,H.
Two implications of this formulation bear further discussion. First, the timing
convention used here ensures that firms observe the level of uncertainty S and hence
the volatility of shocks they face for the next period when making choices in the
current period. Second, note that changes in the uncertainty governing the two
shocks facing firms lead to shifts in two distinct outcomes. While changing volatility
of macro shocks A leads to shifts in the volatility of macro aggregates, the coincident
shifts in micro volatility z lead to higher variance in the cross-section of firm-level
outcomes.

4.2

Firm Investment and Value Maximization

Each period a firm chooses investment i in capital k 0 for the next period, accumulating
capital with one-period time-to-build
k 0 = (1
where capital depreciation satisfies 0 <
AC k according to

k )k
k

+i

< 1. Investment incurs adjustment costs

AC k (i, k) = I(|i| > 0)yF k + |i|I(i < 0)S K
reflecting a fixed or disruption cost component F k > 0 and partial irreversibility
with loss of a share S K of capital’s purchase price. Each firm also hires labor in a
competitive labor market with wage w. Each period a fraction satisfying 0 < n < 1
of the firm’s labor departs due to exogenous factors. So, hiring an increment s of new
labor relative to the previous level n 1 results in a new level of labor given by
n = (1

n )n 1

+ s.

Hiring new labor also incurs adjustment costs AC n given by

20

AC n (s, n 1 ) = I(|s| > 0)yF l + |s|H l w,
with a fixed disruption component F n > 0 and linear costs of hiring or firing H l > 0.
The framework here implies that both capital k and labor n 1 are state variables for
the firm. In our small economy framework, the firm maximizes firm value taking as
given the global real interest rate leading to a discount rate 0 < < 1. The firm’s
value is given by the expected present discounted value of payouts

V (z, k, n 1 ; A, S) = max
y
0
k ,n

i

wn

AC k

AC n + EV (z 0 , k 0 , n; A0 , S 0 )

subject to each of the constraints and stochastic processes laid out above. Numerically
solving this model with five states and two endogenous policies is computationally
intensive. As laid out in Appendix B, we apply conventional but eﬃcient applied
dynamic programming techniques in our solution and simulation of the model.

4.3

The Impact of an Uncertainty Shock in the Model

As usual in this class of models, fixed adjustment costs lead to an optimal lumpy
adjustment strategy for each input, with some firms actively investing and adjusting
their labor and other firms pausing in an inaction region. After an increase in uncertainty S, the inaction regions for investment in capital k or hiring more labor n
increase in size because a firm’s option value to delay such investments increases. In
other words, more firms “wait and see,” delaying input adjustment in order to respond
optimally to more uncertain or volatile shocks in future. The result is a drop in hiring
and investment that drives a recession. Because inactive firms also respond less to
their micro-level shocks in the face of increased uncertainty, misallocation also rises
and leads to amplification and propagation of the recession.

4.4

Simulating the Model with Disasters

Macro fluctuations in the model are driven by a combination of two shocks. The
levels or first-moment shock A directly drives business cycles through its impact on
the production function. At the same time, the uncertainty or second-moment shock S
indirectly causes fluctuations through eﬀects such as the wait-and-see channel outlined
21

above. We quantitatively embed the notion of disaster shocks into our simulation of
the model for each of the four types of events we analyze above. For each disaster
type i = 1, ..., 4 we choose a parameter governing the first-moment impact
F
i

2R

and a parameter governing the second-moment impact
0<

S
i

< 1.

During the simulation of the model, we allow for iid occurrence of a disaster of type
i with probability pi . We indicate disaster occurrence with the dummy variables dit .
If a disaster of type i occurs in period t, we first shift the current levels of macro
productivity
At ! At +

A F
L i ,

where LA is the low-uncertainty standard deviation of the macro productivity
innovations. Then, we increase the level of volatility St to a high state
St ! H
with probability Si .
In all other respects, the simulation of the model follows a conventional structure.
The nature of the heterogeneous firms model here means that in each period t we
obtain a simulated cross-sectional distribution µt (z, k, n 1 ) across the unit mass of
firms. Also, to align with the later structure of our data which reflects a panel across
nations we simulate k = 1, ..., N nations for t = 1, ..., T periods each, delivering a set
of simulated data
{Akt , Skt , d1kt , d2kt , d3kt , d4kt , µkt }k,t
including information on the first-moment Akt , second-moment Skt , disasters dikt
for i = 1, ..., 4, and cross-sectional distribution µkt for country k at time t. We provide
further detail on the computational approach employed here in Appendix B.

22

4.5

Estimating the Model with Indirect Inference

To use our environment as a quantitative laboratory for exploring our empirical identification strategy, we must first parameterize the model. We do this in a two-step
process. First, we fix the values of a range of model parameters to conventional values
for a quarterly solution from the literature, reporting these in Table 5. We also fix
the arrival probabilities of disasters pi to their empirical averages in our cross-country
sample. Second, we structurally estimate the values of all the parameters Fi and
S
i governing the disaster shock process through an indirect inference procedure targeting the cross-country panel instrumental variables regressions discussed in Section
3. This matches the empirically estimated impact of each type of disaster shock on
stock-market returns and volatility with its equivalent estimated on model data.
In particular, we collect the first- and second-stage coeﬃcients for our IV estimates
in two versions using both micro and macro second-moment proxies, i.e., we target
the first-stage and second-stage coeﬃcients in columns (4) and (5) of Table 2.14 The
result is a total of 16 first-stage coeﬃcients and 4 second-stage coeﬃcients, or 20
target coeﬃcients. Our structural estimation of the model through indirect inference
chooses the set of parameters Fi and Si for i = 1, ..., 4, a total of 8 parameters, to
minimize the weighted diﬀerence between simulated and empirical estimates of the
target coeﬃcients.
Intuitively, the first-stage target coeﬃcients rely on heterogeneity in the parameters Fi and Si mapping diﬀerent disasters to observable first and second moment
shifts. The second-stage target coeﬃcients reflect the impact of each innovation on
macro growth, which is indirectly a function of the size and sign of the disaster mappings Fi and Si in our nonlinear model. We provide further detail on the structural
estimation approach employed here in Appendix B.

4.6

Parameter Estimates and Model IV Regressions

The bottom panel of Table 6 reports the structurally estimated disaster impacts Fi
and Si . Revolutions and terrorist attacks dominate the impact of disasters on first
14

The target coeﬃcients in Table 6 slightly diﬀer from those reported in Table 2. The reason is
that the model is solved at quarterly frequency, while the empirical macro stock return index involves
daily standard deviations of stock returns. So when computing the target regression coeﬃcients we
have to slightly modify the definition of the macro second moment in both the model and the data.
Details are provided in Appendix B.

23

moments or levels, while political coups, revolutions, and terror attacks increase uncertainty or second moments appreciably. In the top panel, we examine the targeted
IV regression coeﬃcients, comparing the data versus the model. Give the overidentified nature of the estimation, with 8 parameters and 20 target regression coeﬃcients,
the model fits well. The first-stage regression coeﬃcients based on both the micro
and macro measures of uncertainty broadly mirror the underlying estimated disaster
mappings in both the data and the model. Both of the micro and macro second-stage
estimates in the data reveal a strong positive impact of levels shocks on growth, with
a strong negative impact of uncertainty on growth, a pattern replicated in the model
estimates.
Crucially, the second-stage coeﬃcients run on simulated data in columns (2) and
(3) of Table 6 reveal that our IV approach correctly uncovers a negative impact of
uncertainty on GDP growth.

4.7

The IV-VAR on Simulated Data

Armed with our structurally estimated model, we then estimate our IV-VAR on
the simulated model data. Figure 5 plots two lines. The blue line with circles duplicates the baseline empirical IV-VAR estimates, uncovering an estimated drop in
GDP growth after an uncertainty shock. The red line with plus signs plots the estimated impulse response of GDP growth to an uncertainty shock in simulated data.
The magnitude of the drop and the recovery path are similar across the empirical
dataset vs simulated data. The estimation exercise for the model targeted only the
univariate panel IV regressions, but clearly the model matches both the initial impact
and dynamics of the estimated VAR path quite closely.

5

Applying our Model to Estimate the Impact of
COVID-19 on US GDP Growth

The COVID-19 pandemic generated a steep decline in the aggregate stock market as
well as a large spike in volatility. The pandemic likely combines multiple underlying
shocks, with a direct impact on the average level of business activity together with
increased uncertainty about the future path of the economy. Our IV estimation
methodology, designed to exploit variation from disruptive events which embed a
24

bundle of first- and second-moment shocks, is a natural laboratory in which we can
seek to understand the impact of the pandemic on US GDP growth.
Deep shifts in previously buoyant equity markets began in late February. From
the US market’s peak on February 19, through to the end of the quarter on March
31, the decline in the aggregate return of the total market was 28%. Simultaneously,
the cross-sectional standard deviation of US returns increased by around 150%. In
our estimated IV-VAR, both of these shifts represent large shocks relative to the
historical norm. In the US, the first-moment (levels series) dropped by over two
standard deviations.15 Our second-moment uncertainty index simultaneously spiked
by over one standard deviation in this short period. See Appendix D for more of the
underlying details of our empirical exercise.
We feed in these immediate changes in first and second moments, which arrived
late in 2020Q1, as shocks to the economy in 2020Q2. Figure 6 plots the resulting
forecast path of US year-on-year GDP growth over the next several years. The red
line with square markers plots the impact of the uncertainty shock alone, while the
blue line with circular markers plots the impact of the combined uncertainty and firstmoment shocks. The forecast path of growth has a 7% drop in US GDP in 2020Q2,
with a peak decline in 2020Q4 of 9% in year-on-year terms.
There is reason to emphasize the wide uncertainty around these forecasts as well as
some omitted economic factors. In a narrow statistical sense, for example, a maximum
year-on-year decline of over 16% in 2020Q4 lies within the 90% bands. In economic
terms, several factors should also be kept in mind. While our sample of events, based
on disasters in a wide sample of nations, is an attractive source of historical experience
about the impact of large disruptions on economic activity, the US economy’s path
after the pandemic may of course be muted relative to the impact of disasters on
some of the smaller, poorer nations in our sample. On the other hand, widespread
social distancing and business closures, a shift to working from home, and a potential
drop in innovation or technology are all potentially unusually damaging to the path
of US growth.
15

While the stock market recovered somewhat in April 2020 we did not include this rebound as it
reflects the response of fiscal and monetary policy.

25

6

Conclusion

A recent body of research has highlighted how uncertainty is counter cyclical, rising
sharply in recessions and falling in booms. But what is the causal relationship? Does
rising uncertainty drive recessions, or is uncertainty just an outcome of economic
slowdowns?
In this paper, we perform multiple analyses designed to determine the direction of
causality. We construct cross-country panel data on stock market levels and volatility
as proxies for the first and second moments of business conditions. We then build
a panel of indicators for natural disasters, terrorist attacks and political shocks and
weight them by the changes in daily newspaper coverage that they induce.
Using these shocks to instrument for our stock market proxies for first- and secondmoment shocks, we find that both first- and second-moment shocks are highly significant in driving national business cycles. In particular, second-moment or uncertainty
shocks cause a decline in short-term growth in panel IV regressions. These results
are consistent across a range of specifications. A negative impact of uncertainty on
growth also appears in an estimated multivariate IV-VAR.
To validate our disaster shock-based identification strategy, we build and solve a
rich micro-macro model of business cycles and heterogeneous firms subject to disaster
shocks. In this benchmark quantitative model, comparable to many used in the
literature on uncertainty, volatility shocks cause a robust decline in growth. We
structurally estimate this model, targeting our baseline IV regressions using simulated
data to parameterize the disaster shock process. Our estimated model reveals that
both our IV regressions and the IV-VAR correctly uncover a negative impact of
uncertainty on growth.
Armed with our structurally validated empirical estimates, we then turn to an
analysis of the COVID-19 pandemic, which has combined a sharp drop in the level of
equity markets with a jump in volatility. Feeding the observed COVID-19 shock into
our IV-VAR results in a sobering forecast of 9% declines in US GDP by 2020Q4.

26

References
Abel, Andrew B. 1983. “Optimal investment under uncertainty”. The American Economic Review 73 (1): 228.
Albagli, Elias. 2011. “Amplification of uncertainty in illiquid markets”. Working paper.
Alexopoulos, Michelle, and Jon Cohen. 2009. “Nothing to Fear but Fear itself? Exploring the eﬀect of economic uncertainty”. Working paper.
Alfaro, Laura, Anusha Chari, Andrew N. Greenland, and Peter K. Schott. 2020. “Aggregate and Firm-Level Stock Returns During Pandemics, in Real Time”. Working
paper.
Arellano, Cristina, Yan Bai, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2019. “Financial Frictions and
Fluctuations in Volatility”. Journal of Political Economy 127 (5).
Arslan, Yavuz, Aslıhan Atabek, Timur Hulagu, and Saygın Şahinöz. 2015. “Expectation errors, uncertainty, and economic activity”. Oxford Economic Papers 67 (3):
634–660.
Atkeson, Andrew. 2020. “What Will Be the Economic Impact of COVID-19 in the
US? Rough Estimates of Disease Scenarios”. Working paper.
Bachmann, Rüdiger, and Christian Bayer. 2014. “Investment dispersion and the business cycle”. American Economic Review 104 (4): 1392–1416.
— . 2013. “Wait-and-See business cycles?” Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (6):
704–719.
Bachmann, Rüdiger, Steﬀen Elstner, and Eric R Sims. 2013. “Uncertainty and economic activity: Evidence from business survey data”. American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 5 (2): 217–49.
Bachmann, Ruediger, and Giuseppe Moscarini. 2011. “Business Cycles and Endogenous Uncertainty”. Working paper.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, Steven J. Davis, and Stephen J. Terry. 2020a.
“COVID-Induced Economic Uncertainty”. Working paper.
Baker, Scott R, Nicholas Bloom, Steven J. Davis, Kyle J. Kost, Marco C. Sammon,
and Tasaneeya Viratyosin. 2020b. “The Unprecedented Stock Market Impact of
COVID-19”. Covid Economics: Vetted and Real-Time Papers 1 (3).
Bansal, Ravi, and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Risks for the long run: A potential resolution
of asset pricing puzzles”. The journal of Finance 59 (4): 1481–1509.
Barro, Robert J. 1991. “Economic growth in a cross section of countries”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (2): 407–443.
— . 2006. “Rare disasters and asset markets in the twentieth century”. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 121 (3): 823–866.
Barro, Robert J, and José F Ursúa. 2012. “Rare macroeconomic disasters”. Annual
Review of Economics 4 (1): 83–109.
Basu, Susanto, and Brent Bundick. 2017. “Uncertainty shocks in a model of eﬀective
demand”. Econometrica 85 (3): 937–958.

27

Berger, David, and Joseph Vavra. 2018. “Dynamics of the US price distribution”.
European Economic Review 103:60–82.
Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. “Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment”. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 98 (1): 85–106.
Bertola, Guiseppe, and Ricardo J Caballero. 1994. “Irreversibility and aggregate investment”. The Review of Economic Studies 61 (2): 223–246.
Bianchi, Francesco, and Leonardo Melosi. 2014. “Dormant shocks and fiscal virtue”.
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 28 (1): 1–46.
Bloom, Nicholas. 2009. “The impact of uncertainty shocks”. Econometrica 77 (3):
623–685.
Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen J
Terry. 2018. “Really uncertain business cycles”. Econometrica 86 (3): 1031–1065.
Campbell, John Y, Martin Lettau, Burton G Malkiel, and Yexiao Xu. 2001. “Have
individual stocks become more volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic
risk”. The Journal of Finance 56 (1): 1–43.
Carrière-Swallow, Yan, and Luis Felipe Céspedes. 2013. “The impact of uncertainty
shocks in emerging economies”. Journal of International Economics 90 (2): 316–
325.
Christiano, Lawrence J, Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. 2014. “Risk shocks”.
American Economic Review 104 (1): 27–65.
Correia, Sergio, Stephan Luck, and Emil Verner. 2020. “Pandemics Depress the Economy, Public Health Interventions Do Not: Evidence from the 1918 Flu”. Working
paper.
Decker, Ryan A, Pablo N D’Erasmo, and Hernan Moscoso Boedo. 2016. “Market exposure and endogenous firm volatility over the business cycle”. American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 8 (1): 148–98.
Dixit, Avinash, and Robert Pindyck. 1994. Investment under uncertainty. Princeton
university press.
Eichenbaum, Martin S, Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt. 2020. “The Macroeconomics of Epidemics”. Working paper.
Engel, R, and J Rangel. 2008. “The spline garch model for low frequency volatility
and its macroeconomics causes”. Review of Financial Studies 21:1187–1222.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D, Edouard Schaal, and Mathieu Taschereau-Dumouchel. 2017.
“Uncertainty traps”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (4): 1641–1692.
Fernández-Villaverde, Jesús, Pablo Guerrón-Quintana, Juan F Rubio-Ramírez, and
Martin Uribe. 2011. “Risk matters: The real eﬀects of volatility shocks”. American
Economic Review 101 (6): 2530–61.
Fomby, Thomas, Yuki Ikeda, and Norman V Loayza. 2013. “The Growth Aftermath
of Natural Disasters”. Journal of Applied Econometrics: 412–434.
Gabaix, Xavier. 2012. “Variable rare disasters: An exactly solved framework for ten
puzzles in macro-finance”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 (2): 645–700.
Gilchrist, Simon, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajsek. 2012. “Uncertainty, Financial
Frictions, and Investment Dynamics”. Working paper.
Gilchrist, Simon, and John C Williams. 2005. “Investment, capacity, and uncertainty:
a putty–clay approach”. Review of Economic Dynamics 8 (1): 1–27.
28

Gourieroux, Monfort, Christian Gourieroux, Alain Monfort, Director Alain Monfort,
et al. 1996. Simulation-based econometric methods. Oxford university press.
Gourio, Francois. 2012. “Disaster risk and business cycles”. American Economic Review 102 (6): 2734–66.
Guvenen, Fatih, Serdar Ozkan, and Jae Song. 2014. “The nature of countercyclical
income risk”. Journal of Political Economy 122 (3): 621–660.
Hartman, Richard. 1972. “The eﬀects of price and cost uncertainty on investment”.
Journal of Economic Theory 5 (2): 258–266.
Hassan, Tarek, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun. 2020.
“Firm-level Exposure to Epidemic Diseases: Covid-19, SARS, and H1N1”. Working
paper.
Hassler, John AA. 1996. “Variations in risk and fluctuations in demand: A theoretical
model”. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 20 (6-7): 1115–1143.
Hoover, Kevin D, and Stephen J Perez. 1994. “Post hoc ergo propter once more an
evaluation of does monetary policy matter? in the spirit of James Tobin”. Journal
of Monetary Economics 34 (1): 47–74.
Imbens, Guido W, and Joshua D Angrist. 1994. “Identification and Estimation of
Local Average Treatment Eﬀects”. Econometrica 62 (2): 467–475.
Jones, Benjamin F, and Benjamin A Olken. 2005. “Do leaders matter? National leadership and growth since World War II”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120
(3): 835–864.
Jurado, Kyle, Sydney C Ludvigson, and Serena Ng. 2015. “Measuring uncertainty”.
American Economic Review 105 (3): 1177–1216.
Karaman, K Kıvanç, and Seçil Yıldırım-Karaman. 2019. “How Does Financial Development Alter the Impact of Uncertainty?” Journal of Banking & Finance.
Kehrig, Matthias. 2015. “The Cyclicality of Productivity Dispersion”. Working paper.
Khan, Aubhik, and Julia K Thomas. 2008. “Idiosyncratic shocks and the role of
nonconvexities in plant and aggregate investment dynamics”. Econometrica 76
(2): 395–436.
Kocherlakota, Narayana. 2009. “Some Thoughts on the State of Macro”. Working
paper.
Koren, Miklós, and Silvana Tenreyro. 2007. “Volatility and development”. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (1): 243–287.
Leduc, Sylvain, and Zheng Liu. 2020. “Robots Do Not Get Sick: The Role of Automation when Pandemics Create Employment Uncertainty”. Working paper.
— . 2016. “Uncertainty Shocks are Aggregate Demand Shocks”. Journal of Monetary
Economics 82 (C).
Ludvigson, Sydney C., Sai Ma, and Serena Ng. 2020. “COVID19 and The Macroeconomic Eﬀects of Costly Disasters”. Working paper.
Ludvigson, Sydney, Sai Ma, and Serena Ng. 2019. “Uncertainty and Business Cycles:
Exogenous Impulse or Endogenous Response?” Forthcoming, American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics.
Meghir, Costas, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2004. “Income variance dynamics and heterogeneity”. Econometrica 72 (1): 1–32.
29

Mertens, Karel, and Morten O Ravn. 2013. “The dynamic eﬀects of personal and
corporate income tax changes in the United States”. American Economic Review
103 (4): 1212–47.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. 2018. “Identification in macroeconomics”. Journal
of Economic Perspectives 32 (3): 59–86.
Nakamura, Emi, Jón Steinsson, Robert Barro, and José Ursúa. 2013. “Crises and
recoveries in an empirical model of consumption disasters”. American Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics 5 (3): 35–74.
Narita, Futoshi. 2011. “Hidden actions, risk-taking and uncertainty shocks”. Working
paper.
Oi, Walter Y. 1961. “The desirability of price instability under perfect competition”.
Econometrica: 58–64.
Popescu, A, and F Smets. 2009. “Uncertainty, Risk-Taking and the Business Cycle”.
Working paper.
Ramey, Garey, and Valerie A Ramey. 1995. “Cross-Country Evidence on the Link
Between Volatility and Growth”. The American Economic Review 85 (5): 1138–
1151.
Rietz, Thomas A. 1988. “The equity risk premium a solution”. Journal of Monetary
Economics 22 (1): 117–131.
Salgado, Sergio, Fatih Guvenen, and Nicholas Bloom. 2020. “Skewed Business Cycles”.
Working paper.
Schaal, Edouard. 2017. “Uncertainty and unemployment”. Econometrica 85 (6): 1675–
1721.
Schwert, G William. 1989. “Why does stock market volatility change over time?” The
Journal of Finance 44 (5): 1115–1153.
Sim, Jae. 2006. “Uncertainty, Irreversible Investment and General Equilibrium”. Unpublished PhD Thesis, Boston University.
Smith, A. 2008. “Indirect Inference”. The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd
Edition.
Stock, James H, and Mark W Watson. 2018. “Identification and estimation of dynamic
causal eﬀects in macroeconomics using external instruments”. The Economic Journal 128 (610): 917–948.
Storesletten, Kjetil, Christopher I Telmer, and Amir Yaron. 2004. “Consumption and
risk sharing over the life cycle”. Journal of Monetary Economics 51 (3): 609–633.
Van Nieuwerburgh, Stijn, and Laura Veldkamp. 2006. “Learning asymmetries in real
business cycles”. Journal of Monetary Economics 53 (4): 753–772.
Zussman, Asaf, Noam Zussman, and Morten Ørregaard Nielsen. 2008. “Asset market
perspectives on the Israeli–Palestinian conflict”. Economica 75 (297): 84–115.

30

Table 1: Descriptive statistics
Obs.

Mean

Median Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Annual GDP Growth, %

10,095

3.46

3.44

Return Level Index

7.16

-138.02

60.98

4,445

-0.01

Return Volatility Index

0.05

0.98

-5.20

4.79

4,435

Stock Returns, %

-0.03

0.00

1.00

-5.19

2.91

Log (Stock Return Volatility)

7,396

0.01

0.01

0.07

-0.45

0.45

Cross Sectional Returns

7,395

-4.52

-4.55

0.49

-6.05

-2.59

Log (Cross Sectional Volatility)

4,582

0.00

0.00

0.09

-0.38

0.93

Natural Disasters

4,542

-1.56

-1.55

0.35

-3.89

-0.39

Natural Disasters (scaled by media increase)

10,095

0.37

0

0.67

0

4

Coups

10,095

0.20

0

0.61

0

7.99

Coups (scaled by media increase)

10,095

0.01

0

0.11

0

2

Revolutions

10,095

0.03

0

0.40

0

14.07

Revolutions (scaled by media increase)

10,095

0.01

0

0.09

0

1

Terrorist attacks

10,095

0.00

0

0.06

0

2.47

Terrorist attacks (scaled by media increase)

10,095

0.02

0

0.16

0

4

GDP Per Capita (2005 $US, World Bank PPP)

10,095

0.02

0

0.28

0

10.10

10,095 24,148.2

24,643

16,687.1

1,335

78,559

Notes: All values are yearly averages at quarterly frequency. Data from 60 countries from 1970 to 2019 wherever available.

Table 2: Estimated impact of levels and volatility on GDP Growth
Estimation
Sample:
Stock Measure
Level of returnst-1
Vol of returnst-1
(in logs)
IV 1st stage: Level
Nat Disasterst-1

(1)
OLS
Common
Micro+Macro

(2)
IV
Common
Micro+Macro

(3)
IV
Macro
Macro

(4)
IV
Common
Macro

(5)
IV
Common
Micro

0.592***
(0.110)
-0.616***
(0.192)

1.733***
(0.239)
-6.532***
(0.618)

2.874***
(1.004)
-5.820***
(1.456)

2.878***
(0.420)
-6.898***
(0.733)

1.806
(1.370)
-8.412***
(2.139)

-0.079
(0.107)
2.168***
(0.070)
-6.705***
(1.415)
-0.118*
(0.061)
270.47

-0.019
(0.129)
1.917***
(0.324)
-4.885***
(1.386)
-0.061
(0.073)
11.81

-0.042
(0.106)
1.645***
(0.052)
-6.278***
(1.109)
-0.053
(0.065)
352.93

-0.099
(0.088)
0.931***
(0.255)
-4.813***
(0.946)
-0.113**
(0.058)
10.26

-0.006
(0.157)
1.094***
(0.087)
3.866***
(1.146)
0.159**
(0.076)
50.17
0.381
4,435
42
Yes

-0.068
(0.136)
0.887***
(0.296)
2.969***
(1.076)
0.037
(0.106)
4.79
0.430
7,347
58
Yes

0.004
(0.160)
1.156***
(0.086)
2.894***
(0.603)
0.122
(0.106)
51.41
0.305
4,435
42
Yes

0.023
(0.079)
0.515**
(0.228)
3.119***
(0.845)
0.154
(0.101)
5.27
0.126
4,435
42
Yes

Coupst-1
Revolutionst-1
Terror attackst-1
Instrument F-test
IV 1st stage: Vol
Nat Disasterst-1
Coupst-1
Revolutionst-1
Terror attackst-1
Instrument F-test
Sargan p-value
Observations
Countries
Year-Qtr FE

4,435
42
Yes

Notes: The dependent variable is GDP growth. The level and (log) volatility of returns are scaled for comparability
across columns to have unit standard-deviation over the regression sample. In columns (1) to (2) stock returns and
volatility are the principal component factor of the micro (cross-firm) and macro (overall index) returns. Columns
(3) and (4) utilize the macro (index) stock returns and volatility while changing the sample to be the overlap between
the macro and micro (column 4) or the full sample where we have macro index data (column 3). Column (5) is
micro (cross-firm) returns. Standard errors clustered by country. Data is quarterly by country from 1970 until 2019.
Column (1) estimated by OLS and (2) to (5) by instrumental variables. Instruments (disasters) are scaled by the
increase in media mentions of the country in the 15-days after the shock compared to the 15-days before the shock.
Sargan test is the over-identification test of instrument validity. All columns include a full set of country dummies
and a full set of year by quarter dummies. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.

Table 3: Estimated impact of trade-weighted and distance-weighted returns and volatility
on GDP Growth
Estimation:
Weighting:
Stock Measure
Level of returns t-1
Volatility of returns t-1
(in logs)
Sargan test p-value
Observations
Countries
Year-Quarter FE

(1)
IV
Trade
Micro+Macro

(2)
IV
Distance
Micro+Macro

(3)
IV
Trade
Macro

(4)
IV
Distance
Macro

(5)
IV
Trade
Micro

(6)
IV
Distance
Micro

1.666***
(0.301)
-6.351***
(0.717)
0.224
4,435
42
Yes

1.372***
(0.359)
-6.353***
(0.785)
0.239
4,435
42
Yes

2.929***
(0.830)
-5.405***
(1.283)
0.680
7,347
58
Yes

2.993***
(0.716)
-6.624***
(1.324)
0.452
7,347
58
Yes

1.519**
(0.621)
-7.858***
(1.119)
0.287
4,542
42
Yes

1.014*
(0.611)
-7.981***
(1.181)
0.306
4,542
42
Yes

Notes: The dependent variable is GDP growth. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.
Standard errors clustered by country. Data is quarterly by country from 1970 until 2019. All columns estimated by
instrumental variables with a full set of quarter-by-year time dummies. Instruments are all multiplied by the increase
in media mentions of the country in the 15-days after the shock compared to the 15-days before the shock. All
columns include a full set of country dummies and year by quarter dummies. Volatility is in logs in the regression.
Levels and Volatility are the principal component factor of the micro (cross-firm) and macro (overall index) returns
in (1) and (2), while columns (3)-(4) are macro (index) and columns (5)-(6) are micro (cross-firm) returns. Trade
weighted regressions include both shocks (instruments) in a given country and also a weighted version of shocks in
a country’s trading partners (scaled by total trade/GDP). Distance weighted regressions include both shocks
(instruments) in a given country and also a weighted version of shocks in a country’s neighbors (shocks scaled on a
0-0.5 scale based on the linear distance between the borders of each country-pair; shocks occurring in bordering
countries will receive a weight of 0.5).

Table 4: Robustness of main stock results to alternate specifications and sample splits
Specification
Level of returns t-1
Volatility of returnst-1

(1)
Baseline
Index

(2)
Population
Weighted

(3)
Above Median
Shocks - Unscaled

(4)
Add
Skewness

1.733***
(0.239)
-6.532***
(0.618)

1.746***
(0.237)
-6.634***
(0.609)

1.141
(1.417)
-3.358*
(1.736)

1.101
(1.268)
-9.172***
(2.888)
6.451
(4.678)

Skewness of returnst-1

(5)
Just Vol and
Skewness

-10.285***
(3.002)
8.146*
(4.932)

Rich*Level of returns t-1

(6)
Split by GDP per capita
1.356**
(0.602)
-5.687***
(0.861)
-2.865
(4.036)
2.378
(3.878)

Rich*Vol of returnst-1
Post2000*Level of returns t-1
Post2000*Vol of returnst-1
Sargan p-value
Observations

0.208
4,435

0.215
4,435

0.159
4,435

0.716
4,345

0.719
4,435

0.286
4,435

Notes: The dependent variable is GDP growth. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Standard errors clustered by country. Data is
quarterly by country from 1970 until 2019. All columns estimated by instrumental variables with a full set of quarter-by-year time dummies. Instruments
(disasters) are all multiplied by the increase in media mentions of the country in the 15-days after the shock compared to the 15-days before the shock, except for
column (3) which simply utilizes the unscaled disasters that are above the median of media attention. Volatility of returns is logged in all specifications. All
columns include a full set of country dummies and year by quarter dummies. Volatility is in logs in the regression. The split by GDP per capita in column (6)
splits countries by the sample median of long-run GDP per capita, which is ~$25,000 (in 2010 dollars).

Table 5: Calibrated model parameters
Parameter

Symbol

Value

Capital Elasticity

a

0.25

Labor Elasticity

n

0.50

Discount Rate

b

0.99

Capital Depreciation

dk

0.03

Labor Depreciation

dn

0.09

Micro Persistence

rz

0.95

Micro Low Volatility

sL

Micro Volatility Jump

s H/s L

4.12

Macro Persistence

rA

0.95

Macro Low Volatility

s

Macro Volatility Jump

s H/s

Uncertainty Frequency

pL,H

0.03

Uncertainty Persistence

pH,H

0.94

Capital Fixed Cost
Capital Irreversibility
Labor Fixed Cost
Labor Linear Cost

z

z

0.05
z

A

0.01

L

A

A

L

1.61

k

0.00

k

0.34

l

0.10

l

0.07

F
S

F

H

Notes: The table reports the values of calibrated parameters fixed before
the structural estimation of the disaster mappings in the model. The
values come from Khan and Thomas (2008) and Bloom, et al. (2018).

Table 6: Structurally estimated model parameters and fit
Panel A: Model Fit
Model vs Data
Stock Measure
IV 1st stage: Level
Nat Disasterst-1

(1)
Data
Macro

(2)
Model
Macro

(3)
Data
Micro

(4)
Model
Micro

-0.071
(0.106)
1.657***
(0.055)
-6.154***
(1.084)
-0.047
(0.051)

-0.002
[0.652]
0.612
[-18.966]
-3.275
[2.657]
-0.223
[-3.424]

-0.147
(0.112)
1.852***
(0.085)
-4.818***
(1.198)
-0.117***
(0.044)

-0.002
[1.259]
0.612
[-14.590]
-3.275
[1.288]
-0.223
[-2.409]

-0.028
(0.082)
Coupst-1
1.693***
(0.116)
Revolutionst-1
7.841***
(2.236)
Terror attackst-1
-0.011
(0.049)
IV 2nd Stage: GDP Growth
Level of returnst-1
1.557**

0.021
[0.600]
0.779
[-7.890]
2.490
[-2.393]
0.266
[5.653]

0.004
(0.102)
0.508***
(0.130)
3.201***
(1.275)
0.133
(0.083)

0.018
[0.137]
0.391
[-0.903]
0.615
[-2.028]
0.058
[-0.899]

1.610
(0.291)
[0.181]
Vol of returnst-1
-3.859***
-1.326
(0.284)
[8.905]
Panel B: Estimated Model Parameters
Nat
Disaster Type:
Coups
Disasters

0.736
(0.558)
-9.735***
(1.533)

2.008
[2.279]
-3.244
[4.234]

Revolutions

Terror
Attacks

-0.277***
(0.008)
0.816***
(0.153)

-0.0264***
(0.0014)
0.110***
(0.011)

Coupst-1
Revolutionst-1
Terror attackst-1
IV 1st stage: Vol
Nat Disasterst-1

Level (sAL lF)
Vol (lS)

-0.0002
(0.0005)
0.014
(0.024)

0.0004
(0.0015)
0.853***
(0.076)

Notes: The top Panel A reports model vs data moments for the indirect inference estimation of the heterogeneous
firms model. The target moments from the data are IV regression coefficients from the macro uncertainty measure
(column 1) and the micro uncertainty measure (column 3). Year-quarter and country dummies are included in all
regressions, and standard errors clustered by country are reported in parentheses beneath the target moments. *
significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The simulated model moments, regression
coefficients themselves, at the estimated parameters are reported in columns 2 and 3, with the t-statistic for the
difference in model vs data moments reported in brackets below. The bottom Panel B reports the structurally
estimated parameters mapping the four categories of disaster events to the macro TFP process and uncertainty
process in the model. Standard errors, computed via the standard indirect inference formulas and clustered by
country, are included in parentheses below the point estimates.

1.8

15 days
after

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

15 days
before

-1
5
-1
4
-1
3
-1
2
-1
1
-1
0
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

.8

Count of country word counts
(each event normalized so that before averages to one)

2

Figure 1: Daily counts of newspaper articles mentioning country names in
the weeks around natural disasters, political or terrorist shocks

Days before and after the shock

Notes: Shows the daily count of the name of the impacted country in the fifteen days before and after the shock, averaged over the
universe of shocks (spanning the period from 1970 to 2020) studied in the regression analysis. For graphing purposes, the series for
each event is normalized so that over the 15 days before the shock it has a mean of one. In the regressions events are weighted by
the increase in cites in the 15 days after the event compared to the 15 days before to focus on the jump in cites after an event.

1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2

15 days
after

1

15 days
before

-1
5
-1
4
-1
3
-1
2
-1
1
-1
0
-9
-8
-7
-6
-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

.8

Count of country word counts
(each event normalized so that before averages to one)

2

Figure 2: Daily counts of newspaper articles mentioning country
names in the weeks around national elections

Days before and after the election

Notes: Shows the daily count of the name of the impacted country in the fifteen days before and after the election, averaged
over 133 pre-scheduled elections in the G20 countries from 1970 to 2014. The series for each event is normalized for graphing
so that over the 15 days before the election it has a mean of one.

Figure 3: An uncertainty shock causes a drop in growth of around 3.5%
in the disaster IV VAR

GDP Growth, Percent Year-on-Year

5
Notes: The figure shows the
response of GDP growth to a
one-standard
deviation
innovation in volatility in the
disaster IV VAR. The sample is
a panel of about 4,400 nationquarters spanning around 40
nations from 1987Q1-2017Q3.
GDP growth in period t is the
percentage growth from quarter
t-4 to t. The estimated VAR
includes time + country effects,
country dummies, 3 lags, with
GDP growth, stock returns, and
the stock return uncertainty
index. The instruments include
natural
disasters,
coups,
revolutions, & terrorist attacks.
90% block bootstrapped bands
plotted.

0

-5

-10

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Quarters, Shock in Period 1

Figure 4: The drop in growth after an uncertainty shock is robust across
alternative disaster IV-VAR specifications

GDP Growth, Percent Year-on-Year

5

Baseline

Fewer lags

0

No country effects
No time effects
Early sample

-5

More lags
Later sample
-10

2

4

6

8

10

Quarters, Shock in Period 1

12

14

Notes: The figure shows the
response of GDP growth to a
one-standard
deviation
innovation in volatility in the
disaster IV VAR. The responses
are baseline (blue circles), pre2003 (orange hexagrams), post2003 (yellow stars), two lags
(cyan + signs), four lags (green
squares), no country trends
(brown, x symbols), and no
global time effects (pink, right
arrows). The sample is a panel
of about 4,400 nation-quarters
spanning around 40 nations
from 1987Q1-2017Q3. GDP
growth in period t is the
percentage growth from quarter
t-4 to t. The baseline includes
time + country effects, country
dummies, 3 lags, with GDP
growth, stock returns, and the
stock return uncertainty index.
The instruments include natural
disasters, coups, revolutions, &
terrorist attacks. 90% block
bootstrapped bands plotted.

Figure 5: An uncertainty shock causes similar drops in growth in the
disaster IV-VAR in the data and the model

GDP Growth, Percent Year-on-Year

5

Model
0

Baseline
Data

-5

-10

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Notes: The figure shows the
response of GDP growth to a
one-standard
deviation
innovation in volatility in the
disaster IV VAR. The responses
include the baseline data (blue
circles) and model (red + signs)
estimates. The sample is a
panel of about 4,400 nationquarters spanning around 40
nations from 1987Q1-2017Q3.
GDP growth in period t is the
percentage growth from quarter
t-4 to t. The estimated VAR
includes time + country effects,
country dummies, 3 lags, with
GDP growth, stock returns, and
the stock return uncertainty
index. The instruments include
natural
disasters,
coups,
revolutions, & terrorist attacks.
90%
empirical
block
bootstrapped bands plotted.

Quarters, Shock in Period 1

Figure 6: COVID-19 will cause a drop in US GDP growth

GDP Growth, Percent

0

-5

Impact of Uncertainty Alone
-10

Combined Impact of Uncertainty
& First-Moment Shock

-15

-20
2020Q2

2020Q4

2021Q2

2021Q4

2022Q2

2022Q4

2023Q2

Notes: The estimation data spans 1 January 1987 to 31 March 2020. The forecast path of year-on-year real GDP growth
is plotted. The first moment shock is estimated from an observed late 2020Q1 drop in stock returns of 2.3 standard
deviations. The second moment shock is estimated from a combined micro and macro stock return volatility increase of
increase of 1.04 standard deviations. The dashed lines are 90% confidence intervals computed with a stationary block
bootstrap.

