                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               ECONOMETRICS AND THE DES ICN OF ECONOMIC REFORM




                               Michael Bruno




                           Working Paper No. 2718




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                September 1988




This research is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                         NBER Working Paper #2718
                                         September 1988


               ECONOMETRICS AND THE DESICN OF ECONOMIC REFORM


                                   ABSTRACT


     The concepr of Economic Reform ia described as a planned shift from one,

Pareto inefficient, but quasi-stable, equilibrium (or 'trap') to a new Pareto

superior equilibrium which is, or is designed to become, stable too.     The


concept is applied to recent 'shock'   stabilization programs, with special

reference to Israel, where the economy was credibiy shifted from a 3-digit

inflationary process with considerable inertia, to relative price stability

with higher real growth, at only small adjustment costs, by means of a

'heterodox' plan.   This two-pronged stabilization program consisted of a

substantial correction of budget and external account 'fundamentals'

together with a synchronized, wage-price-exchange rate freeze.      The idea

is theoretically rationalized within a simple dual equilibrium inflation

model, for which some econometric estimates are also given.


                                          Michael Bruno
                                          Oovernor
                                          Bank of Israel
                                          P.O. Box 780
                                          Jerusalem, ISRAEL
Michael Bruno


Econometrits and the Design of Economic Reform*


       Implementation     of     a       plan of economic actlon often precedes
systematic theoretical rationalization of it. Given the problem
to be attacked the policy planner may think of an idea based on
some a prtori' sensible' theoretical arguments that have not yet
been fully worked out. A set of numbers may be attached (by
methods which might            horrify      many    statistical       econometricien
members      of   this Society)      .    The idea may then become a program of
action to be adopted by a government, after being massaged, if not
muttlated, by the political process. And then, lo and behold, the
program sometimes works in practice. Only later may a body of
systematic  theory  and  quantitative empirical testing develop to
which the program and its implementation can be subjected ex—post
and may be improved upon for future respplication. Like in other
areas of epplied economic theory,  the field of enquiry within
which  this  Address  is  embedded, that of Economic Policy Design
often has to deal with ad—hoc programs or rules of action which
evolved through practIce and only later received a seal of
approval of proper science.

       Thegeneral ares of my choice is one that has fascinated me
ever since I became a member of this learned society about thirty
years ago and was actively involved, at that time, in trying to
design programs for long-term development planning as well as
short-term national budgeting in my own country. I asked myself
XBased      notes prepared for the PreaidAntial .kddreas of the
             on
 Econometric Society deivered in the Latin American meetings in
 tordoba, Argentina in August and in the European meetings in
 Budapest. September 1986.     I have extended the theoretical
 discussion somewhat   and  also  updated some   )f  the empirical
 developments. For helpful comments  on  ad eat  .er  draft I am  -



 indebted to Stanley Fischer, Mordechai Fraenkel, Elhanan Heipman
 and   Sylvia Piterman.        tommenta and        suggestions by the referees
 are also gratefully acknowledged.
                                —4-


     At this point I would like to remind you of the definition ci
the  scope of Econometrics and of our society as originally statec
by its founders in 1930. It is definitely not statistica
econometrics in the narrow sense of the word hilt "Any activitl
which promises ultimately to further unification of theoretica]
and factual      studies
                       in economics shill be within the sphere of
interest of the society" .  Ragnar Frisch in the early years of
the Society stated (1933) "Experience has shown that each of thesc
three view-potnts of statistics, economic theory and mathematicE
is a necessary, but not by itself a sufficient condition for
real understanding of the quantitative reliEions in moderr
economic    life.    It is the unification of       all   three that
powerful   and.. .that constitutes econometrics."

     Thus the development of input—output analysis and chat of
static and dynamic linear programming models in development
planning in the 1960's comes under a broader definition of
econometrics, as   applied to policy design. There were parallel
developments  in decision theory under uncertainty that hays
greatly contributed to the broadening of the scope of this general
field. Two of my illustrious predecessors devoted their
presidential eddresses to some of the most pertinent issues -
Arrow   in 1956 ("statistics and Economic Theory") and Dreze in l97C
("Econometrics   and Decision Theory")

     By the end of the 1970's the whole area of eccnomic polic3
design had certainly reached a much more sophisticated phase (at
least in its theoretical approach,         less so in empirical
implementability) than was originally set out by Tinbergen a
quarter of a century earlier. However, it had one major drawback.
The policy maker in most of policy designs was an omnipotent
government much like the control theory vision of the economy as
a dumb machine planned and run by a clever engineer to achieve a
well defined objective.
     The major agents in the economy, as we all know, talk back tc
the government. Unlike the dumb machine they can incorporate
anticipated government action into their rules of behaviour, a
fact that a policy designer has to take into account. Tinhergec
in his writings of the 1950's was well aware of the problem of
policy design when "there is more than one policy maker" and ever
analyzed an example of government versus the trade unions in a
game-like situation to which we shall come back in our subsequent
discussion (see "Centralization and Decentralization in Government
Policy",   1954). This line, however, was not seriously and
systematically followed up until very recently when game theory
made its successful entry into macroeconomics (after staging its
re-entry,  this time successful, into the mainstream of economic
theory)

     Another parallel development, that of the literature based on
the rational expectations approach (having  its origins in Huth
(1961)  brought up a critique of the use of conventional backward-
looking econometrically estimated coefficients when applied     to
forward-looking policy designs This is the so—called Lucas (1976)
critique. A very relevant example in the present context would be
a misguided attempt to plan the sharp reduction of inflation
within a model based on time series equations of past inflationary
behaviour.   Here   is a case in which a back-of-an-envelope
calculation based on simple input-output wage      and  import
coefficients can give (and has been shown to give, at least in
our recent experience)   much better guidance than a backward
looking model based on inflationary inertia.

     The same new approach to economic policy design also brought
up the issue of dynamic inconsistency (Kydland and Prescott, 1977)
and  led to the discussion of rules versus discretion in policy
design (Barro and Gordon, 1983) and systematically tackled the
issue of government credibility and reputation all of which also
have a repeated game theory grounding (Kreps and Wilson,   1982,
mackus and Driffill, 1985).

Ii.   Equilibrium trap and Economic Reform

     It is in the spirit of both of these later developments that
I would now like to take up one sub-class of policy designs      -
that of economic reforms. Let me again turn back to Tinbergen
for definitions.  He distinguished among three types of policy
changes varying by the degree of change in the underlying policy
structure. First, quantitative policy constitutes a quantitative
change in given instruments of policy (e.g., changes in tax
rates). Next comes his definition of a qualitative policy change,
which is a change in structure keeping the foundation intact
(e.g., a change in the type of taxes implemented). Finally there
is economic reform, "being equivalent to changes in foundations"
Again using Tinbergen's words (1956) "changes in more fundamental
features of social organizations are the most far-reaching types
of policy". What is sometimes called a 'regime change' also falls
under the same heading.
                                 —8


     One conventional, or 'orthodox', element in these programs
was an attempted reduction in the government deficit (coupled with
an initial devaluation and a monetary squeeze)        which is a
correction of 'fundamentals'. In the case of Israel the deficit
came down from 12-15  percent  of GNP throughout the preceding
decade  to  a virtually balanced budget. A conventional flex-price
market clearing approach would say that the correction of
fundamentals is all that the government should have been required
to do, implying that the market would do the rest of the
adjustment to a lower inflation rate. Yet in all three cases
there was another major, though less conventional, element (and
one that had earned these episodes the term 'heterodox' programs)
 — an attempt at a synchronized exchange rate, wage and price
freeze. In the case of Israel it took the form of an explicit
social contract between the three major parties to an incomes
policy package - the trade unions, the employers' association and
the government. What is the theoretical rationale for such a step?
  Judging from our own experience it is a case in which intuition
and some hand—waving arguments have preceded systematic          —


some vague ideas about affecting the public's expectations,
establishing government credibility and the need for initial
synchronization   of nominal magnitudes, under inflationary
inertia.
      Toconvince oneself of the rationality of applying a certain
polacy design and moreover, to convince one' s colleagues in the
profession, there is obvious need for a more firm theoretical
grounding. This is particularly true when controversial policy
measures such as a wage and price freeze (including temporary
price controls) are involved, While I am not certain that the
following will eventually prove an adequate (let alone the only)
way of going about the theoretical problem, I will here attempt a
sketch of the basic idea, which is an offshoot of work that I have
been doing jointly with Stanley Fischer of MIT. It still requires
a more thorough working   out.



3)   I had proposed a very similar idea at an earlier stage (Bruno,
     1981),  with  an  attempt to adapt the lessons of historical
     hyperinflation experience (see Sargent, 1981) to the different
     local scene.
                                     —9



III.   Multiple Inflationary Equilibria and Their Stability

     The design of a stabilization program that we are discussing
here involves two major components - the removal of the source of
inflationary   finance   on   the budget deficit side and the
simultaneous synchronization or 'freeze'       of   nominal     price
variables on a new low level of inflation.            Two   important
questions immediataly arise -             first,
                                           can    one     rationaliza
theoretically how and when both elements of the program are
absolutely indispensable for rapid disinflation?      secondly,   can
a new low equilibrium level of the inflation rate be sustained and
what are the conditions for its stability?

     In order co tackle both these questions I will   extend an
analytical framework based on deficit finance by money and bonds
which Stanley Fischer and I have used in an earlier empirical
paper (1986) and whose theoretical     properties weredeveloped
in other papers (1984, 1987).

     The underlying idea, which in itself is not new,  is that a
given amount of seigniorage revenue can be collected at either
high or low rates of inflation [see Sargent and Wallace (1984),
and Liviatan (1984)].    The dual equilibria - a reflection of the
Laffer curve - imply that an economy may be stuck in a high
inflation equilibrium when, with the same relative budget deficit,
it could be at a lower inflation rate.    Which is the relevant
aqullibrium depends on how economic agents form expectations and
adjust pricas       and   other nominal magnitudes (wages,   money   and/or
exchange   rates)while learning about the system.  It is known that
under adaptive expectations (with sufficiently low coefficient of
adaptation)  the   low  inflation rate will be stable and the upper
one unstable while the roles are reversed for the   case of rapid
adaptation or fully rational expectations [see Aurenheimer )1973);
Evans and yarrow )l98l); and mruno and Fischer (1984)].   The novel
and more interesting model to be suggested here, however, is the
empirically relevant non-linear case in which adjustment of a key
variable like the exchange rate (and therefore wages ahd prices)
is adaptive with coefficient of adjustment that itself rises with
the  rate of    inflation. In this case both equilibria could turn
out to be stable for some parameter values.   This has  interesting
implications for the nature of stabilization policy. We shall skip
technical detail here and consider only those features which are
essential for the empirical applications that follow (for some
additional detail see the Appendix to this paper)
                                         —    10   —




        The first   to note is that fiscal policy considerations
                          point
may determine              the
                    average growth rate of money through the
government budget constraint,   Considerting first the    closed
economy,  thus leaving aside foreign finance (see below), we can
write the government budget constraint                 as:
 (1)    G—T=dY=H/P+E,
where G is government expenditure, T are taxes, Y is real GDP,
d is the ratio of the deficit to GDP, H is base
                                                 money, H are real
indexed bonds, and the dot indicates the change in a variable.
Interest payments on bonds are included in G.

     In steady state, the ratios H/(PY) and B/Y are constant.
Pccordingly in steady state the growth rate of high-powered money,
H, or    H/H,  is equal to the inflation rate (it) plus the growth
rate of output (n)
(2)     ®=rt+n.
Similarly, in steady state, the growth rate of bonds is equal      to
the  growth rate of output (n)    Accordingly, in steady state
                                          .                        he
government budget constraint becomes

(3)     d =    (it   +   n)h   +   nb,

where h denotes the ratio of the stock of real high-powered money
to nominal GNP (H/PY), and b tile ratio of bonds to GNP (B/Y) Let
                                                               .

v be the ratio of net wealth to GNP, where v = h + b. Then,


(4)      ii   = (d   - nv)/h.

4.    we here suppress the difference between bonds indexed to   the
      domestic price level and to the exchange rate, and omit direct
      government sales of foreign exchange, which can be added
      separately (see below)
                                      —   11 —




     The use of the government budget constraint (l)or (4) does
not necessarily imply that the government consciously decides on a
particular growth rate of high-powered modey as a means of
financing its budget deficit. Rather, in the present context it
is more realistic to assume that the government turned to printing
money as its last resort in budget-financing.     First it decided
what it needed to spend and how much it could raise through taxes
(and in the open economy - how much it could borrow abroad);     then
it sold as many bonds as it could at the existing real interest
rate and financed the rest by printing money,     As we shall     see
relatively small changes  in the deficit could be  consistent in  the
long run with major changes in the growth rate of H and thus of
inflation. However, high real costs of transition from high
inflation to low inflation could inhibit such a change.

      Eguation (4) givea one approach to analyzing the determinants
of growth rate of the monetary base and thus, in steady state, of
the inflation rate.5    The term nv in the numerator of (4) is the
amount   of the deficit that     can be financed by the government
through  the sale of bonds and printing of money without increasing
their respective ratios to GNP. The more rapid the growth rate of
output, the greater the share of the deficit that can be   financed
in a non—inflationary way. The larger the government deficit, d,
the higher the inflation rate in the steady state.   And the larger
the monetary base, the lower the inflation rate need be.



5)   It   can   be        shown that out of the steady state the analogous
     eguation is     it   = (d - vn - ir(/h, where V is the time change of
     the net wealth ratio (v(
     In the open economy the same equation holds, providing it is
reinterpreted to represent the ratio of domestic government
finance to GNF.6> It is in this sense that equation (4) will be
applied to the Israeli data in Section III (see Table 4).

     To embed equation (4) into a behavioural model we have to add
assumptions pertaining to the demand for money and bonds.  Assume,
for simplicity, that consumption and savings depend on net wealth
and the real rate of interest,   and that the latter is fixed
exogenously (by world markets or by government intervention in the
market for bonds, not an unrealistic assumption in the Israeli
case)    This means that net injection to the money base d1 = (d -
          .


vn)     be considered as depending mainly on policy variables.
       can
However, the amount that the public wishes to hold in the form cf
base money (h) will depend on expected inflation. )fle)

6)    in the open economy the budget constraint (1)       has  to be
      extended to include both the domestic and foreign deficits. Say
      dh is the domestic deficit ratio to GNP, df  is the ratio to

      GN? of the foreign deficit (net of unilateral transfers) and E±
      is the change in net government debt (net of the change in
      exchange reserves and including interest payments)   We have.




      (la)  (d1 +   d)y=   + B +   S
      where E is the exchange rate. Thus,


      )lb) d1Y =     + B +    [i   -   dY]
      Equation (lb) now says that the domestic deficit (dhY) is
      financed not only by domestic finance (money and bonds) but by
      net sales of foreign exchange by the government to the public
      sector (the term in square brackets)

      Thus equation   (1)    continues to hold   providing   we       reinterpret
      d   to be the 'domestic finance ratio'      (a/P + E)/1, which
      according to equation -      )lb)   is the difference between the
      domestic deficit ratio     and the part that is financed by net
                                   d1,

      foreign exchange sales to the public (EEf/PY - df).
                                         —   13    —




     Assume that the demand for unit real base money h (H/PT)
depends negatively on expectated inflation (fle) (again suppressing
the  real rate of interest, for simplicity) and we shall choose an
empirically tested semi-logarithmic (Cagan) demand function:

                    h = exp(—ane).


          Figure A depicts equations         (4)       and   (5)   in the space of   H   and
ii (or rt)       Curve  d,   a  simple hyperbola, asymptotic to
the axes, shows the combinations of money demand and steady state
inflation consistent with a given net deficit injection ratio d.
Curve          h shows    the demand for money as a function of              inflationary
expectations.

          In     steady state inflationary expectations are the same as
actual  inflation and equilibrium may thus, in principle, take
place    at   two  intersection points A or B.       If  the  lower
intersection is stable, then an increase in d (i.e. a rise in the
domestically financed deficit,      d    or a        in the rate of  fall
growth,   n( showing in Figure A as a shift from the d curve to the
d' curve will involve an upward shift in steady state inflation to
point A'

     If there is an exogenous downward shift in                              the     demand
schedule for money (due to the introduction of moneysubstitutes,
e.g, foreign exchange-linkedbank deposits(8 this will show as a
      .

laftward shift in the h curve to h' and a further increase in
long run inflation to C' . However, points such as A,A' or C'
7)    This is the framework originally employed by Liviatan (1984).
     In joint work with Stanley Fischer we have mainly carried out
     the analysis in the space of fle and e (growth rate of nominal
     money)       or Tt   and 75.(See Appendix).

Eu   This was a practical reality in th case of Israel and an old
     tradition in inflationary situations leading to hyper—inflation
     [(see post-second World War Hungary (Bomberger and Makinen,
     1983       .
                                                —   14   —




are low inflation equilibria having respective dual high inflation
equilibria    B, B' or U'   which are consistent with the same
deficit injection ratio (d for A, B and d' for A',B'      or C',D'.
respectively), The upper equilibria are inefficient (i.e., on the
 'back'  side of the Laffer curve) in the sense that the elasticity
of demand for money at those points is above unity   and inflation
could be reduced by an increase in the deficit. For example.
starting from equilibrium at point B' on     h and d'    a further
rightward shift of the curve      d' to d* will reduce inflation to
the point A*    at which the inflation tax   is optimal   [Friedman
)1971)j.    A further increase in the deficit will imply no
intersection at all and inflation may rise ad infinitum.

     The above discussion brings us to the question of dynamics of
adjustment   from one equilibrium, when there          an outside          is
disturbance, to a                  new    equilibrium.          Suppose expectations are
adaptive:

(6)              =    13)Tt
                               —


       Time differentiation                 of equation (5) gives
)7a)         O-rt-n=-afte.
Substituting for         it    from equation        (6)      gives the equation of motion
for rr:

(5)    Tte   = )l -   aBV'          B    (B—n—ne)
        where   B =    d      exp       )an>
     As is shown in the Appendix, end can be seen from equation
(8), the stability of the low inflation equilibrium )A) depends on
the product of a )the semi- elasticity of demand for money) and
B )the adaptation coefficient) being less than 1.  If a-B > 1 the
low level equilibrium becomes unstable and the high inflation
equilibrium )B) becomes the stable one [this, at the limit,     is
also the case for fully rational expectatiots, as Sargent and
Wallace (1987), have shown).

     It is important to point out that the only rationale for the
gradual adjustmant rule given in (6) is to introduce friction in
the adjustment of some nominal variable.  The adaptive expectation
assumption on prices is thus only given for illustration purposes.
Very similar results are obtained on the assumption of rational
expectations when friction comes from lagged adjustment of money
balances )see Bruno and Fischer, 1987) or from the fiscal lag (see
Miguel, 1987). Below we turn to an open economy application with
                                      —    15 —




gradual exchange rate adjustment performing that very same role.
These   examples   show    that stability or   instability of an
inflationary equilibrium may be endoqenous to the choice of an
operating rule for policy.

      Let   us    now return to our simple model in which the argument
has so far been entirely abstract. A further alteration of this
model and a particular interpretation of the variable    turn         e        it
into one which is both applicable for policy and particularly
relevant  for the process of high inflation and a disinflation
program such as the Israeli one (or, for that matter, the recent
Argentinean or Brazilian programs(.

     First consider the case in which the 13 coefficient is itself
positively dependent on inflation or inflationary expectations.
what this means is that a-B may be balow 1 at low inflation rates
and eventually rise abova 1 for high inflation rates.   Say there
is a critical inflation rate of            n
                                    such that d(*( = 1/a. Then we
have the following possibilities:

            (a(              71   <               A stable,     B unstable.


            (b(     rt   <   a    C               A unstable,    B stable

            (c(     n.   c   n    <   it          Both   A and B are stable.


      case (c ( is the one shown in Figure A for the smaller budget
deficit   d while for the upper ourve   d' both equilibria lie above
11*   and thus correspond to case (b( .  Suppose for some reason the
economy    is    stuck at the high deficit and high inflation
equrlibrium point B' which is stable. The point B' is a real
trap.    A mere cut in the deficit will eventually lead the economy
to a high inflation equilibrium B     (which,  of course,   is even
less   efficient than having stayed at B'). On the other hand,
keeping fiscal policy invariant (namely a fixed injection ratio
d( but attempting a freeze on prices so as to jump back to the
low inflation point A' will not work either as long as A' is an
unstable equilibrium (being above the critical n* rate)       Only a    .



combined budget cut and price freeze will get us down to the low
inflation equilibrium A which will be stable if n. <                  n,
                                          —   16 —




IV.    Dynamics of Inflation in the Open Economy

     To make the argument of the previous section applicable to
the case at hand let us reinterpret lte for an open economy to be

represented by the rate of devaluation (e = &), on the  assumption
that   the   actual   adjustment of the exchange rate by the
authorities, which is also the rationally expected rate of
devaluation, follows a crawling peg rule, in which the rate of
devaluation is adjusted (other than through shocks - see below( to
the lag between the rate of wage inflation (w( and the rate of
devaluation:


(9)          =       O,   (w —   a).
     The rationale for this adjustment rule comes from supply of
exports (or import substitutes) in the current account. Whenever
the real (foreign-exchange deflated) wage departs         from   an
equilibrium  rate,   the  loss  (or gain) in competitive power will
induce an adjustment in the rate of devaluation. This adjustment
is not   instantaneous because the signals on wages are not
immediately obvious.   There may be information lags between the
time wages are paid and the exchange rate is adjusted (a few
months in most cases) and too frequent adjustment of the exchange
rate in face of variable wage behavior may be costly.   At the same
time it makes sense to assume that the coefficient of    adjustment
O   will rise with a, since the cost of error in terms of foreign
exchange losses (or gains) mounts with the rate of expected
inflation (represented by a)

     Next assume for analytical convenience, that wage adjustment
follows the simple rule

(10)         w   =    n     +    (1   —
                                               —   17 —




        Equation          (10) implies that wages are indexed partly to actual
inflation          (a)    and partly to the exchange rate.9

     If we take the time unit over which rates of change (w, a, a)
are defined as discrete but small, say a quarter,  then the wage
indexation coefficient ()           itself will
                                            depend on the formal
indexation lag, which we know tends to get shorter and shorter in
the process of high inflation (see next section for evidence).
Thus   itself will rise with inflation and we may assume ' (a)   >



        From        (10)     we get   w    -       a   =   )a   -
                                                                    a).   Substituting into
erstion        (9)       we have

(11)                 B)a))a — a)
                     =

where        B =   eo = B(s). and         B'> 0

      The adjustment rule  (11) could  also be derived directly
[without    going   through (9) and (10)] from an alternative
tradable/non-tradable goods model.    In that case, however, •a
separate wage-inflation rate link would have to be written down,
for a discussion of    the wage/exchange rate policy game (see
below)   . In our empirical illustration we consider both the
components as well as a direct estimation of (11).

0)   The rationale foc equation (10) can be based on the argument
     that   a,   in   a high inflation context,     comes  close to
     representing inflationary expectations.     Alternatively (10)
     will be relevant in a context in which a represents prices of
     home goods and a those of importables.       Under the                          latter
     interpretation. however, there is no reason                               why   the    'B
     coefficient should rise with inflation. The                                  role     of
     unemployment in wage adjustment is ignored here.
                                         —        18 —




     Equation (11) is the same as (6) with a replaoing Tte. We can
likewise replace         e
                    by a in the demand function for money (5), on
the assumption that money and foreign exchange holdings are close
substitutes in the open economy.

     Thus the adaptive expectations mechanism of the previous
simple model has been reinterpreted for an open economy in terms
of the dynemics of exchange rate adjustment with a coefficient of
adjustment (B) that rises with the rate of inflation. The
stability of low or high inflation will thus very much depend on
whether the cagan condition aB(a) < or > 1 holds for the
relevant rate of inflation (or devaluation)   In particular we may
                                                            .



underline the point made earlier. An attempt to stabilize the
economy from an initial high inflation trap requires not only a
cut in the deficit by a permanent move of a below       (analogous
                                             this it is not
                                                                            s
to    *)   .   But to be able to do                             enough to slow down
the   rate of devaluation ) through a reduction of the B1
coefficient) Wage indexation must be brought down to the level
                 .

commensurate with slow price adjustment so that                    13   c       1/a   at the
lower devaluation (and inflation) rate, it.    otherwise the now
low inflation equilibrium (at      A) will not be stable and the
system will eventually end up at the higher inflation rate itt.

     This analysis is incomplete in a number of ways.    First   of
all  the complete underlying model involving domestic end foreign
assets has not been spelt out. This can be done, but will not be
carried out here.     There is one more important aspect, however:
having to do with the dynamics of the inflationary process, under
inertia and the possibility of jumps in the rate of inflation,
that has to be                   in the
                     discussed further                   present context.
     Equation (11) describes a smooth exchange rate adjustment
process, with no speculetive attecks, in which no discrete
devaluation of the exchange rate can take place. To add this very
realistic  possibility we rewrite equation (11) as a difference
equation and add a discrete jump variable    it:           j to
       (lie)     at —    a—   = 13(7t_1 — St—a) + Jt
                                  with       13    C 1
       where    a,   =   e—e—1  = Pt — Pt—a
                                   itt
       e = log of exchange rate    p = log of price level.
                                                           —
                                                                   19    —




      A    discrete upward shift of tha axchange rate by  at time                                     et
t   will    show as J-             =e      att         =       t
                                                  at t = s + 1. J-,    and      J,-1 =    —e-
may be a funotion of the foreign exchange exposure of the country
and thus depend on the variable           in equation (la) and the              B
                               deficits        as well as other exogenous shocks (such
cumulative
as an
                budget
          oil shock).              J will      here be taken to be exogenous.

        Next:       for the short—run dynamics of inflation, when there is
inertia,       we   can write the following simglified equation:

        (12)    rt    =   5Tt_- + (l—5)s - a

     This aquation may be derived from a conventional aggregate
supply   (As) and aggregata demand (AD) framework with some
simplifying assumptions.°
     The degree of inflationary inertia (5) may come froif price
indexation of wages while                      s
                              comes from the cost of imports.  The
shift factor at may reflect productivity shocks as well as planned
intervention in the inflationary process by wage and price
controls.

        Equation (12) can be rewritten in the form
(12)            -   t-t        =   5-' )l-d))a                     -    itt) -       5i
        while (ha)         ,       using    (12'   )   /       can be rewritten as


(13) s      - Tt     =    S)l—S)(e_, -                 itt,)                +   at   +   5j
substituting back                    into     (12')                    we       finally       get   the    following
equation:


)14) n—n=_,          =    -a       + (1—5)     J           +       (1—5))1-5)E[5)1-5]''
                                                                          i1
                                                                                        [5J_,—a,]


lO)This cost-based equation  can be rationalized on the assumption
    that under the circumstances the AS schedule is relatively flat
    while the AD curve is relatively steep [See Bruno and Fischer,
    1986].   Thus AD mainly determines output and employment while
    cost—push (AS) determines prices (unemployment feedbacks on
    wages are here ignored)  This type of equation (with more lags
    and   including   other  exogenous   variables)   works   well
    empirically.
                                                       —   20 —




Equation  (14) expresses discrete changes in the inflation rate as
a function of all present and past disturbance or jump variables
weighted                 by             geometrically      declining         coefficients.   when
(1 -       5)(l-B)
             is small (e.g., when inflationary inertia 5 is high
and/or when the price adjustment coefficient B is high) a
devaluation today (Jr) will translate into an immediate upward
jump in the inflation rate (rather than the price level)
Likewise wage and/or price controls (ar) will cause a downward
pull  on rt,.  Equation (14) may thus be used to rationalize an
upward pull on it when there are speculative pressures on the
exchange rate    (e.g.,  from  an unbalanced budget, erosion of
competitive power,  loss of confidence, etc.) causing an expected
exchange rate level devaluation (J)           also incorporates the .   It
possibility of discrete downward jumps in Tt as a result of direct
controls imposed on wage and price formation when a stabilization
effort is undertaken.

      Note that when there is no inertia [5=0 in equation (12)]
and   no discrete jumps (a= J= 0), equation (lla) is the same as
(11) and equation (12) degenerates to the      equilibrium condition
    =   it,,, in which case we are in the smooth world of the laws of

motion derived from monetary finance as described in section in.

        The law of motion of St is then given from equation (8)                              with
a    replacing lie. in difference—equation form we have:

(0    )    a.,       —   a         =    (1—aB)'    13[d exp(aat)   —n —

           For      rt we have, from analogously rewriting (7(
(7')           it   = d exp (ast) + a(st+i — a,) — n


           Using         (8'   )       this   can also be rewritten as

(15)       it. =     (l—aB)'              [d exp(act)— n —    aBs_1]
How can   one combine the long-run money-determined smooth path of
rt      given by (15) with the
          as                         short-run   shock-and-inertia
determination of the random walk (14)? We may assume that the
actual path of                     n
                   is determined by whichever gives a higher
acceleration number (itt -                              m_)
                                        Whenever a shock from (14)
                                                               .



dominatas this means that the money-determined equation (7') will
be in temporary disequilibriurs.'t

     For  actual application of this framework one may assume that
the shocks .j and                     a
                      are rather rare occurrences     representing                 (J
step  devaluations  and                        a
                             wage and price controls). Thus the
dynamic system represented by (8') and (15) could be used to
simulate the dynamic stability and instability around equilibrium
points  with the occasional shocks marking the jumps in new initial
conditions on m and                       s.
                            This way of looking at the inflationary
process  is usefuk in the present context because it helps to
explain:
             a)        why    equilibria,               even   if stable,        are only temporary
equolibria             (until a       new shock         sets in)


     b(   why equal upward and downward shifts may not         be
symmetrical in their effects12
     c(   Why inflation may jump up across the "sound barrier"                                         m
under an exogenous shock                       (J
                           ( or down across the barraer when wage
and price controls (-e( are imposed.

     While the theoretical discussion given here is not formally a
complete account it does provide sufficient theoretical basis for
the empirioai analysis that follows. We first return to an
application of the accounting framework for defioit finance given
in Section III.

ll)The ed—hoc assumption still has to be justified within a
   fully-fledged asset model. It does, however, make intuitive
   sense  for the present example.   Here it would imply that reel
   money balances fell by more than expected and the reel interest
   rate rises to equilibrate excess money demand (or ekcess supply
   of real bonds). For some empirical support see below p.


12(tonsider the case of a step devaluation      at                          e         line   t     =   a.
   We have from equation (14) applied at t = a and                                    a + 1 that

                  —               =       (nt÷1     —
                                                          m(       +   )n   —   m2)   = (1—8)      s    —

   (1-Ô)(l-Th(a              Aa       =    s)1-6([l-5)l-d)]
   This     positive end rising with 2 (which itself rises with
              is
   ia)   .        If
            the general thrust of n- is upward (to a higher stable
   equilibridm at B, say( , a devaluetibñ will thus accentuate the
   inflationery acceleration.
                                —   77   —




V.    Deficit Finance and Equilibrium Inflation Rates,   1965-1986

     we now apply the accounting framework presented in Section
III to the Israeli inflation data,'3>  in an attempt to  account
for the main components of the stepwise shifts in the inflation
rate into and out of the high inflation period.    The issue of
stability will he taken up in the next section.

      Table 2 gives figures on the budget deficit and its finance
by the three major categories (money, domestic debt and the sale
of   foreign exchange)   during the period 1981-1986. A few major
changes stand out for the period after 1983.   one is the sharp
rise in the deficit in 1984, after a temporary drop in 1983, both
fluctuations to be traced primarily to the tax revenue side.
Secondly we note the sharp drop in the share of finance from the
domestic debt issue since 1983 and its replacement by foreign
exchange sales, evidence of the loss of confidence after the bank
share crisis of 1983, with e partial rebound in the first half of
1985   (mainly sales of a foreign exchange linked domestic asset,
PATAM, as part of the speculative move into a foreign exchange
linked hedge,   in addition to straight foreign exchange outflow)
Third and last we note again the sharp drop in the deficit in the
course of 1985     (already noted in Table 1) and the very marked
change in the composition of finance,  mainly between money and
debt,   a reflection of the rise in the demand for money with the
reduction in (expected) inflation.

     Table 3 applies the framework of equation (4) to the
inflation profile and budget finance data over a 20 year period in
which inflation increased in stepwise fashion from 5 to 400
percent per annum. This is a comparative dynamics exercise. For
each sub—period we calculate the difference between the deficit
ratio (d) and the part of the growth in domestic financial assets
that individuals would be willing to hold as GNP increases {nv =
n(h+b) I.  The ratio   of the resulting net injection to the money
base (line 7) is then ompared for consistency with the underlying
inflation rate (line 8), under a hypothetical steady state
assumption, as was shown in equation (4) of section III.

13)     This is done along the lines given in an earlier analysis
      [Bruno and Fischer(l986)], that was confined to the period up
      to 1983.
                                 —23—



     As indicated    in a previous study [Bruno and Fischer (1986)]
the shift from      one phase to another could be related, during the
high  inflation   period, to three important developments: the rise
in the    deficit )d) between the wars (1968—73), the fall in the
growth rate )n) after the 1973—74 crisis [see Melnik and Sokoler
(1984)],   and the probable drop in the demand for money schedule
[h)   )] after 197724.     Also noted was the marked discrepancy
between the injection ratio and actual inflation during 1981—83,
anticipating the sharp subsequent jump in inflation at the end cf
1983,   which    looked consistent with the underlying budget finance
data.   We    note    in hindsight that in the subsequent period
(1984—84:2)     the   reverse relationship held, with actual inflation
far exceeding the underlying government injection ratio, which was
already  consistent  with the eventual lowering of the inflation
rate (we return to this point below)

     Line )9) in Table 3 gives hypothetical numbers of the supply
of  real money balances )h) that would equate lines (7) and )8),
i.e., the numbers are derived from the ratio )d- vn)/n.  Thus,  in
the period '81—83 the data are consisent with a disequilibrium in
the direction of 'excess money supply' (monetary expansion) while
in 84-85:2 it is consistent with a converse 'excess money demand'
(monetary contraction)     situation.25

     In the post stabilization period (1985:3—86,   column 7)    h
rose dramatically, the deficit ratio continued to fall, and the
lower net injection ratio (30 percent) is quite consistent with
the new low inflation rate (25 percent during the first 18 months

14)This is linked to the liberalization of foreign exchange
   markets of October 1977, in which a new liquid,        foreign
   exchange linked,   asset was introduced )PATAM, see above) —
   close substitute for conventional money.
15)Real interest rate behavior is indeed consistent with this
   characterization (see respective Bank of Israel Annual Reports
   for 1983—1985).
                              —   24 —




of the program, in annual terms)  .'  Finally, column 8 in Table 3
gives       a
          hypothetical  set of numbers for zero inflation which is
consistent with a 4 percent growth, a further growth in the money
base ratio to 8 percent, say, and a government domestic deficit
finance ratio of 4 percent (implying a surplus of 1—2 percent when
interest payments are excluded)

       Wefirst reexamine this table using the model of Section II,
by assessing the applicability of the demand function for money.
A number of empiricial studies have been conducted at the Bank of
Israel in •recent years (see symposium in Bank of Israel, Bulletin
60,  November 1985), mainly centering on the semi-logarithmic form
of equation (5). Estimates by Melnik and by Ben-Eassat and Narom
(see above symposium and introduction by offenbacher) put the a
coefficient for quarterly data at about 5 (strictly speaking, the
estimate is 4,75).      This  figure implies that the elasticity of
demand for money (an) turns unitary when the monthly inflation
rate  exceeds 6.5 percent (or 115 percent in annual terms). Let us
look at the implied a estimate as we move from one sub—period to
the    next,in Table 3, namely, we calculate the proportional rate
of change of h (from line 2) and divide it by the change in the
rate of inflation between respective periods (translated into
quarterly data)   The following
                  .             set of numbers is obtained for the
relevant high-inflation period:

                to period          Implied a
                1974—77             4.4
                1978—80             4.8
                1981—83             8.0
                1984—85:2           0.9
                1985:3—86           4.4




l6)The 1 percent GNP growth rate for this period is an everage
   between a drop in the second half of 1985 and a 2 percent
   increase in 1986.     With 2 percent GNP growth rate the net
                                                               the
   injection ratio would drop to 10 percent. Obviously
   estimates are   sensitive  to  small  changes in the underlying
   parameters and should only be regarded as a very rough guide.
                                       —
                                           25 —




     Thus the first two observations and the last seem quite
consistent with the estimate suggested, while the third and fourth
very high inflation periods diverge substantially up or down,
respectively (on average,    interestingly, they do fit...).   The
very high figure for the early 1980s has given rise to the
argument that there was a             shift
                                  in the demand for money schedule
on account of         PATAM   and other money     substitutes that   became very
widespread          this period, thus illustrating the analysis of
                    during
section III (shift from curve h to h' and from point A' to C' in
Figure A)   How could one then rationalize the very low figure for
            .


1984—1985:2? One possible explanation for the back— shift in the
demand for base money could be the decision to pay higher interest
on commercial bank deposits with the Bank of Israel, evidence for
which can be found in line 9 of Table 6 in the years 1983 and
1985 : (1+2) But this would require deeper analysis .
                .                                           It is
interesting to point out, however, that the tripling of h in the
post-stebilizaton period is entirely consistent with an inflation
semi—elasticity that was estimated econometrically for the               earlier
highiy inflationary era.
     How    could one account for the large discrepancies in the
bottom     lines of Table    3  during the high inflation plateau
(1980—83)       and the period of runaway inflation (1984—85:2)?

     I believe s potential explanation lies with   the theory of
dual inflationary equilibria and the possibility that in those
years tne eoonomy was on the move to an inefficient, high
inflation equilibrium of the type B' (Figure A). First we note
that with an annual inflation rate of 141 percent (7 percent
monthly) the elasticity of demand for money may have passed the
unitary, 'optimal', inflation point, or was very close to it. If
the net injection ratio of 219 is any indioation of the long—run
equilibrium inflation at that time, it certainly satisfied the
high level equilibrium characteristics (the inflation rate
certainly did in the subsequent period) . We shall argue below
that the stability properties of the high inflation equilibrium
were also consistent with such an argument.

     The more         interesting discrepancy        came   in the next •period
(1984—85:2), however.    We note that by then the net injection
ratio had already come back to the 1968—73 level )i) i.e., the d'
curve had shifted back to d, and yet the net inj eotion ratio (and
even more so the runaway inflation) were placed in a very
different           environment.    First of all, it gives the best
illustration of         the multiple equilibrium nature of the system.
                              —   26 —




Even if we correct for a possible shift in the h(    ) function in
the intervening years, there is no doubt that the pair 18 and 119
(in line 7) or 11 and 385 (in line 8) together with the pair 13.4
and 2.1 for h (line 2) can be consistent with the same net
injection ratio only under a multiple equilibria interpretation.
But if at that point the economy was at a high inflation
equilibrium, and if, in fact, that was a potentially stable
equilibrium, then it is no wonder that a fall in the budget
deficit, without any accompanying measures that would make for
synchronization of nominal magnitudes at a credible low rate of
devaluation and wage-price inflation, could shift the economy to
an even higher rate of inflation (e.g., from B' to B). This in
fact took place as a result of a balance-of-payments-induced price
shock (i.e., a large devaluation), making for a jump in the
inflation rate (see section IV)

     The same argument holds with no less force for the shift into
the actual stabilization period.   Note that under the present
imterpretation the further fall in the domestically financed
deficit ratio (and even more so in the net injection ratio) was
only marginal, yet the fall in the inflation rate was dramatic.
It can only be explained as a shift back from a high inflation
equilibrium trap to its dual low—inflation equilibrium, along the
lines of dynamic adjustment given in Section IV, to which we
shall return below.

     Figure B is an attempt to give numerical content to Figure A,
using the data of Table 3 (observations are numbered by the
columns   of Table 3).       Curves d50 and d2.5 represent the
hyperbolae  h-it = d for the   two  injection ratios 5% and 2.5%
respectively. Curves     m and m' represent money demand schedules
before and after the shift caused by the introduction of money
substitutes. For each of the problematic periods 1982-83 (col. 5)
and 84-85:2 (col. 6) two observations were introduced,         the
original one and one based on the hypothetical h as given in line
9 of Table 3.

      According   to  this   analysis   the   hypothetical   upper
inflationary equilibrium before stabilization was situated at an
annual rate of about 700 percent (actual inflation being about 400
percent,    was  thus "on the way" to 700), while the lower
inflationary equilibrium was around 50 percent (observation 7,
which    represents the post-program inflation rate is at an
intersection of curve rn with a constant injection curve d1.9
which is not marked on the diagram).         Point 8 represents a
                                   -27—



hypothetical      bliss      of     zero       inflationary    equilibrium
(intersection    of   rn   with   the     curve  d0   which is the pair of
co—ordinates).

     Two questions immediately arise:   First, if the change in the
relevant part of deficit finance was so marginal why is so much
emphasis placed on the dramatic cut in the deficit (see Table 2)?
Secondly,    if the economy actually shifted to       a  low level
equilibrium,  what would guarantee its stability?

      The answer to the first question hinges on the important link
between the budget and the balance of payments which removed an
important source of pressure on the exchange rate.   The cut in the
budget   deficit helped bring about an almost equivalent cut in the
current account deficit of the balance of payments (commensurate
with the dramatic drop in foreign exchange sales to the public.
see line 8 in Table 2) which, together with the step devaluation,
made the exchange rate freeze credible. In the terminology of
section IV we would say that the expectation of another jump in c
and rt due to the J-term was snarply reduced.

     For the   answer to the second question, on the stability of
the new low level equilibrium, we turn back to the analysis of
dynamics and the stability of multiple equilibria.

VI.    Dynamic Adjustment and           the   Stability of the High and Low
      Level Inflation Rates7

     We now return to the analysis of the dynamics of       adjustment
(see  Section   IV) and  in  particular,  to  an  attempt  to give the
dynamic  adjustment  equations   (9)-(ll)    [or,    rather,     (ila)]
empirical content.

     Consider first the COLA adjustment of wages. I have run two
kinds of regressions of wages on present and lagged inflation
rates,  one based on quarterly data, the other on monthly data,
                                                                of
aggregating the results to a three-month equivalent coefficient
adjustment ('p).   If  we  consider  quarterly data for the period
1965-1985 and break the period down into three sub-periods (each
with roughly 20 observations) the implied adjustment coefficient

l7)Research assistance for        this    section   was   ably   provided by
   Eran Yashiv.
                                 —   28 —




comes out as follows:'9

              1965:1—72:4            0.40
              1973:1—78:4            0.57
              1979:1—85:4            0.79

     This confirms, in broad outline,       the claim    that   the
within—quarter adjustment coefficient has risen,       and in fact
doubled in the course of the inflationary process.          Let us
remember that in 1980 the frequancy of adjustment of the COLA
increased from a six to a three months lag and the rate of
indexation   increased from 70 percent to 80 percent.          Mora
recently, in October 1983, the agreement switched to a monthly
adjustment formula,   a   12 percent threshold and an 80-90 parcant
indexation coefficient.

     To obtain a finer sub—period breakdown we have to use monthly
regressions for wage adjustment. Table 4 gives the resulting
estimated coefficients for the wage equation    ),
                                                 line 2) end the
exchange rate adjustment equation )i5, lines 3 and 4) for
sub—periods starting with the introduction of the crawling peg
(the observations run starting 1975:1)29). The exchange rate
adjustment coefficients listed include both quarterly art monthly
based regressions, with the resulting calculated p:iduct (B =
a-)   given in lines 5 and 6, respectively.  Finally; lines 7 and
8 introduce estimated coefficients for equation )lla) run directly
on consumer and wholesale prices, respectively.

l8)The regression was run for each sub-period    separately in the
   form
   wt     —   =   a1 flt_i) + a2(n9_1 n2_2) + as)nt_2
                       )n2   —              —              —


   (1 + a1) is taken as the coefficient for the quarterly
   regressions and (1 + a3) as the one in the monthly
   regressions.
19)The exchange rate regression was run as in (9), adding a
   correction fdr U.S. wholesale prices within the brackets. For
   each regression dummy variables were included in the relevant
   periods in which step devaluations took place (since these are
   rete of change regressions, the dummies were introduced in two
   consecutive periods each time.)
     From the various series of estimates it seems that the              0
               that    we   were     looking    for   did   indeed  behave
coefficient
                                                Given the fact that the
monotonically over the four sub-periods.
                        demand  for  money  equation   is of the order of
a coefficient of the
                  exceeds 0.20-0.25   would    be   consistent   with the
4—5, any 0 that
        condition   of  stability    being   violated.     Given the above
Cagan
tentative results one could thus argue that up to 1977:2 stability
                                                    low inflation rate of
was   probably still maintained only at the
around 40 percent per   annum.   During   the  subsequent   two periods it
            been             above  or on  the  borderline   of stability,
may have           slightly
              the  last       inflation   period   (84-85)  stability  has
while during            high
                                              level  equilibrium  point   B
certainly also characterized the high
or B'    thus substantiating   the  argument    made   in   the  preceding
          ,


                                   inflation rate becoming unstable at
section, with the low level
the going wage and exchange rate adjustment mechanisms.

                                                                   0
     An alternative, more direct, way of testing whether the
                           itself inflation-dependent is to  specify
adjustment coefficient is
a linear relation  0 =                ff
                           + 02n, estimate equation (ha)    directly
by non—linear methods  and      whether    test
                                           > 0.         0
                                                             was   estimated over the
         The    following         difference equation
above     sample of         123   monthly observations (1975—85):

 )hlb)        at —   at—i    =    0   +   (0   +   8it_))n   —   it'5_1   —
                                                                              s...,)   +   J,

Here     t       = rate of devaluation
                 = rate of inflation
                 = U.S. rate of inflation
                 = Dummy variables for discrete devaluations of
                   1975)IX—X), 1977(XI—XII) and 1983 (X—XI)
                                                    of the consumer
      The equation was estimated once for n in term
                           once  for  the  wholesale price index of
 price index (CDL) and                                          and
                                The  resulting   coefficients
 manufacturing goods (WHP)
 threshold inflation ratio (*) are:
                             —    30 —




                                                           71*

                 ________           132          monthly         annual
COL              —0.29             9.33           5,8             97
                 [0.99]           [373]

WHP              —0.43            12.74            4.8            76
                  1.39]       [   4.97]
Figures   in   square brackets are        t-   values.     Estimates      are
corrected for serial correlation.

     The threshold inflation rate (n*) has been estaated from the
condition 13 = 13 -f- 13= m = (1 + a)—' which is the difference
equation analog of the Cagan stability threshold condition aB=l.
The implication is that as long as the inflation rate is less than
5.8 (or 4.8) percent a month (97 or 76 percent in annual terms,
respectively),  inflation will adjust to the lower inflation
equilibrium (since then a13<l) while starting from a higher
inflation rate it will diverge to the upper equilibrium. obviously
these results depend on equation (lib) being the maintained rule
of crawling exchange rate peg adjustment under accelerating
inflation, barring special events     (e.g., balance of payments
crisis)   for which one time adjustments of      the exchange rate
(represented by 3) are being made.

     We note that the above estimate of a critical monthly
inflation rate of about 5 percent (the 'sound barrier' shove
which the process diverges) conforms to one's intuitive hunch as
to what the    "danger zone" in this type of stabilization program
may be (both Brazil and Argentina, for example,    have,  at some
stage,  overshot this rate and their programs started getting into
very serious difficulty)

     It is important to point out that the estimated equation
)llb) is an exercise in ex—post interpretation of historical date
in terms of a hypothesized policy adjustment rule.   Policy rules
are man-made and can be changed and obviously the numerical
estimates should not be read as necessarily strictly applicable at
the tail end to which the stabilization program was directed. Part
of the program design can in fact be interpreted as an attempt to
make a new low level inflation stable. A discussion of a number
of ingredients in the program and its evolution should clarify
this point.
       A major    component    of      the program was a government
preannounced commitment  to  exchange    rate stability on condition
that  the trade unions take care of wage stability. With price
controls added on and a fiscal cum monetary squeeze it is an
extreme application of equations (9), (11) or (ha) with a = w =
= 0 and the fiscal and monetary squeeze (as well as adequate extra

foreign finance)    guaranteeing J = 0. Viewed as a (differential)
game played by the unions and the governmentzo) the stability of
the   equilibrium    depends     on     government's      credibility and
reputation building.    The   first     few   months   of   the program's
implementation provided     such    a  credibility   test.   When wages in
the business sector  overshot  in   the  expectation,      based    on past
experience,  that  the government     would  accomodate   with  an  exchange
rate devaluation     (so as to keep          export profitability from
falling), such     devaluation did not take place,               causing a
                          and  a  downward     correction    of    wages in
temporary profit squeeze
some manufacturing industries. Eventually, only a year later (in
January, 1987) was another step devaluation of 10% undertaken,
again   coupled    with    an agreed COLA suspension and a tax
compensation to employers. This became part of a new, this time
more credible,     precommitment to an exchange rate stabilization
policy.

      In terms of the model presented in section IV,   this is a
case  in which the coefficient 0=0 and a step devaluation (J) is
coupled with an incomes policy (-ar) at the same time so as to
neutralize the shock to (n -             n_)
                                           [see equation (14)] and
thereby confine  inflation  to  the  vicinity of the low level
equilibrium point.

              the COLA itself was corrected in the course of 1986
           Next,
to conform to a lower inflation rate (moving up the threshold for
wage compensation from 4 to 7 percent cumulative price increase
and a reduction of the  compensation rate to 70 percent)       The   .




result  of both of these steps      and the smaller price increase
prevented the need for actual COLA payments for almost a year.

20)    A relevant bargaining model was analyzed by Horn and Persson
      (1986)   .   In
                    their model, however, the trade—off is between
      inflation and unemployment (in the export industry).       More
      relevant  in  the  present context is the trade-off between the
      current account (supplying foreign exchange       relief)   and
      inflation.
                                 —   32   —




     The imposition  of initial prioe controls was a part of the
social contract demanded by the unions. While those controls were
not effective during the initial stages of the program they did
help in kignalling the government's serious intentions. Their
gradual removal in the course of the subseguent two-yeer period
without any clear signs of repressed inflation emerging added
another element of credibility. The best test of the public belief
in the success      of the program,   which in turn helped keep the
exchange rate  stable, was a large inflow of capital.2'-

VII.   Concludang Remarks

      In our empirical application we have naturally concentrated
on  the Israeli example.   An interesting line of further research
would be to cast the simultaneous experience of other countries,
like that of Argentina or Brazil (and more recently, Mexico) , into
the  same analytical mould.     This has, to the best of our
knowledge, not yet been done. It could, however, be observed that
the reason for a less successful outcome in Argentina and Brazil
probably  lies with both parts of the heterodox package.    In the
case of Argentina, for example, which was the first and also more
serious attempt at stabilization, the initial correction of
fundamentals appears to have been insufficient - the fiscal
squeeze had temporary more than permanent elements in it, and the
external adjustment problem appeared more serious then Israel s,
making an exchange rate freeze less credible and more short-lived.
But the initially synchronized wage-price freeze also appeared to
be more shaky on account of a trade union movement that was
politically less collaborative       than     its Israeli counterpart.   It
21)    Another   element making for stability of a new        'eguilibrium'
      is the bureaucratic feed-back mechanism by which mistakes in
      policy or unanticipated disturbances are quickly detected and
      reacted upon by corrective measures. In the Israeli case this
      role was at least in part played by a follow-up committee of
      bureaucrats with direct access to the Minister of Finance end
      the Prime    Minister. In this sense the post-reform decision
      making mechanism should be part of the design for ecobomic
      reform, since it affects the stability properties of the new
      equilibrium.
                               —
                                   33 —




is hard to make a more concrete assessment of the differences
between the countries without an analogous detailed empirical
comparison.22> Let us now turn back to more general remarks.
     We have used the example of a recent 'shock' stabilization
program to illustrate the way the concept of economic reform can
be placed within acceptable theoretical and empirically testable
frameworks.   Even our particular example still has to be worked
out more fully.      For our present    purpose,   however:    it
illustrates a principle. The underlying idea is the existence of
multiple stable equilibria for the economy and given a dear
preference ordering over these equilibria, a reform program
consists of a shift from one stable or quasi-stable equilibrium,
which is inferior (or a point on the way to such equilibrium) to
another, superior, equilibrium (or a process by       which such
equilibrium  can  be   reached),  which  can  be made stable by a
suitable reform design.

      We note the rather eclectic role of     'econometrics'  in our
exercise.    statistical     econometrics can be used for varioua
fragments or building stones of the jigsaw puzzle, as was indeed
done here, but prubably not as a complete estimable model
structure. The conservative nature of backward looking time series
modelling limit the use of the larger econometric models for this
purpose because the extrapolation of the past under a regime
change is fraught with difficulties. At the same time there are
other,   complementary ways,      of bringing the past historical
experience (sometimes      not  even  quantifiable) to bear on the
understanding of the potential ingredients of an economic reform.
It   requires a marriage of different subfields all of which
constitute 'econometrics' as practiced by the members of our
society.    of   all required components I would put the greatest
emphasis on the need for one unifying analytical framework or
'theory'   which can then be filled with smaller sub-models and
missing facts.       Facts   alone,  even if ordered or      analyzed
correctly from a purely 'statistical' point of view, can naver he
a good basis for policy, if there is no attempt to understand how
the system to be guided actually 'ticks'.

22)For   the   separate country studies      see   Bruno,   Di   Tella,
   Dornbusch, and Fischer (1988).
                                    —   7a   —




          In
         a lecture on experimental economics given at      the last
World   Congress of our Society I heard Alvin Roth mention four
types of experiments in economics: The first one is    'speaking to
theorists'.   The  second is 'searching  for meaning'.  The third is
'searching  for facts' and the fourth  and last  is  'whispering  in
the ears of princes', which I take to be the politicians.


     Speaking of politicians, I would like to end with a quote
from Joseph Schumpeter who, believe it or not, happened to be one
of   the founding fathers of our Society. (Here is an interesting
question - would he be elected Fellow of the Econometric Society
to-day? Or else, would he be interested in being elected, given
the highly technical segmentation of our discipline
1933   issue of  Econometrica  that  I  have  already
                                                          ?)
                                                          In the
                                                      mentioned an
article      of his, entitled "The Common Sense of Econometrics", ends
in    a   paragraph which runs as follows:
            only way to a position in which our science might give
           "The
positive advice on a large scale to politicians and business men,
leads through quantitative work. For as long as we are unable t.a
put  our  aruments into figures, the voice of our         science,
although   occasionally it may help to dispel gross errors, will
never be heard by practical men.       They   are, by    instinct,
                                                               -



econometriciams all of them,     in their distrust of anything not
amenable to exact proof."

           Princes   in Schumpeter's days may have been a special breed.
I  am not       w:sure ether
                        I would buy        this
                                         statement of Schumpetar' a
as far as to-days politicians' optimal menu is concerned, at
least not chose in whose ears I have recently been whispering. I
do, however, subscribe to the contents of a preceding paragraph in
the same article having to do with the mix of 'speaking to
theorists' and 'searching for facts' which is as relevant to-day
as it seemed 55 years ago:




23)       Areader of a previous draft of this paper quipped at this
      point:" Or would he be Schumpeter to-day?". I hope he could.
                                  —   35 —




            "Theoretic and 'factual' research will of themselves find
their   right     proportions,    and we may not unreasonably expect to
agree   in the       the right kind of theory and right kind of
                 end on
fact and the methods of treating them, not postulating anything
about them by program,    but evolving them, let us hope,    by
positive achievement."

        I    hope this discussion will be a small contribution towards
further  evolution of theory and fact in the continued 'search for
meaning' of how policies ought to be rationalized. Princes and
politicians come and go, some of onthem    more receptive to our
whispers   than others.  It befalls    us in the profession, in the
meantime, to improve our basic understanding of how and what menus
to prepare for future plans of action and reform.
                                      —   36 —




References
-
    Arrow, K.J. (1957),  Statistics and Economic Policy",
    Econometrica, 25, pp. 523-531.

-
    Aurenheimer,       L. (1973), Essays      in   the    Theory     of    Inflation,
    Ph.D.    dissertation,    Chicago.

—   Backus, D. and J. Driffil (1985), 'Inflation and Reputation,
    American Economic Review, 75 pp. 530-538.

-    Barro. R.J. and D.B. Gordon (1983), 'Rules, DiscretIon and
    Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy", Journal of Monetary
    Policy",    12,   pp. 101—121.

-   Ben-Porath,       Y. and M. Bruno (1977) "The Political Economy of a
    Tax Reform:         Israel 1975", Journal of Public Economics, 7,
    pp.285—307.

-
    Bomberger,  W,A.   and G.E.  Makinen (1983),    'The   Hungarian
    Hyperinflation    and Stabilization of   1945-46',   Journal of
    Political Economy, 91, 5, October, pp. 801-824.

-   Bruno, N. (1981), "A Swift and Determined               Blow",    Migva1,     55,
    Feb. pp. 33-38 (Hebrew).

-               (1986),    "Sharp    Disinflation        Strategy:   Israel 1985,
    Economic Policy,      2, pp.   379—407.

            and S.  Fischer (1985),    Expectations                  and   the   High
    Inflation Trap", unpublished note, September.

            and             (1986) "The Inflationary Process: Shocks
    and Accommodation', Chap.    17 in Y. Ben-Porath (ad.),      The
    Israeli Economy:   Maturing through Crisis, Cambridge, Mass.:
    Harvard University Press.

               and              (1987), "Seignorage, Operating Rules             and
    the High Inflation Trap",       NBEP. Working Paper, November.


             ,R.  Dornbusch, G. Di Tella, and S. Fischer (1988),
    Inflation Stabilization: The Experience of Israel, Argentsna,
    Brazil, Bolivia and Mexico, M.I.T. Press, forthcoming.
                                     —   37 —




-   Cagan, P. (1956), The Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinflation", in
    Friedman, M. (ed. , Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money,
                            3



    Chicago UniverSlty Press.

-   Cukierman,        A.     The End of the Israeli Hyperinflaton -
                           (1987),
    An Experiment in Heterodox Stabilization,   Working Paper No.
    7—87, Foerder Institute, Tel-Aviv University, April.

-
    Dornbusch, R. and S. Fischer (1986), Stopping Hyperinflations:
    Past and present", Weltwirtschafliches Archiv, April.

                           M.H.    Simonsen    (1987),    Inflation
    Stabilization with Incomes Policy Support, The Group of Thirty,
    New York.

-   Dreze,  J.H.  (1972),  "Econometrics and       Decision   Theory,
    Econometrica, 40, 1, January, pp. 1-17.

-   Evans,        and G.K. Yarrow (1981),
               J.L.                            Some Implications of
    Alternative Expectations Hypotheses in the Monetary  Analysis of
    Hyperinflations," Oxford Economic Papers, pp. 61-80.

-   Friedman, M. (1971),     "Government Revenue from Inflation,"
    Journal of Political Economy, 79, 4 (July/Aug.), pp. 24C-86.

-   Frisch,    R. (1933), Editorial, Econometrica, Jan., pp.1-4.

-   Helpman, E. and L. Leiderman (1987), "Stabilization in High
    Inflation   Countries:    Analytical Foundations and Recent
    Experience", Working Paper No. 12-87,    Foerder   Institute,
    Tel—Aviv University, June 1987.

-   Horn,      and T.
              H.        Persson (1986), "Exchange Rate Policy, Wage
    Formation and Credibility, Working Paper No. 48, Institute
    for International Economic Studies, Stockholm, June.

—   Kiguel,  M.A.  (1986), "Stability, Budget Deficits and Monetary
    Dynamics of Hyperinflation", The World Bank, DRD Working Paper,
    No. DRD 182.

-   Klein, L.R. and A.S. Golderger (1955), An Econometric Model of
    the United States, 1929-1952, Amsterdam: North—Holland.

-   Kreps, D.M. and R. Wilson (1982),   "Reputation and Imperfect
    Information", Journal of Economic Theory, 27, pp. 253-279.
                               —   38 —




    Kydland,  F.E.   and E.C, Prescott (1977), Rules Rather than
    Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans", Journal of
    Political Econony, 85, June, pp. 473-91.

—   Liviatan,  N. (1983), "Inflation and the Composition of Deficit
    Finance," in Adams, F.E. (ed), Global Econometrics, Cambridge,
    M.I.T.    Press.

                 and S. Piterman (1985), "Accelerating Inflation and
    Balance  of Payments Crises: Israel 1973-84,"  Chap.  18 in Y.
    Ben-Porath (ed), The Israeli Economy: Maturing through Crisis,
    Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

—   Lucas,     (1976), "Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique"
              R.E.
    in   K.Brunner and AR. Meltzer )eds.), The Phillipe Curve and
    Labour Markets, Supplement to the      Journal    of  Monetary
    Economics.

    Melnik, R. and M. Sokoler (1984),   "The Government's Revenue
    Creation and the Inflationary Effects of a Decline in the Rate
    of Growth of GNP, Journal of Monetary Economics, 13   (No. 2,
    March),    pp. 225-236.

—   Muth,  J.F.   (1961),  "Rational Expectations and the Theory of
    Price Movements', Econometrica. 29, pp. 315-35.

    Sargent, T.J. (1982), "The Ends of Four Big Inflations" in
    R.  Hall )ed.), Inflation, NEER and University of Chicago
    Press.

                                                       and   the
    Government Budget Constraint", in         .
                                      Razin and E. Sadka )eds.),
    !sonomic Policy in Theory and Practice,   London:  Macmillan
    Press.

—   J.  Tinbergen (1956), Economic Policy: Principles and Design,
    NorZh Holland Publishing Company Amsterdam, 276 pp.
                                          ,




    Yitzhaki, 5. (1982), "A Tax Programming       Model,"   Journal   of
    Public Economics, 19, pp. 107—120.
                                          —   39   —




Fipure A,       ('overnment Finance, Base onev and Equilibrium Inflation
                    d-line:   (4)   h7r       d    =   (1   - fly
                    h—line:   (5)   h      exp(- aJTe




            h




                                              *


                                                               d




                                                                    d
                                       —   40       —




      Figure B. Deficit, Money Base, and lnf!ation: 1965 —1986




800                                                                 ————m



                                                                                  d50
700
                                                                                  d25



600                                                        OBSERVATIONS:
                                                           65 67              1

                                                           6873           2
                                                           7477           3
                                                           78 80          4
                                                           81 83              5
                                                           84 85:2            6

                                                           85:386             7
               6
              S                                            Equil              8




200



100



  0                                I            I
                                                        r1—..4]i     I    I        I   1   I

         1    2    3    4    5    6             7         8     9   10   11       12       13   14   15
                                                                                                     h
                                                                        - 4'    -




                                                 TABLE    i
                                                              -
                                                                   £csnceic Indicators


                            Mean         904                       1985                                1986                                            1987
                            1681-       (during
                             604        year)       Jan.!          Aug.
                                                                          -     Oct.-      Jan.- April-           July-       Oct.      -
                                                                                                                                             Jan.-        April-
                                                    July           Sept.        Dec.       March June             Sept.       Dec.           March        June


A. Prices,      exchange rates and wages(asnnhly percentage change rates)

     1. Consuner prices 8.1               5.2       14.0           3.5          2.l            0.6     2.1            1.0         2.2            7.6          7.3

     2. Wholesale prices 6,1              5.2       12.0           1.8          2.4             .2     1.1            o,g         1.0            2.4          1.1

     3.   Eschange rate   8.8             5.9        3.6           0.2         -2.1            0.0     0.0            0.0         0.0            2.0      -0.3
     A. B-currency basket
         eoch. rale       1.5            15.3        5.3           2.7          2.0             .5     0.5            3,3?        0.0            3,3?     -0.1
     5.  Aoninai cage     6.0            15.5       11.0           0.3          4.5            6.4     4.3        1.1             0.2         0.6          u,g


B.   Corey and credit )aonthiy percentage rates)

        Octal bank       8.6             76.1       13.0          4.8               .1         2.9     2.o            3.1         3.3         4,6          3.1
        credit
     2. 4uasi-sney(y3 )elo7              75,9       73.0           3.5              .9         2.3    —1.0            3.2         3.3         4.3          1.5
     3. Means of
         nayment (8,)    8.6                        11.9          76.2          6.1        75.1        0.9            7.0      4.2            2.4          0.5
     4. Interest rate
        (end-sf-period
         level)                          76.1       21.0          14.1          7.2         4.0        3.6            3.5      4.0            4.0          u.1



C.   Relative price levels (1980:100)

     Real   exchange rate
       (new besket(a             94        92            03       III          lOS         03         98          96          93             96          95
     keel wage (grass)       108b         116        116°          95           95        106        113      1   hA         II?            115         727
     Real    wage
          (eftar tax)            0gb      114        116°         99            03        Ill        120      121             24            123


                                           5.0                                                                                0              0
     Budget deficit)SOOP) iO,2b                      2.0°          5d           4          3                      3
0.

6.   Aneaplxyment rate(t)         4gb      s,g       6.0°           7,9?            6.6        1.2     7,9            6.8         6.6         5.1          5.9

F, Balance of payments
     basic balance
                             _0,2b       -0.3                       0.6             1.2    -0.7        0.0            3.3         1.3        -0.2

a. Relatixe wholesale prices of major trading partners (now basket of 5).
0. wean, 1980-83.
c, Mean,     Jan-Jane    1986.
d. Mean,  July-Seyt. 1985.
e. Money and liquid assets, includes foreign-currency denand derosits.
   cuts for Asg -Sept, On August I, 1986 a new basket was adopted.
   (The tigura for July was 2.3.)
                                                              the S currency basket.
g. In Jan. the 11.1.5. aas devalued by II percent relative to
                                               —12—

                   Table 3: 000ESTiC PUBLIC SECTOR DEFICIT (INCLUDING SANK OF IDFFELI
                                      END ITS FINANCING, 1980—1784


                    -                 -       (Percent of      OCR)


                                                                         1995
                              1981   1988   1983     1984                               1788
                                                             Total    Jan.-   July—
                                                                      June    Dcc.

1. Comnonento of
     Deficit


     eopendiouro              57,9   5°C    54.1     52.7    55.4     54.8    54

                              50.5   52.7   72.8     58,4    52.8     5O,5*** 54.Erea   540

2. Deficit (cool.
      intereoc)                9.4    0.3    3.3      8.3     3.0      8.8    -0.2      —0.3


      Interest
      (adjusted)               2.2    0.8    2.8      3.8     5.7     5.9      5.7       5,3


D. Domestic        deficit
   (3, +     t,)              il.4   (D.C    4.0     i2.i     9.01,2.3         5.7       2.8

8.'Finarcino of
     Deficit
4. Base     money
     creation                  2.0    1.7    2.3      2.7     4.5      2.4     (0.6      1.9

7. Net domestic
     debt*                     8.1    4.2   —1.0      0.2    —(.2      3.7     —6.i     —0.4

2.   Foreign currency
     sales                     1.9    2.8    4.3      9.6     8.2      7.4      2.2      8.5

9.   Net   effect of
     monetary      policy*    —0.4   —0.6   —i.4     —0.2    —1.1     —l.2     —1.0     —(.4

* Financial asset formation (inoloding             PATAMI   net of public credit to private seoDor.
8-'Interest on the money base, plus the            fiscal   burden of discount—cindoc lending,
     less penalties     for liquiditf deficits.
"Estimale.
Source: Bank of Israel, Annual Report 1985, Table 9—4.
        1784 — Bank of Israei estimate.
                                                    -   45    —




Table 3.          Government              Injection      to    Honey    Base and     the Rate of        Inflatjo0
                  5965—5988
                                                                                                        (Percent ages)
                                1965—       1968-       1974-       1978- 1981-        1984—      1985:3-        Hypo-
                                 1967        1973        1977        1980      983 1985:2             5986       thetjcal
                                                                                                                  equi-
                                    (1)       (2)            (3)       (4)     (5)
                                                                                       '
                                                                                            (6)
                                                                                                  -   7)(8)      librium

5,   Financial
     asset ratio
     (h    ÷   b)lOO             (0.5)        0.8            1.0     1.1       1.3          5.2       1.3

2.   Percentage
     money base
     to    GN'P    (h)           12,5        13.4            9.8     5.2       2,7          2.1       6.1            8

3.   GN'P      growth
     (n)                            3.2      10.3            2.6     3.5       2.3          2.0       1.0            4

4. Domestic
     governoen          t
     finance
     ratio        (d)               2.2       8.8            7.3     9.3       8.9          4.9       3.1
5. Of which:
   Growth factor
     (1.       x 3.)                1.6       6.2            2.6     3.9       3.0          2.4       1.3

6.   Net injection
     (4.       —5.)                 0.6       2.4            4.7     5.4       5.9          2.5       1.8            0

7. Net injection
   mcney base
     (6/2.)                           5        58             48       104     219          119        30            0

8.   Inflation
     rate          .                  5        U              40        97     141          385        25            0

9.   Hypotetical
     moey         Supply
     (h
     I   4)—(5 >17(8)                12.5      21.9          11.8        5.6         4.2    0.7        7.3   .       8


Note :This       table is an extension of Bruno and Fischer (1986), Table 4,
            which only covered the period up to 1983 [o1umnsU -(5) 1.
            All nui±ers are in percentages except for line 1 which a simple                            is                 ratl
Sources: Line               1   —   Yariv (1982) plus update                 1965—67       figure assumed same as
                  1970   1968—1973             is
                                      the average for 1970—73. Line 2
                                                                      — Bank or
                  Israel, Annual Reports. Line 3 — CBS. Line 4 —Meridor (1985)
                  plus update. Line 8 - CBS.
                                                 —   44 —




Table      4.    Estimated    Dynamic Price Adjustment       Coefficients,          1975—1985


                                               1975:1-       1977:2-             1979:4-       1983:3—
                                                1977:2        1979:4             1983:3.        1985:3


1.   No.    cf monthly observations               24            31                 45             24

2.   Wage       sdjusant     coeff.    ()        0.44          0.53               0.87          0.77



Exchange rate adjustment              (41


3.    Quarterly                                  0.57          0.83               0.38           0,75

4.    Nonthly                                   -0CC           0,12*              0.34          0.88


Price adjustment         coefficients

Calculated         (4i)
5. = 2.          3.                               0.25         0.33                0.31          0.50

8. * 2.          4.                              -0.02         0.08*               0.30          0.68

Esormated         (4)

7.    Consraar                                    0.27*         0.32               0.41          1.02

8.    'holasale                                   0.13          0.30         .
                                                                                   0.70    .     1.54

9.    Exchamga rate          duias                IX—X          El—Ill               —           I—Il
                                                  1975           1977                            1983




     Coefficient insignificantly            different    from zero at    5   percent level.

 Sources:         Lin&2 —    Coefficient (1 + so) in        monthly wage adj. equation (8).
                  Line 3 —   Quarterly exchange rate        adjustment equation (9), with—

                  Line 4 —   S
                             -out   dunias.
                               of-3 first coefficients in legged monthly exchange
                           rata adju.stmant equation (:9), with duias- for periods
                                                                           -
                           given in Lina 9.
                  Line 7 — Based on monthly regressions with ( replaced by it
                              (for
                                consu.mar prices).
                  Line 8— As in Lina 7, with it representing wholesale prices.
                                                      —
                                                           45        —




                                                    TECHNICAL            APPENDIX-

                         High Inflation Traps and Rapid Disinflatior




1.       The Banic Model           (see section            HI)



We here detail the model of Section III only for the case of no bcnds, i.e,

v    r   h.   When the- real rate of interest is exogenous,                                generalization to the

money and         bonds   case is straightforward Asse                               a
                                                                                         semi—logarithmicdemand
function for money                (e       =       expected     inflation),

                         H/PY          h =         exp(—a)

This is equation (5) in the text.                               Now      assume   deficit finance by   oney—base
creation,                                      -




                         H/PY          (H/H)h = d


This      is equation (1) in i(e text for the cas,.                                       0.
                                                                 -
          From    (Al) and (A2)

                          d   =   8h   =   8 exp(—aa)


where         8    H/H    is the growth rate of high—powered money. This shows as

curve GD           in Figure Al.

          Differentiating (Al) with respect to time we obtain



1        This Appendix is partly based on Bruno and Fischer ( 1984,1987)                                  -,

         The case where the real interest rate is endenous is technically messier
          (It is worked out in the above 1987 paper). Here our eccvhasis is an
         illustration off the case of dual stable equilibria which was not taken
         up   in the     above     papers.             -
                                                     —       46 —




                                                APPENDIX,                 p. 2




(Al')


share         is actual inflation and                        n       is the growth rate of GNP.

        In steady state,             ke =     3,    and we have



(A4)                          =   Kr    9 —



This    is equation (2) in the. text, and shows en the 45' line with intercept

n    in Figure Al.            There are two possible steady states (at most),                                          A    and

B,     with    A    the low—inflation and                        B       the high—inflation equilibriur.                     As

d     increases,         GB       shifts to        GB'   ,       the losinfIetion steady                     state      rises


from     A    to    A'   ,    while     the high—inflation steady state shifts leftward

 iran    B    to    B'   ,    with      the inflation rate felling. Maximum saignorege is

obtained when            d =      c'exp(an1)             end             X = 1/a — n            [Friean      (lBTl)).

        Now consider adaptive expectations (for an elternetive interpretstion

 in terms of exchange rate adjustment see section IV)



 (AS)                    k

 This    is equation (6) in the text.                            Substituting             for    x   fran (Al') we get


 (AG)                              (1
                                        -   a)1q(9           - n —         te)

 where       B =   d exp(mxe), from            (A3),             This is equatiob                )8)in thetext.

         For slow expectations adjustment                                (4   4   l/a),     ke > 0     for       t,    <   B —   n,

    i.e., below the          45    line,      and            4    0       for     x   >    S — n     (see Figure Al).

    Thus for the case             af3 4 1,     A,        the lower inflation                     equilibrium          in Figure A

    (if it exiats) is stable,                 and the higher inflation rate et                               B    is unstuble.

    These roles are reversed when                    cr41    >       1    (see Figure 91).           This will also be
                                                                  47        —




                                                           APPENDIX,              p. 3

the    case for rational expectations which can be represented as the limi-

ting case                    a        or          =    a      always.

        The two cases can equivalently be represented in                                            ae—     space, when
the     GO       and    '             curves are           no longer independent                  of the process of

adjustment         (see Figures                  A2,   32,     respectively).



2.     Variable Adjustment Coefficient


Consider         now the         case in which the adjustment coefficieqt in equation                                 (A5)
becomes      inflation—dependent and                          we          have

(A5')                                  3()(t               7te)




where        '    > 0        and assume                (0)        (       l/cz.


        The interpretationis that as inflation rises it becomes                                                  liar to

make    mistakes and              therefore            the response to unanticipated shocks will be
more rapid.             In the text (section IV) we            replace this ncdel                          and its



                                                                                                  ,t
interpretationwith one                       based on exchange rate adustmerit.

        Since            )       0,        there exists               a    critical      value,            which     3()
1/a     (see      Figure Cl)           .    It     now becomes                  of crucial importance as      to how the

A     and    B     intersections of,the                           GO         curve with the          = 0    line relate to
the point          D    at       which        x     the GG line (D is
                                                       = c$       on                                   a   singularity
point).          We have         the following cases:
(a)                               < xs < xl         A stable, B unstable

(b)                      xl       (                                        A    unstable,   B stable

(c)                      a. ( xl             K    xa                       Both A and B      are stable.
                                                                  —       48       —




                                                                  4PPENDIX, p. 4



Case (c) is clearly of special interest because it gives rise to multiple

stable equilibria sad therefore to a rationale for a discrete step in stab-

ilization policy involving more than just s cut in the government                                                                                deficit.


         analysis in terms of Figures A or Cl is of necessity incomplete
        The

because we have said nothing shout sotuel inflation. As it turns out, the
threshold expectation level, 4, here causes some special dichotomy in
inflation behavior. Let                      us consider                       case (c) where                         XA    K    4    K    tn         This is

3how12 in Figure C2.

         From      equations (AS') and                            (AS) we know                   that except at                      4      we    have

                                                                      d exn(ate)                — n                             -
 (A?)                                                         —
                                                                                                                                mr        a13 r 1
                                                     I            m13(it)

                          we have

                                                     )
while for           in
                                                                                                             -
                           in     =          -                    =    Md' exp(zxe)-n
 (AS')                                13(x


         Cifferentieting (A7.)                       with respect to                             x.     we get, for the slope of the

 CC     curve in          itlie        space,

                           dx         = cz(ç3'(x
                                                              —    ze)    —
                                                                                   (xe)         + d exp(axefl
 (AS)                      dx                                           1 —



 It     follows that at the points                                    A       and       B,       where           it        un,       dz/due           is the


 seine    as for the constant                            13       case 1sinoe the                       '        term       in (B) vanishes].2

          Consider now the range xa                                       K   Xe K      4,            Here       a13   K    1    and        in    K   C




          At
                                       dx           +
                                              = cz(x —n)
                                                                               —
                                                                                       o4                                             n)
          x    =   xe    = XA,
                                                                  1
                                                                                            K
                                                                                                 1,      since             a(    +          K    1



          while at

               = lie -—
                                        dx       =       mp—o(x+n)                                       since o(x                    n)
                           Its,                                           —    1
                                                                                                 '                               1-          >   1
                                                          -   49        -




                                                        APPEHDIX,           p.    5


             S        Se    to the      left      of    the   e         =      line. Therefore the numerator
on the right hand                 side   of equation (AS')                   must be negative. But this means

that close to the                  m     level, when              m13        1,       the numerator of        ecuation         (A?)
must also become negative, namely, the                                      UG     curve in that branch must even-

tually cross the      axis and m  a  a                        -             as     a    —          (from below)
           For a      sjilar reason it                 follows         that in the range                  a.        as
(a     —
            1)    the numerator of (A7) must be negative abd
                  >   0    and
                                                                 positive,
with  a —  ÷ a  as a.  —  a (from above).
     Here a shift to a higher deficit ratio will show in the
                                                             corresoonding
shift of the two branches (to the right in the lower region and to :he left
in   the upper region).                 Figure C2 also includes a case where a higher deficit

ratio gives a curve                    GG1     for which both equilibria are in the upper

region, now               the   lower one (A') being unstable and                           for    low enough       a

becoming asymptotic to                   the       ml     line         from above.

       Repeating the expebiment, previously discussed, of moving from the

initial point               B'     to a lower deficit together with an

incomes policy that pulls                         a.     credibly below ml,                   we    first move to the

point       E,        say, on the        lower         branch of            GG,       which is enough to get             u.s


eventually            to the point           A.        Note that for this case the                    actual inflation
rate falls at              first      by more than ae              ,    while         the adjustment process             from    B


to     A    will invclve a further fall in                              't        as a      rises to the new equilib—
riLn   at         A.3

       Ne     also marked the point B on
                 have                                                            Figure Cl.       Note that     9   behaves
       monotonically during the transition,                                 the growth rate of money falling
           (with the fall in expectations)                             while inflation must rise — the
       numerator in (A7)                 rising         by more         than the denominator.
                                                                             U,




nd                            0
Fig. Al. Money growth                                   Fig. A2. Inflation


                         Depicts the case    < 1/a.
                        A, A' stable; B, B' unstable.
                               stable. B' B,   unstable; A' A,
                                 1/a. >    case the Depicts
          Inflation B2. Fig.                                     growth Money 81. Fig.
     yr
U,
                                                                                         7re
A                                                   R                          71
                                   0
    Fig. Ci. Money grOwth                                 Fig. 02. Inflation

                   Depicts the case P—(e) with /3(4) = 1/a.
                                         +
                   On GG: A and B stable.
                   On GG: A' unstable, B' stable.
