                                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          COVID-19 AND EMERGING MARKETS:
AN EPIDEMIOLOGICAL MODEL WITH INTERNATIONAL PRODUCTION NETWORKS AND CAPITAL FLOWS

                                                 Cem Çakmakl
                                                Selva Demiralp
                                             Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan
                                                Sevcan Yesiltas
                                             Muhammed A. Yildirim

                                               Working Paper 27191
                                       http://www.nber.org/papers/w27191


                             NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             May 2020




        This paper is previously circulated under the title: “An Epidemiological Multi-Sector Model for a
        Small Open Economy with an Application to Turkey.” We would like to thank former CBRT
        governor Süreyya Serdengeçti, Fatih Özatay, Cevdet Akçay, Serkan Özcan as well as webinar
        participants at London School of Economics, Central Bank of Chile, EU Delegation in Ankara,
        and Koç Holding for their valuable feedback. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
        and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

        NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
        reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
        NBER publications.

        © 2020 by Cem Çakmakl , Selva Demiralp, Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Sevcan Yesiltas, and
        Muhammed A. Yildirim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
        may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
        to the source.
COVID-19 and Emerging Markets: An Epidemiological Model with International Production
Networks and Capital Flows
Cem Çakmakl , Selva Demiralp, Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Sevcan Yesiltas, and Muhammed
A. Yildirim
NBER Working Paper No. 27191
May 2020
JEL No. E01,F23,F41

                                         ABSTRACT

We quantify the macroeconomic effects of COVID-19 for emerging markets using a SIR-
multisector-small open economy model and calibrating it to Turkey. Domestic infection rates
feed into both sectoral supply and sectoral demand shocks. Sectoral demand shocks also
incorporate lower external demand due to foreign infection rates. Infection rates change
endogenously with different lockdown policies. To calibrate the model, we use indicators of
physical proximity and tele-workability of jobs to measure supply shocks. We use real-time credit
card purchases to pin down demand shocks. Our results show that the optimal policy, which
yields the lowest economic cost and saves the maximum number of lives, can be achieved under a
full lockdown of 39 days. Partial and/or no lockdowns have higher economic costs as it takes
longer to control the disease and hence to normalize the demand. Economic costs are much larger
for an open economy because of the amplification role of international input-output linkages.
Lower capital flows exacerbate this amplification as capital flows are the key form of financing
for the production network. We document that sectors with stronger international input-output
linkages and higher external debt suffer worse COVID losses and as a result have larger fiscal
needs.
Cem Çakmakl                                      Sevcan Yesiltas
Koç University                                   Koç University
College of Administrative                        Department of Economics and Finance
Sciences and Economics                           Rumelifeneri Yolu 34450
Rumelifener Yolu                                 Sariyer, Istanbul
Sariyer, Istanbul                                Turkey
Turkey                                           syesiltas@ku.edu.tr
ccakmakli@ku.edu.tr
                                                 Muhammed A. Yildirim
Selva Demiralp                                   Koç University
Koç University                                   and Center for International Development
Rumelifeneri Yolu, Sariyer                       at Harvard University
Istanbul 34450                                   mayildirim@ku.edu.tr
Turkey
sdemiralp@ku.edu.tr

Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
Tydings Hall 4118D
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and CEPR
and also NBER
kalemli@econ.umd.edu
                                                                                 “Best safety lies in fear.”
                                                                                             – William Shakespeare




1    Introduction

The COVID-19 shock may soon lead to the biggest emerging market (EM) crisis of modern times.

EMs observe a collapse in domestic and external demand, record capital outflows, higher external

borrowing costs, a commodity bust, and depreciating currencies. At the same time, EM governments

increase domestic borrowing via unconventional policies to assemble fiscal resources to fight the

pandemic. This puts further pressure on external finance premium, reducing capital inflows and

making it harder to rollover the external debt. In this paper, we focus on this complex embrace

between domestic fiscal needs and external financing needs. In order to estimate the amount of

fiscal resources needed to cover the economic costs, we develop an epidemiological Susceptible-

Infected-Recovered (SIR)- multi-sector-macro model for a small open economy that is linked to an

international production network.1 Our work differs starkly from the rapidly growing COVID-19

literature that focuses on closed economies, mostly advanced countries.2

    Our main result is that, small open economies/emerging markets have much bigger fiscal needs

to offset the costs of COVID-19 crisis. Larger fiscal needs arise from the fact that, these countries

face more sizable shocks due to their reliance on external demand, trade and capital flows. We

document a direct relationship between the fiscal needs and trade and capital flows at the sectoral

level. Furthermore, we show that the fiscal needs are lower under full lockdown compared to a

partial lockdown. This is because demand normalizes sooner under a full lockdown as the infection

rates go down faster.

    We develop an epidemiological-econ model to calculate the economic costs of the pandemic so

that we can estimate the fiscal needs. We take into account the effects of the COVID-19 shock through

infection rates on domestic demand as well as foreign demand. Our approach has the advantage

of being simple and easily mapped to real time data. We calibrate our model to Turkey by using
    1 See
       Cakmakli et al. (2020) for the earlier working paper version of our model, April (2020).
    2 See
       Arellano et al. (2020) who also focuses on emerging markets by analysing sovereign debt and default risk under
COVID shock with a SIR and sovereign debt model.



                                                         2
Turkey’s international linkages to 65 other countries via capital flows and through 36 sectors within

the international production network.

    The key properties of our model are as follows. The ability to work from home determines the

size of the supply shock in non-essential sectors (as also done in the closed economy literature).

For the essential sectors, the nature of the physical proximity of the job dictates the supply shock.

Infection rates are higher for people with those jobs that necessitate closer proximity. Hence, sectors

with a higher fraction of such jobs are hit harder by the supply shock. On the demand side, our

model contains a domestic component and a foreign component for sectoral demand shocks. Both

types of demand decline as the number of infections increase and the lowest point is calibrated using

real time credit card purchases. We have a short run model where the output is demand determined

with fixed prices. We use international input-output (I-O) linkages to transform changes in final

foreign demand into changes in demand for domestic intermediate sectors. We show that, almost

30 percent of the economic costs we estimate stem from lower external demand.

    Once we estimate the economic cost for each sector from the model, we take these as the mini-

mum level of fiscal need for a given sector and document the link between domestic fiscal needs and

external finance. We empirically associate each sector’s loss to its I-O linkages with the other domes-

tic and international sectors. We also connect the sectoral losses to country-sector capital flows. The

I-O link to other sectors is measured as a weighted average of the links to 65 countries that Turkey

trades with. External finance needs are captured by using data on country-pair capital flows.3 Sec-

tors with stronger external links have larger fiscal needs. This is because, as we document, sectors

with stronger I-O links suffer from larger COVID-19 related losses and sectors who finance these

stronger production links through capital flows suffer even more.

    Contrary to the popular belief that no lockdown policies would minimize economic costs, we

show that such policies are actually costlier than an effective full lockdown given the importance

of the demand shocks. Our findings are consistent with recent findings of Goolsbee and Syverson

(2020) who shows that, using real time data, legal shutdown orders account for only a modest share

of the decline of economic activity. Our model based estimate for the total cost of containing the
   3 We use country-pair specific capital flows to gauge the external finance needs of that sector by connecting sector to
the country via I-O links. See also Kalemli-Özcan et al. (2014).




                                                            3
pandemic immediately, with a Chinese style full lockdown is about 5.8 percent of the GDP (at an

annualized rate). This implies that output declines by 17.5 percent during the quarter in which the

lockdown is imposed, compared to the previous quarter. After the lockdown ends, if the economy

returns to normal during the rest of the year, as demand normalizes, then the shock is smoothed

out, leading to a decline of 5.8 percent of annual GDP. Under no lockdown, this cost increases from

5.8 to 11 percent of GDP annually. The reasoning is that, under no lockdown (or partial lockdown),

even though businesses remain open, there are still interruptions in supply, and demand declines

as people get infected. This is because as infections increase, people cut spending due to fear factor

and demand declines for sectors that possibility of infection is higher (travel, restaurants) and this

decline feeds into other sectors via I-O links. Full lockdown, on the other hand, is optimal since it

is able to contain the pandemic more quickly, within approximately one month. Hence it yields the

minimum economic cost which saves the maximum number of lives.

    Several recent closed economy papers employing epidemiological models similar to us, includ-

ing Acemoglu et al. (2020), Alvarez et al. (2020), Farboodi et al. (2020), and Eichenbaum et al. (2020)

reach comparable conclusions where imposing full lockdowns or stricter measures at the early stages

of the pandemic lower economic costs due to normalizing aggregate demand. We argue that, for an

open economy, the effects are even bigger as lower external demand amplifies the domestic demand

shock via sectoral I-O linkages. Most of the literature on global supply chains have similar amplifi-

cation via I-O linkages but they focus on the role of sectoral supply shocks, not demand (See Barrot

et al. (2020), Bonadio et al. (2020), and Baqaee et al. (2020)).4 We show that once the number of infec-

tions reach a certain threshold, demand stalls and remains rather sluggish so long as the infection

numbers do not exhibit a substantial decline. In fact, even if the domestic infection numbers are re-

duced, economic recovery will not be complete until the pandemic is contained abroad and foreign

demand improves consequently. Thus, the course of the pandemic abroad affects domestic sectors

differentially via international I-O linkages. In this framework, even if the supply channels remains

unrestricted, demand drags the equilibrium output down and elevates the size of economic costs so
   4 In a model with no infection dynamics (SIR), Baqaee and Farhi (2020a) exploits nonlinear production networks in a
general equilibrium framework and show that non-linearities amplify the impact of COVID-19 between 20 to 100 percent.
See also Baqaee and Farhi (2020b). The work by Guerrieri et al. (2020) do not include an infection dynamics model either
but underlines the importance of a multi-sector economy, where supply shocks can turn into larger aggregate demand
shocks as in our model.




                                                           4
long as the health issues are not resolved.5

    The heterogeneity in infection rates by the job type and age are critical in our framework. In

no lockdown scenario, most of the population is fully exposed to the outbreak. Nevertheless, the

working population is under higher risk compared to the non-working population. In partial lock-

down scenario, teleworkable occupations start working from home and hence the base infection rate

declines for this group. It is important to note that the individuals in the highest risk group, ages

65 and above, as well as the younger people are assumed to have lower infection rates because they

do not work or because they switch to distanced learning. This is consistent with the optimal set-

ting identified by Acemoglu et al. (2020). The infection rate is still high for the on-site workers. In

full lockdown, we assume that only the essential sectors require their non-teleworkable employees

on-site. This is why the infection rate declines substantially for the remainder of the population that

stays home under full lockdown and therefore normalizing the demand.

    Our benchmark estimates of economic costs (or fiscal needs) are estimated in the absence of

any policy action. Costs might decline when fiscal and monetary policy responses are taken into

consideration. We prefer to provide our baseline estimates based on no policy action so that the

minimum magnitude of the fiscal policy packages can be clearly identified. This approach makes

our findings particularly relevant under the current threat of a second wave after reopening. In

the case of a second wave countries may need to go back to lockdowns and undertake new policy

action. The risks and the costs of a second wave are explicitly captured in our model. If the economy

opens up prematurely, the increase in the number of infections would stall demand again, even if

the businesses remain open. The consequent economic costs may lead to lasting economic damage

by extending the duration of the recession. Indeed, we show that the duration of a lockdown that is

needed to contain the virus increases to more than one year, if the lockdown ends prematurely.6

    Our findings are consistent with the early experiences of small open economies such as New

Zealand, Denmark and Greece. These countries implemented full lockdown before the number of
    5 Closed economy version of this result is emphsized by Chetty et al. (2020), who uses real time data to show that tra-

ditional macroeconomic tools, such as stimulating aggregate demand or providing liquidity to businesses, cannot restore
employment when consumer spending is constrained by health concerns.
    6 See https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpub/article/PIIS2468-2667(20)30073-6/fulltext, that argues that re-

opening too soon before the R number is below one might trigger another peak. The case of Singapore is an exam-
ple with recurring lockdowns: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/21/singapore-coronavirus-outbreak-
surges-with-3000-new-cases-in-three-days



                                                            5
patients reached critical levels and contained the virus rather rapidly. Consequently, they gradually

began to lift lockdown restrictions before the end of April. Another country is South Korea, who

did not implement a full lockdown but did extensive testing and contact tracing.7 If we look at in-

dustrial production numbers for April, we observe that the decline in industrial production in these

countries is similar to our baseline estimates. For example, in Greece, industrial production shrunk

12.3 percent in April compared to previous month, respectively, which is similar to our 17 percent

loss during the lockdown quarter. Greece and South Korea annualized GDP growth rates turn out

to be -6.2 and -5.3 percent, respectively, which is close to our -5.8 percent annualized estimate. Out

of emerging markets, only Mexico’s second quarter GDP is available, and that shrunk -17.4 percent,

which is comparable to our annual estimates of no lockdown countries as Mexico did not do any

lockdown. Turkish experience can be considered as an ”enhanced partial lockdown” which is a

mixture of full lockdown and partial lockdown periods and hence provide rich information for our

calibration of different scenarios. Thus, the real annual costs for Turkey might fall within our range

of 5.8 and 11 percent of GDP at the end of 2020. So far, industrial production in Turkey fell 7 percent,

and 32 percent in March and April 2020 respectively. In May, IP growth picked up but it remains

well below its level prior to the pandemic.8

    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we provide an overview of the

literature on COVID-19 pandemic, explaining our contribution. In Section 3, we briefly go over the

environment in which Turkey entered the COVID-19 crisis, the policies adopted by Turkey to deal

with the pandemic so far, and compare to other countries. Section 4 describes the model that allows

us to estimate the sectoral and aggregate COVID costs and fiscal needs. Our quantitative findings

are summarized in Section 5, where we show that costs are larger for an open economy due to I-O

linkages and we empirically link the costs and fiscal needs to capital flows. Section 6 considers the

policy alternatives to finance the economic costs of the pandemic, focusing on both domestic and

external finance. Section 7 describes the historical experiences. Section 8 concludes.
   7 Recent   work suggests that testing and tracing can mimic the benefits of a full lockdown. See Zilibotti et al. (2020).
   8 It is hard to compare model based estimates to real data from emerging markets, without the release of second quarter

GDPs as most EMs observed the pandemic later than advanced economies and started their lockdowns almost at the end
of the first quarter. Turkish second quarter growth number is not due until August 31, 2020.




                                                               6
2   COVID-19 Literature and Our Contribution

There is a rapidly growing literature that aims to capture the economic impact of COVID-19 crisis.

Many papers utilize SIR models or its extensions to incorporate the infection dynamics into their

analysis. Papers such as Stock (2020) and Alvarez et al. (2020) consider a standard SIR model and

focus on the trade off between unemployment that arises from lockdowns versus the number of

deaths due to the pandemic. They reach the conclusion that the optimal policy is a full lockdown

that covers the majority of the population where the restrictions are removed gradually afterwards.

    Acemoglu et al. (2020) considers a multi-risk SIR model by focusing on the structural differences

in the severity of infections for distinct age groups that affect lockdown policies and economic costs.

They show that targeted measures such as full lockdown for the elderly group could be more ef-

fective. Alon et al. (2020) also considers a closed economy model but approaches the problem from

the developing country perspective, considering market distortions and the presence of an informal

sector and hand to mouth consumers. They realize that such economies cannot fully lockdown and

argue that lockdowns on the elderly population might be better. Alfaro et al. (2020) focuses on the

effect of informality and firm size in the emerging markets and highlights the importance of taking

into account the informal sector while developing responses to COVID-19 pandemic.

    Combining supply and demand in a SIR framework Farboodi et al. (2020) internalizes the indi-

vidual choices for social distancing and study both laissez-faire and social optimum scenarios. They

find that even in the laissez-faire case individuals choose to sharply reduce their activity but the

socially optimal response imposes severe restrictions at the onset of the outbreak. Eichenbaum et al.

(2020) incorporate supply and demand in a SIR model as well, where the government is assumed

to alter the individuals’ activities through a consumption tax and again find that relatively severe

containment at the beginning of the pandemic is the most socially optimum response. Krueger et

al. (2020) extends the model by Eichenbaum et al. (2020) and introduces differential transmission

rates based on the consumption or employment choice. They aim to capture the interplay between

infection dynamics and the demand side or the supply side –but not both of them simultaneously.

    The above cited literature do not feature sectoral heterogeneity for demand and supply shocks

together. However, the recent empirical evidence shows the magnitude of the demand shock to


                                                  7
be very large and vary by sector, as we model. Specifically, using granular data, Chetty et al. (2020)

document a decline of 39% in consumer spending in the top-quartile of income distribution and 13%

in the bottom quartile in the United States during the first month of the pandemic. The decline is

heterogenous across sectors with more significant drops in industries requiring in-person contacts.

Geographically, the decline in spending is larger in those regions where the COVID-19 incidences

are higher. Overall, the authors emphasize that at the initial stages of the pandemic, the fear of

contacting the disease is the main source of the decline in spending. Similarly, using cell phone

data to track movements of individuals, Goolsbee and Syverson (2020) show that even though the

consumer traffic fell by 60%, only 7% could be explained by the shutdown restrictions. The authors

suggest that the changes in consumer behavior is most likely to be tied with the fear of infection. In

sum, these results highlight the importance of incorporating the sectoral demand changes into the

model.

    To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to incorporate both supply and demand

shocks at the sector level for an open economy operating within the international production net-

work, making full use of international I-O linkages.9 We estimate our COVID losses by considering

the effects of domestic and foreign sectoral shocks and their amplification through I-O linkages.

Linking the economic losses/fiscal needs to I-O trade links and capital flows empirically, provides

evidence on the relationship between fiscal needs and external financing needs of EMs.

    Figure 1 summarizes our theoretical framework. We ponder the figure for a given industry. After

we separate sectors into essential and non-essential sectors, we capture supply shocks by quantify-

ing how susceptible each industry is to the transmission of the virus among its employees. The

transmission dynamics of the virus would differ depending on whether the workers are on-site or

at a remote location like home. We use Dingel and Neiman (2020)’s list of teleworkable occupations

to capture the proportion of employment that can be fulfilled at remote locations in each industry.

Among the professions that need to be carried out on the work site, we assume that the viral trans-

mission depends on the physical proximity between the workers or between the workers and the

customers. An on-site worker could be exposed to infection either at work or outside work. Us-
    9 Theonly other paper that we are aware of considering both demand and supply shocks at the sectoral level is by del
Rio-Chanona et al. (2020) with an extension in Pichler et al. (2020). Their analysis is also for an open economy, focusing on
the UK. They incorporate domestic demand shocks for the UK based on hypothetical predictions of an influenza pandemic
from a CBO report in 2006.


                                                             8
   Figure 1: The effects of COVID-19 in a multi-sector open economy: A Schematic of the Model

                                                         Inter-industry
                                                                                   Output Implied
                            Demand Change                 International
                                                                                    by Demand
                                                            Linkages

         Infections
    Consumer Preferences


                                                                                                          Equilibirum
     COVID-19
                                                                                                            Output
                                                         Teleworkable

     SIR Model with                   Lower Infection Rate
 Industrial Heterogeneity            Same as General Public


                               Workers                                             Output Implied
                                                                                     by Supply

                                      Higher Infection Rate
                                       Physical Proximity

                                                              On-site

N OTES: We implement two main lockdown scenarios: partial and full. Under partial lockdown, all industries remain
open while the teleworkable portion of the employees work from home. The restrictive measures result in a low
infection rate for the teleworkables and the general public, but the infection rate remains high for the on-site workers.
Under full lockdown, only the essential industries remain open and the workers in the non-essential sectors stay at
home. With these extreme measures, the infection rates are lowered for almost everyone. The lockdowns affect the
supply channel directly via workers and the demand channel by mitigating the number of infected individuals, which in
turn change the consumption profiles.



ing the teleworkable share of an industry and the physical proximity measure as part of the SIR

model, we estimate the proportion of the work force in each industry that would be impaired dur-

ing the time of the pandemic. Of course, the viral transmission dynamics will be affected by the

implementation of different lockdown policies. Thus, we calculate our sectoral supply shock under

different scenarios. Under partial lockdown scenario, we assume that all businesses are open, but

the teleworkable share of the employees remain home. The viral transmission is lower among the

teleworkable employees and the general public, but the transmission rate is still high among the on-

site workers. Under full lockdown scenario, we assume that all businesses except the essential ones

are closed and all employees working in the closed sectors remain home. The viral transmission

rates drop to a lower level for all the workers in the non-essential sectors.

    The pandemic affects the demand side as well. The economics profession unanimously agrees

that the prerequisite for economic recovery is the elimination of the virus so that demand normal-



                                                              9
izes.10 We have a disproportionate role of demand in our model as we focus on both domestic and

external demand shocks, where shocks are propagated through domestic and international input-

output linkages. In the upper half of Figure 1, we illustrate the changes in demand due to the

pandemic that ultimately affect the equilibrium output. We consider two scenarios for demand: one

for the normal times and one during the brunt of the pandemic. To proxy for demand shocks during

the peak of the pandemic, we use data on credit card purchases provided by the Central Bank of the

Republic of Turkey (CBRT).11 For the few sectors where the credit card data is missing, we use other

proxies for real-time demand reduction. For pre-COVID demand, we use consumption spending

from Turkish national accounts. During the course of the pandemic, we expect demand to adjust

from its pre-COVID levels to the lowest possible level under COVID shock. We model this adjust-

ment with a reduced form function where demand deviates from its normal patterns as a function

of the number of infected people. Hence, the demand profile changes depending on the infection

levels in the population, which, in turn, is mitigated by the lockdown decisions. The sooner the

infection numbers decline, the sooner demand normalizes.

    Our open economy framework makes the role of global coordination clear. If the lockdown can

be implemented with global synchronization, the pandemic will be controlled faster. As the number

of infections decline globally, demand returns to pre-pandemic levels faster as both domestic and

foreign demand normalize sooner. Thus, the economic costs of the pandemic can be kept at a mini-

mum level. The last stage in Figure 1 combines demand and supply sides together to reach market

equilibrium, where the minimum of both sides determines the equilibrium level of production for a

given industry.
   10 See IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2020. Also contributions in Baldwin and di Mauro (2020). Former

Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke noted in late March that “Nothing will work if health issues aren’t resolved,”
sending a clear message to governments. See the transcript of Bernanke’s interview on March 25 is available at
this link: https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/25/cnbc-transcript-former-fed-chairman-ben-bernanke-speaks-with-cnbcs-
andrew-ross-sorkin-on-squawk-box-today.html
   11 Similarly, Andersen et al. (2020a) use transaction-level customer data from the largest bank in Denmark to estimate

consumer responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and the partial shutdown of the economy, see also Carvalho et al. (2020)
who uses similar data from BBVA for Spain.




                                                           10
3     The Initial Conditions, Policies, Fiscal and External Financing Needs

3.1     Background

This section summarizes the economic environment in Turkey before the pandemic to provide a

background on initial conditions. Initial conditions when the countries enter the COVID crisis mat-

ter because existing vulnerabilities such as high debt, low FX reserves, weak balance sheets, and

limited policy credibility will exacerbate the impact of the crisis.

      Since 2017, the inflation rate had been on the rise while Turkish Lira (TL) depreciated. Triggered

by the political tension between Turkey and US, August 2018 marked the beginning of an exchange

rate crisis, where rapidly depreciating TL brought many companies with FX debt to the edge of

bankruptcy. The significant decline in economic growth led to an improvement in the current ac-

count deficit because Turkey’s production heavily relies on imports of intermediary goods. The

growth rate in the first quarter of 2020 reached 4.5 percent and the unemployment rate declined to

12.7 percent.

      Capital outflows by non-residents during COVID-19 led to a wave of depreciation in TL, which

required FX interventions and brought FX reserves to low levels. As of July 17, 2020, net reserves

of Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT) stood at $31 billion, of which over $55 billion

was obtained through swap agreements as of May 2020, indicating significantly negative levels of

net reserves for CBRT. IMF-defined budget deficit that excludes one-time transfers stands close to 5

percent of GDP while the current account deficit is around 2.5 percent of GDP, as an average over

the last 5 years.




                                                    11
                                            Figure 2: External Debt and Currency Decomposition

                             (a) Decomposition in terms of Ownership                                           (b) Currency Decomposition
   40




                                                                                              60



                                                                                                              60
                                                                                                                     59
   35




                                                                                                              40
   30




                                                                                              50
                                                                                                                                35.7




                                                                                                   External
   25




                                                                                                              20
   20




                                                                                              40
   15




                                                                                                                                         5.3




                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                          USD          Other
   10




                                                                                              30
                                                                                                                          TL
        96
              97
                   98
                        99
                             00
                                  01
                                       02
                                            03
                                                 04
                                                      05
                                                           06
                                                                07
                                                                     08
                                                                          09
                                                                                  10
                                                                                  11
                                                                                  12
                                                                                  13
                                                                                  14
                                                                                  15
                                                                                  16
                                                                                  17
                                                                                  18
                                                                                  19
                                                                               20
        19
             19
                  19
                       19
                            20
                                 20
                                      20
                                           20
                                                20
                                                     20
                                                          20
                                                               20
                                                                    20
                                                                         20
                                                                              20


                                                                               20
                                                                               20
                                                                               20
                                                                               20
                                                                               20
                                                                               20
                                                                               20
                                                                               20
                                      Public                         Private       External


N OTES: (a) This panel plots external debt (right x-axis) alongside with its public-private composition (left x-axis) for
Turkey. Debt values are expressed as percentage of GDP. (b) This panel shows the currency composition of total external
debt as of December 2019. Source: Turkey Data Monitor




    Turkey relies heavily on capital flows to finance its external debt, which stood at 60 percent of

GDP at the end of 2019. Figure 2a shows the changes in the composition of external debt over time.

In 2001, total external debt was 57 percent of GDP. Of this, public sector debt was 24 percent, while

the private sector debt was 22 percent.12 Macroprudential measures that were implemented in the

aftermath of the 2001 crisis led to a substantial reduction in total external debt in the years immedi-

ately after the crisis. Nevertheless, the abundant liquidity provided by the major advanced country

central banks in the post-2008 period as part of the widescale QE programs, changed the borrowing

patterns in Turkey. The external debt gradually increased with the composition tilting towards pri-

vate sector borrowing. By the time we reached 2019, total external debt was once again comparable

to 2001 levels with 56 percent of the GDP. Different from 2001, however, this time the lion’s share

was held by the private sector debt which was 36 percent of the GDP while the public debt was 21

percent of GDP. Another interesting pattern that is observed in Figure 2a is the increasing trend in
   12 The    sub-components do not add up because the remainder of the external debt is held by CBRT




                                                                                   12
public borrowing in the period after 2012. This is particularly critical in the period after 2018, which

corresponds to a gradual decline in private sector borrowing that is replaced by an increase in pub-

lic sector borrowing so that total external debt maintains its upwards trend. As of December 2019,

almost 60 percent of total external debt is denominated in USD (see Figure 2b). The composition of

debt has immediate implications for the policy prescriptions needed to address the private sector

debt problem during COVID-19 crisis and bring forward the importance of well designed policies

to address loan restructuring, non-performing loans, and non-viable firms.

    In terms of maturity structure, out of a total external debt of $437 billion, $124 billion was short-

term (17 percent of GDP), and $93 billion of this was held by the private sector. BIS data reflects that

$96 billion of the total external debt belongs to the banking system. Meanwhile, the external debt

that needs to be rolled over in 2020 is $169 billion, which is approximately 23 percent of GDP. The

banking sector’s share in short term debt is $81 billion.13 If the rollover ratios stay at the current

levels, then Turkey needs around $30 billion, however, if they go down to the level observed during

Great Financial Crisis (GFC), then Turkey might need around $90 billion in 2020, a number that is

much larger than any existing swap line and international arrangement available for EMs.14

    In terms of market sentiment and global investors’ risk perceptions, EMs seem to be in the middle

of a strong risk-off shock, as risk premium, measured by five-year CDS premium increased sharply

(See Figure 3). Given the surge in the sovereign risk premium after the COVID-19 shock, rolling

over existing external debt would be much costlier, which could raise the fiscal deficit, leading to a

prolonged period of higher indebtedness. From the beginning of the year until the week of April

24, 2020, $2.7 billion of equity and $5.5 billion of government bonds held by foreign investors were

sold-off to domestic investors in the secondary market.15 These numbers may not be as big in the

context of total external debt but notice that these are local currency government bonds that were
   13 We   use the annual GDP of 2019 to express the January 2020 values as a percentage of GDP in this section.
   14 In a recent report, Bürümçekçi (2020) notes that the current rollover ratio for the banking system is around 73 percent,

which receded to 45 percent during 2007-2009 crisis, and 35 percent during 2001 crisis. For the public sector, rollover risk
looks minimal for 2020. Turkish government already issued $4 billion of Eurobonds so far, and another $2 billion is due
in June 2020. Indeed, when we look at the last 20 years, we note that there were only three instances where debt coming
due was not covered with new issuance. Yet none of these events resulted in a missed payment or recontracting of debt.
The closest case of partial default was during 2001-2002 crisis that was avoided due to IMF funding. See Figure A.2 in
Appendix based on Stoppok and Trebesch (2020).
    15 As for corporate bonds, the sell off started in the last week of February but the total volume of these transactions are

rather negligible with a total of $86.5 million outflow from January 3 to April 24, 2020. This is due to the low share of
corporate bonds relative to bank loans and government bonds in external debt. See di Giovanni et al. (2019).



                                                               13
held by foreign investors. As local currency bonds become riskier with the ongoing depreciation of

TL, foreigners load-off these bonds first.

                                                           Figure 3: The Risk Premium as Measured by CDS Spread

                                            (a) Raw CDS Values                                                                                                                                                                                      (b) Normalized CDS Values
         700




                                                                                                                                              CDS (Normalized to 100 on 1/1/2020)
                                                                                                                                                                                    100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Turkey CDS (05/31/2020): 557.050
         600




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Brazil CDS (05/31/2020): 283.940
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   South Korea CDS (05/31/2020): 28.713
         500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   India CDS (05/31/2020): 136.425
         400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Argentina CDS (05/31/2020): 6091.365
   CDS
         300
         200
         100
         0




                                                                                                                                                                                    0
                     20




                                 0



                                           20




                                                       0



                                                                  20




                                                                              0



                                                                                        20




                                                                                                    0




                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       19


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                02




                                                      02




                                                                             02




                                                                                                   02




                                                                                                              02




                                                                                                                         02




                                                                                                                                    02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 01
                /20




                                      /20




                                                             /20




                                                                                   /20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                             /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  /20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /20


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               /20
                           2/2




                                                 9/2




                                                                        8/2




                                                                                              5/2




                                                                                                         9/2




                                                                                                                    3/2




                                                                                                                               7/2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    /1/2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            /1/2
               1/8




                                     2/5




                                                            3/4




                                                                                  4/1




                                                                                                                                                                                                            1/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         9/1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  /1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5/1


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              6/1
                          1/2




                                                2/1




                                                                       3/1




                                                                                             4/1




                                                                                                        4/2




                                                                                                                   5/1




                                                                                                                              5/2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                           Turkey                                   Brazil                                                                                                                                                   Turkey                                            Brazil                                                    South Korea
                                                           South Korea                              India                                                                                                                                                    India                                             Argentina




N OTES: N OTES: This figure plots risk premium for Turkey, Brazil, South Korea, India and Argentina which are measured
by the 5-year CDS rate (World Government bonds) for these countries. Panel (a) shows the raw values and Panel (b)
shows the normalized values. Source: Bloomberg.




    In addition to bonds and equities held by non-residents, more than 1/3 of total external funding

is obtained through bank loans in Turkey, which is almost all in FX. These loans finance the foreign

currency debt in the non-tradeable sector. Half of the entire corporate sector debt is in FX and most

of it is borrowed from domestic banks.16 To dig deeper into the short-term risks, and considering the

market dynamics in the aftermath of the 2007-2009 global financial crisis for EMs, we also need to

look at cross-border loans. As shown in Figure 4, Turkish banks had been net payers in the external

long-term loans for a while.
   16 See      di Giovanni et al. (2019).




                                                                                                                                         14
                              Figure 4: Rollovers of External Loans by Turkish Banks

                      1,500

                      1,000

                       500

                         0

                      -500

                     -1,000

                     -1,500

                     -2,000

                     -2,500

                     -3,000

                     -3,500

                     -4,000
                               3

                                     4

                                           5

                                                  6

                                                         7

                                                                8

                                                                       9

                                                                              0

                                                                                     1

                                                                                            2

                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                          2

                                                                                                                 3

                                                                                                                        4

                                                                                                                               5

                                                                                                                                      6

                                                                                                                                             7

                                                                                                                                                    8

                                                                                                                                                           9

                                                                                                                                                                  0

                                                                                                                                                                         1

                                                                                                                                                                                2

                                                                                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                                                                                              2

                                                                                                                                                                                                     3

                                                                                                                                                                                                            4

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                              8-0

                                    8-0

                                          8-0

                                                8-0

                                                       8-0

                                                              8-0

                                                                     8-0

                                                                            8-1

                                                                                   8-1

                                                                                          8-1

                                                                                                 9-0

                                                                                                        9-0

                                                                                                               9-0

                                                                                                                      9-0

                                                                                                                             9-0

                                                                                                                                    9-0

                                                                                                                                           9-0

                                                                                                                                                  9-0

                                                                                                                                                         9-0

                                                                                                                                                                9-1

                                                                                                                                                                       9-1

                                                                                                                                                                              9-1

                                                                                                                                                                                     0-0

                                                                                                                                                                                            0-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                   0-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                          0-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0-0
                             1

                                    1

                                           1

                                                  1

                                                         1

                                                                1

                                                                       1

                                                                              1

                                                                                     1

                                                                                            1

                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                          1

                                                                                                                 1

                                                                                                                        1

                                                                                                                               1

                                                                                                                                      1

                                                                                                                                             1

                                                                                                                                                    1

                                                                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                                                                                         1

                                                                                                                                                                                1

                                                                                                                                                                                       2

                                                                                                                                                                                              2

                                                                                                                                                                                                     2

                                                                                                                                                                                                            2

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                          20

                                 20

                                        20

                                               20

                                                      20

                                                             20

                                                                    20

                                                                           20

                                                                                  20

                                                                                         20

                                                                                                20

                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                            Short-term                                                    Long-term



N OTES: This figure plots rollovers of external loans belonging to Turkish Banks. Loan rollovers refer to monthly-net
values expressed in terms of millions of USD. Source: Turkey Data Monitor.




    In January 2020, Turkish banks paid to foreign financial institutions a net of $0.8 billion over

what they borrowed in short-term loans and $0.7 billion in long-term loans. While short term loan

rollovers have improved in the subsequent months, the situation did not improve for long term

rollovers. In May 2020, Turkish banks paid $0.6 billion in long-term loans This suggests that they

need to borrow large amounts each month to prevent any interruptions in their domestic lending at

home.

    Overall, these numbers suggest that, there is quite a bit of foreign investment still in the coun-

try given the extent of external debt. Thus, although there are still many horses in the barn, it is

important not to scare the horses given the extent of FX debt in the corporate sector, which can

lead to massive bankruptcies with a spiraling depreciation of TL. In fact, while most sectors are

adversely affected from COVID-19, those sectors with higher levels of FX exposure are hit harder

because of the increase in their debt burden during the COVID-19 shock. In Figure 5, we plot the

sectoral FX debt against the economic loss from the pandemic under the scenario in which no ac-


                                                                                                              15
    Figure 5: Sectoral Relation between FX Exposure and Economic Cost of the COVID-19 Shock


                                                            corr: 0.558 & t-stat: 2.231




                                      40
                                                                                                 Accommodation and food services




                                      30
                               Output loss (%)


                                                                                                     Real estate activities
                                     20




                                                                                  Construction
                                                                                     Manufacturing
                                                                                                  Transportation and storage
                                      10




                                                                                              Mining
                                                                             Other businessElectricity,
                                                                                            sector     and quarrying
                                                                                                    services
                                                                                                        gas, water supply, sewerage, waste and remediation services
                                                      Education
                                                                                     Information and communication
                                                           Wholesale
                                                       Agriculture,    and retail
                                                                    forestry       trade; repair of motor vehicles
                                                                             andHuman
                                                                                  fishinghealth and social work
                                      0




                                                 20          40          60          80                   100
                                                                   FX debt ratio (%)



N OTES: This figure plots 2016 values for sectoral FX exposure (measured as the ratio of foreign currency debt in total
debt) against the economic cost of the COVID-19 shock that we estimate under no lockdown scenario in which no policy
action is taken against the pandemic. We measure the sector-level economic cost as the percentage change in output for a
given sector during pandemic relative to its pre-pandemic level. The information on currency composition of debt is
obtained from the “Company Accounts” data that has been compiled by the Central Bank of Turkey.




tion is taken against the pandemic. While we elaborate on how we calculate the economic costs in

the next section, we present the loss variable somewhat prematurely in this section to illustrate that

the exchange rate depreciation works as an amplification mechanism during the pandemic. In fact,

those sectors that rely more heavily on FX funding experience sharper declines in their output dur-

ing the COVID crisis. As we show below, this relation is not about a sector being tradeable or not

but rather how strong is the sector’s connection to international I-O links and how high the sector’s

external financing needs which can be financed both domestically and externally, mostly in foreign

currency.




                                                                        16
3.2    Policy Response to COVID-19

In terms of monetary and financial policies, CBRT cut rates by 100 basis points immediately dur-

ing their emergency meeting on March 18, 2020 and again on April 22. The announcement that

came on March 31 eased collateral requirements to borrow from the CBRT and opened the door

for unlimited bond purchases where it was stated that “. . . limits might be revised depending on

market conditions.”17 CBRT and BRSA (Banking Regulation and Supervision Agency) introduced

several financial repression measures in the following days that increase the risk exposure of the

banking system, encouraging banks to lend at low rates or buy government bonds.18 They have

also introduced certain capital flow management measures that reduced domestic banks’ reserve

requirements for foreign currency deposits and put limits on the daily amounts of domestic banks’

swap transactions.19 Notice that although it is important to react early to the pandemic, for an EM,

market perception of such measures is just as important. This is because potential risks and hence

the external borrowing costs are priced by global investors. Thus, effective and transparent commu-

nication of policy actions is as critical as the actions themselves.

      In terms of fiscal policy, the stimulus package announced by government on March 18 is con-

sistent with the general framework adopted by other countries. There is postponement of tax obli-

gations, social security premiums and credit payments of the companies in the services sector. The

limits of the Credit Guarantee Fund have been increased to make bank loans more accessible. Tem-

porary income support is provided to those workers whose companies have ceased production due

to the pandemic. Furthermore, a cash assistance program for needy families has been launched.

While the original package announced on March 18 was announced to be 2 percent of GDP, the

scope of the package has been expanded in line with the evolving conditions. The Minister of Fi-

nance and Treasury announced on May 29 that the pandemic related government expenditure has

already reached 260 billion TL. Even with the revised numbers, however, the package still remains
   17 https://www.tcmb.gov.tr/wps/wcm/connect/EN/TCMB+EN/Main+Menu/Announcements/Press+Releases/

2020/ANO2020-22
   18 https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-04-18/turkey-announces-new-regulation-to-boost-lending-

bond-purchase and https://www.reuters.com/article/health-coronavirus-turkey-banks/turkeys-banking-watchdog-
sets-deposit-ratio-to-boost-loans-idUSL8N2C607I
   19 https://www.reuters.com/article/health-coronavirus-turkey-banks/turkish-regulator-slashes-limits-on-banks-fx-

transactions-idUSL5N2C00OI
     https://www.bloombergquint.com/global-economics/turkish-lira-falls-as-regulator-limits-bank-forex-swap-deals




                                                        17
to around 5 percent of GDP. To put this number into perspective, Figure 6 shows a comparison of

the fiscal measures undertaken by the G20 countries, where the average size of the fiscal stimulus is

about 10 percent with Germany leading the pack with 32 percent. It is clear that the Turkish package

is small, lagging behind 16 of the G20 countries. This reflects the limited fiscal space of EMs relative

to advanced economies.
                           Figure 6: Fiscal Measures announced by the G20 countries
                     30
                      20
                  % GDP
                     10
                     0

                                                           y
                                                  Ja y
                                    St te Fr an

                                            of gd e
                                               Am om

                                                  Sp a
                                           lic st n
                                                  Ko a




                                                        ey

                                       si In ent a
                                            Fe one a
                                                   ra a
                                                C rea

                                                          a

                                                    ra l
                                                 Tu bia




                                                          n
                                          So M dia
                                                h co
                                                          a
                                                i A zi
                                                      an

                                                         l

                                         es in c




                                                        n
                                                       ic
                                         ub Au ai
                                               of rali


                                                      ad




                                         an d in
                                               de si
                                                      tio



                                                      ric
                                                     Ita




                                             ud Bra
                                       at d K an




                                                     rk




                                              ut exi
                                                      p




                                              Ar hi
                                                    er




                                                    In
                           m




                                                   Af
                                                  an




                                                  C
                      er




                                                g
                    G




                                          Sa
                                  d ni




                                     ep
                                te U




                                    us
                                   R




                                  R
                             ni
                           U




N OTES: This figure plots the COVID-19 relief packages adopted by the countries as a percentage of their GDPs. The fiscal
policy measures that are shown in this figure are obtained from the IMF Policy Tracker
(https://www.imf.org/en/Topics/imf-and-covid19/Policy-Responses-to-COVID-19) as of April 29, 2020 except for
South Africa and the United Kingdom, for which the values of the stimulus packages are not explicitly stated. For these
countries, we gathered the necessary information from alternative resources. A detailed comparison of the fiscal
measures as well as the data sources are presented in Table A.1 of the Appendix.




    In terms of the direct transfer payments, the stimulus package contains several channels of social

assistance such as transfer payments for the needy families, enhanced employment protection by

loosening short-term work allowance rules, a temporary ban on layoffs with a state subsidy for

affected workers and unemployment insurance benefits. These transfer payments add up to 12

billion TL, which is only about 4.6 percent of the total stimulus package. Given the asymmetric

nature of the crisis that hit the lower income groups much harder, transfer payments are critical to



                                                           18
provide the much needed income relief and revive demand. Should the transfer payments cover

only those who lost their income or should they be in the form of “helicopter money” in the Turkish

context, which has a sizeable informal economy? The answer depends on the extent of funding

that is available to support the economy. A generous program that does not trigger longer term

macroeconomic imbalances can minimize the economic damage and prevent long term risks. A less

comprehensive program, on the other hand, would delay the speed of recovery. In the next section,

we provide a model that estimates these costs and offers important input for the policy makers

regarding the necessary size of the stimulus package.



4     Estimating the Economic Costs Under Different Lockdown Scenarios

In this section, we develop a model that illustrates how COVID-19 affects the economy. We illustrate

that despite the increasing costs due to business closures, a full lockdown contains the virus in the

fastest way. As we compare the recovery paths with and without the lockdown, we observe that

a full lockdown lasts for approximately 40 days while partial lockdown cannot contain the virus

within a year. Because the duration of the lockdown increases substantially, the economic costs of a

partial lockdown are significantly higher than full lockdown. The mortality numbers present a stark

contrast across alternative scenarios as well. Full lockdown, which has the lowest economic costs

also stands out as the best option that minimizes the number of deaths. Only 0.002 percent of the

population dies in a well implemented full lockdown whereas the numbers range between 0.32 to

0.96 percent in the case of partial lockdown. In the model we do not quantify the economic costs

of lost lives (see e.g., Greenstone and Nigam (2020)) under alternative lockdown scenarios. Had we

incorporated the costs of deaths, the superiority of full lockdown would be even more striking.



4.1   The SIR Model for Pandemic

We start with introducing the model of the pandemic, which is the main workhorse in many epi-

demiological studies, see for example Allen (2017) among others. Let’s take a population of size N.

At any given time, we can split the population into three classes of people: Susceptible (St ), Infected

(It ) and Recovered (Rt ) as of time t. The susceptible group does not yet have immunity to disease,


                                                  19
and the individuals in this group have the possibility of getting infected. The recovered group, on

the other hand, consists of individuals who are immune to the disease.20 The Susceptible-Infected-

Recovered (SIR) model builds on the simple principle that a fraction of the infected individuals in
                    It−1
the population,      N ,   can transmit the disease to susceptible ones St−1 with an (structural) infection

rate of β. Therefore, the number of newly infected individuals in the current period is βSt−1 ItN−1 . The

newly infected individuals should be deducted from the susceptible individuals in the current pe-

riod. Meanwhile, in each period, a fraction γ of the infected people recovers from the disease, which

in turn reduces the number of actively infected individuals.21 To track any changes in the number

of individuals in the above-mentioned three groups, the following set of equations is used:

                                                                 It−1
                                            ∆St = − βSt−1                                                             (1)
                                                                  N
                                            ∆Rt = γIt−1                                                               (2)
                                                                It−1
                                            ∆It = βSt−1              − γIt−1                                          (3)
                                                                 N

The law of motion for the number of infected individuals shows the trajectory of the pandemic at

the aggregate level. Note that, ∆St + ∆Rt + ∆It = 0 holds at any given time, assuming that the size

of the population remains constant.

    We modify the conventional SIR model to allow for sectoral heterogeneity in terms of the size and

working conditions that can lead to distinct infection trajectories in each sector. The transmission of

the virus requires close physical proximity. Hence, employees working in the industries with higher

physical proximity are infected with a higher probability.22

    We assume that the economy is composed of K sectors. We denote the industries by subscript

i = 1, . . . , K. Each industry has Li workers and there is also the non-working population which we

denote by NNW . Each industry has two types of workers: (i) employees who can perform their jobs

remotely (i.e., teleworkable) and (ii) employees who need to be on-site to fulfill their jobs. In each

industry, we denote the number of employees in the first group with TWi and the second group with
   20 Immunity  can be developed either because the individual goes through the infection or because she gets vaccinated.
   21 See also Atkeson (2020), Bendavid and Bhattacharya (2020), Dewatripont et al. (2020), Fauci et al. (2020), Li et al.
(2020), Linton et al. (2020), and Vogel (2020) on different mortality estimates.
   22 A report by DISK labor union in Turkey claims a three-fold increase in infection rates among workers: http://

disk.org.tr/2020/04/rate-of-covid-19-cases-among-workers-at-least-3-times-higher-than-average/



                                                           20
Ni . Hence:

                                                      Li = TWi + Ni .                                                        (4)

For the disease propagation, we lump the non-working population and the employees in the tele-

workable jobs together, and call them the at-home group. We denote the at-home group with index

i = 0. The total number of individuals in this group is:

                                                                      K
                                                  N0 = NNW + ∑ TWi .                                                         (5)
                                                                    i =1


Suppose that the infection rate in the at-home group is β 0 . In order to account for heterogeneous

physical proximities across industries, we compute the rate of infection for each industry i, denoted

by β i , as:

                                          β i = β 0 Proxi       for       i = 1, . . . , K                                   (6)

where Proxi is the proximity index for industry i.23 It is plausible to think that the decline in demand

during COVID-19 in a particular industry would lead to a decline in proximity (see Eichenbaum et

al. (2020)). Nevertheless, we do not incorporate this in our model and take the proximity rates as

exogenous.

    Here, Si,t , Ii,t and Ri,t denote the number of susceptible, infected and recovered individuals,

respectively, with Ni = Si,t + Ii,t + Ri,t denoting the total number of on-site individuals in industry i

and the at-home group (i = 0). Susceptible individuals in the at-home group can get infected from

the infected individuals in the entire society:

                                                                            It−1
                                                  ∆S0,t = − β 0 S0,t−1                                                       (7)
                                                                             N

where It = ∑iK=1 Ii,t + I0,t captures the total number of infected individuals. An on-site worker in
   23 We obtain the physical proximity values at the occupation level from O*NET dataset. O*NET collects the physical
proximity information through surveys with following categories: (1) I don’t work near other people (beyond 100 ft.);
(2) I work with others but not closely (e.g., private office); (3) Slightly close (e.g., shared office); (4) Moderately close (at
arm’s length); (5) Very close (near touching). We divide the category values by 3 to make category (3) our benchmark.
Specifically, a proximity value larger than 1 indicates a closer proximity than the ‘shared office’ level and smaller than 1
corresponds a less-dense working conditions. We create a single physical proximity value for each occupation by doing a
weighted average of the normalized category values. We calculate the proximity values at the industry level after remov-
ing the teleworkable portion from the employees. We use Dingel and Neiman (2020)’s list of teleworkable occupations to
capture the proportion of employment that can be fulfilled at remote locations in each industry.



                                                               21
                                                                                                      Ii,t−1
sector i, however, could be exposed to infection either at work, at the rate of β i Si,t−1              Ni ,   or outside

work, that involves all the remaining activities including family life, shopping and commuting at

the rate β 0 Si,t−1 ItN−1 . Hence, the number of susceptible individuals among the on-site workers in

industry i changes as:
                                                             Ii,t−1             I
                                      ∆Si,t = − β i Si,t−1          − β 0 Si,t−1 t−1                                  (8)
                                                               Ni                 N

The recovery rate is the same for all types of infected individuals:


                                                   ∆Ri,t = γIi,t−1                                                    (9)



    The number of infected individuals changes as the susceptible individuals get infected and some

infected individuals recover from the disease:


                                              ∆Ii,t = − ∆Ri,t + ∆Si,t
                                                                           
                                                                                                                     (10)



    According to the initial report by the World Health Organization (WHO),24 the median recovery

time for the mild cases is reported to be approximately 2 weeks. The mean recovery time could

be longer when we include the severe cases. In this paper, we err on the optimistic side and set

γ = 1/14 ≈ 0.07 to establish a mean recovery time of 14 days. In the same report, the R0 ≡ β/γ

of the disease, which captures the average number of individuals infected by a person carrying the

disease, was estimated to be 2 to 2.5. Here, we use the lower end. In the absence of industrial

heterogeneity, R0 = 2 and γ = 0.07 implies β = 0.14. These values are in line with those used in

Stock (2020) and Pindyck (2020) who primarily focus on calibration of the SIR model for tracking

the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic under different scenarios.

    With industrial heterogeneity, we match the employment size weighted average β i ’s of the in-

fected individuals to β. For an on-site worker in industry i, the implied β parameter can be approx-

imated by ( β 0 + β i ).25 For a non-working individual, this parameter is only β 0 . Using Equation (6),
   24 https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-final-report.pdf
   25 According
              to the DISK report cited in Footnote 22, the infection rate is 3 times higher for workers compared to the
non-working population. Here, we take a moderate stance and set the rate to be 2 times higher on average for the workers.




                                                             22
we impose:
                                           K                                   K
                                    N0                  N                   N
                                 β0
                                    N    i =1
                                                        N                   N ∑
                                       + ∑ ( β 0 + β i ) i = β 0 + β 0 Proxi i = β                (11)
                                                                      i =1

Hence, we solve for β 0 in terms of β, industry size, and the proximity levels as:

                                                                               −1
                                                                K
                                                                    Proxi Ni 
                                              β 0 = β 1 +     ∑       N
                                                                                                  (12)
                                                               i =1


with β = 0.14 based on the WHO report.



4.2     Production

We specify a simplified version of the production function where output is a linear function of labor.

This treatment emphasizes the impact of the pandemic on production through changes in labor

supply. Here, we implicitly assume that the amount of the capital stock remains the same in the

short-run, and therefore, can be omitted during normal times as well as the pandemic period. We

model production as a function of the number of workers in industry i as:26


                                                         Yi,t = Zi Li,t                           (13)


where Zi denotes the productivity of workers in sector i.

      During the pandemic period, the level of production decreases because the infected individuals

cannot work until they recover from the disease. We have two groups of workers, at-home and

on-site. Hence, the total number of available workers at time t will be:

                                                                                       
                                                                                 I0,t
                                          L̃i,t = ( Ni,t − Ii,t ) + TWi       1−                  (14)
                                                                                 N0

where Ni,t is the number of on-site workers, Ii,t is the number of infected workers among on-site

workers, and TWi is the number of at-home workers (i.e. those who can work remotely) in industry

i. The ratio I0,t /N0 captures the fraction of individuals who are infected in the at-home group,

which includes the non-working population as well as all at-home workers (i.e. teleworkers) in the
  26 This   is typical in global supply chain models as in Bonadio et al. (2020).


                                                               23
economy. Therefore, the production in industry i changes to:


                                                  S
                                                Yi,t = Zi L̃i,t                                       (15)



4.3     Demand

During the pandemic period, consumer priorities and preferences change dramatically due to many

reasons. First, there is fear of infection. In order to minimize the risks of getting infected, individuals

alter their behavior and change their consumption patterns, such as refraining from public events

or malls. The fear of infection is related to the number of infected individuals in the society. Second,

there is fear of transmitting the disease to others. Individuals may choose to minimize their social

interactions with a precautionary motive, in order to avoid infecting others inadvertently. The risk

of transmission is particularly high for asymptomatic cases. Recent empirical evidence verifies this

claim. Using granular data, Chetty et al. (2020) document a decline of 39% in consumer spending in

the top-quartile of the income distribution and 13% in the bottom quartile in the United States during

the first month of the pandemic. The decline is heterogenous across sectors, with more significant

drops in industries requiring in-person contact. Geographically, the decline in spending is larger in

those regions where the COVID-19 incidences are higher. Overall, the authors emphasize that at the

initial stages of the pandemic, the fear of contacting the disease is the main source of the decline

in spending. Similarly, using cell phone data to track movements of individuals, Goolsbee and

Syverson (2020) show that even though the consumer traffic fell by 60%, only 7% could be explained

by the shutdown restrictions. The authors suggest that the changes in consumer behavior is most

likely to be tied with the fear of infection.

      In addition to the fear factor, there is uncertainty about the duration of the pandemic and the

related economic outlook which affects demand. Aggregate expenditure typically declines during

times of elevated uncertainty. Furthermore, there is a direct income effect. Individuals lose their

income stream either when they get laid-off or when they experience a sharp decline in demand for

their output.

      In order to capture the change in demand patterns during the pandemic, we consider two de-

mand profiles, one corresponding to normal times and the other one corresponding to the brunt of

                                                      24
the pandemic. We determine the demand for each industry during normal times from the consump-

tion data in national accounts. As for the COVID-19 period, we estimate changes in the expenditure

levels during the pandemic using credit card spending data. For the sectors where we do not have

the credit card data, we use industry reports and expert opinions.27 The progression of the pandemic

and the normalization of demand as the pandemic fades is a gradual process. In order to capture this

steady adjustment, we assume that the individuals move between these two profiles smoothly, as a

function of the number of infected individuals in the country. After determining demand, we use

the input-output framework and map the final good consumption back to output in each industry.

    In modeling the demand side, we first express the utility function of a representative agent who

maximizes her utility by optimally allocating her income on the expenditure of different final goods.

Following the literature on input-output analysis (see e.g. Acemoglu et al. (2012), among others),

we assume that the representative agent has a Cobb-Douglass utility function:

                                                                           n
                                               U ( e1 , . . . , e n ) =   ∏ eiα ,  i
                                                                                                                 (16)
                                                                          i =1


with ei denoting the level of expenditure in industry i, and αi representing the share of industry i in

total expenditure with ∑in=1 αi = 1 and 0 < αi < 1 for all i = 1, . . . , n. The utility function in (16)

incorporates a budget restriction which implies that the total income (w) equals total expenditure,

i.e., w = ∑in=1 ei . With the Cobb-Douglass utility function, αi determines the share of industry i in

the expenditure so that ei = αi w for i = 1, . . . , n.

    During times of the pandemic, demand patterns change. For the sake of simplicity, we assume

that changes in demand come from two channels. First, the pandemic changes preferences and

priorities, which implies an adjustment in sectoral weights. The utility function transforms into:

                                                                           n
                                                                          ∏ ei
                                                                                 α̃i ( I )
                                            Ũ (e1 , . . . , en , I ) =                      ,                   (17)
                                                                          i =1


with the Cobb-Douglas exponents depending on the number of infections and α̃i ( I ) = αi for a small

number of infections, i.e., I ≤ 0.1 Ī, where Ī is a scaling parameter for infections. In the Turkish
  27 Expected   final demand changes and the resources we use in this estimation are presented in Table A.3 of the Ap-
pendix.




                                                              25
context, we set Ī = 50, 000 to capture a relevant range for the number of of infections (see below for

our simulations). This limit implies that the utility function returns to normal times if the number of

infections remain below 5,000. For large I, the limit level is defined as lim α̃i ( I ) ≡ ᾱi with ∑in=1 ᾱi = 1
                                                                                  I →∞
and 0 < ᾱi < 1 for all i = 1, . . . , n.

    In addition to the changes in preferences during the pandemic, demand also changes due to the

income effect. We assume that the available income for expenditure decreases by a ratio of 1 − η ( I )

compared to normal times. We assume that η ( I ) is a decreasing function of the number of infections

and satisfies η ( I ) = 1 for I ≤ 0.1 Ī. For large I, i.e., lim η ( I ) = η̄ with 0 < η̄ ≤ 1. In this set up,
                                                                     I →∞
the minimum level of income that is necessary for survival at the brunt of the pandemic is given

by η̄ × w, which can be achieved through transfer payments. While we capture the effects of the

pandemic by modelling the demand parameters α and η as a function of the number of infections,

the specification can be generalized to include consumer sentiment or the trustworthiness of the

policies as the determinants of these key demand parameters. Hence, the impact of a decline in

capital inflows, or a decline in policy credibility during the pandemic can be analyzed by adjusting

the demand parameters within our framework.

    To determine the level of output implied by the changes in demand during the pandemic, we

first express the expenditure in each industry as a function of the number of infections. Next, we

construct a ratio, δi ( I ), which shows the expenditure in industry i when the infection level is I

relative to the expenditure during normal times. The numerator in this ratio is dependent on both

the income channel and changes in priorities. By combining both channels, we can write δi ( I ) as:

                                                             α̃i ( I )η ( I )
                                                δi ( I ) =                    .                                  (18)
                                                                    αi

As the demand ratio approaches 1, it signals that the number of infections decline and demand

normalizes. As the demand ratio approaches 0, it reflects that the number of infections increase and

demand shrinks due to the pandemic. Using this ratio, we write the limiting cases for δi ( I ). For

small I (i.e., I ≤ 0.1 Ī), δi ( I ) = 1. Thus, for a small number of infections, demand remains intact such

that the ratio of demand during normal times equals demand during the pandemic.28
  28 We use the number of infected patients in Turkey as the determinant of global demand change in a particular in-

dustry. While it is possible for a given country to handle the pandemic better or worse than Turkey, we argue that the



                                                             26
                                                                                                                                ᾱi η̄
    For large I, which corresponds to the peak of the pandemic, lim α̃i ( I ) ≡ δ̄i =                                            αi .    If the demand
                                                                                                    I →∞
for an industry i completely collapses during the pandemic (e.g., the airline industry), then δ̄i = 0. If

there is no change in demand during the pandemic (e.g. food industry), then, δ̄i = 1. We assume that

δ̄i is the utmost demand change in a particular sector that is globally valid under a fully developing

pandemic.

    Changes in demand at any given time is a function of the number of infected individuals in

the population. In this framework, we assume that the ratio of demand, δi ( I ) , smoothly fluctuates

between 1 when nobody is infected and δ̄i when a very large number individuals get infected using

the functional form 29 as:
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     1
                                                                                     if     I ≤ 0.1 Ī
                                        δi ( I ) =                                                                                                (20)
                                                         1+( I/ Ī −0.1)
                                                     
                                                     δ̄i δ̄i +( I/ Ī −0.1)
                                                                                     if     I > 0.1 Ī


It is important to note that the overwhelming uncertainty about the course of the virus may suppress

economic confidence for a longer period of time. To the extent that the actual normalization is slower

than what is implied by Equation (20), we err on the conservative side by assuming a faster recovery.

    Given the smooth transition function, we now model the changes in the final demand levels

using δ values. Let’s illustrate the final demand of country c in industry i with Fc,i . Accordingly, the

new level of final demand in industry i in country c during the pandemic becomes:


                                                              F̃c,i ( I ) = Fc,i δi ( I )                                                         (21)
number of infections and the consequent demand shifts in Turkey would not be that far off from the global course of the
pandemic. In fact, a recent report by the ECB (Chapter 3, ECB Economic Bulletin, Issue 3 / 2020) highlights the striking
resemblance between the timing of demand collapse in Turkey and the Euro Area: (https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/
pdf/ecbu/eb202003.en.pdf on Economic Activity.
    29 This inverse hyperbolic functional form provides a smooth transition between the two limiting cases, for small and

large I, where the marginal impact of the number of infections changes at a rate that is inversely proportional to the
number of infections. The specification flexibly allows for changes across sectors as Ī and δi are the tuning parameters
that determine the limits and the speed of the convergence.
   The smooth transition in Equation 20 between the limiting cases can be achieved with the following functional forms
for η ( I ) and α̃i ( I ) for i = 1, . . . , n:

                                              η( I) = 1       and       α̃i ( I ) = αi                    if I ≤ 0.1 Ī
                                      1 + ( I/ Ī − 0.1)                              ᾱi η̄ + ( I/ Ī − 0.1)
                       η ( I ) = η̄                           and       α̃i ( I ) =                             if I > 0.1 Ī                      (19)
                                      η̄ + ( I/ Ī − 0.1)                             αi δ̄i + ( I/ Ī − 0.1)




                                                                         27
where F̃c,i ( I ) represents the revised demand during the pandemic when the number of infections is

I.

      In order to map the changes in the final demand for each sector to the output level in each

industry, we use the input-output framework. Using a closed-economy version of the input-output

relations would neglect the impact of foreign trade on aggregate expenditure. Turkey is an open

economy with a trade-to-GDP ratio of almost 63% as of 2019 (See Figure 7).

                                                   Figure 7: Trade Volume (% of GDP)



                     60




                     50




                     40




                     30




                     20
                          4

                                6

                                       8

                                              0

                                                     2

                                                            4

                                                                   6

                                                                          8

                                                                                 0

                                                                                        2

                                                                                               4

                                                                                                      6

                                                                                                             8

                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                                           2

                                                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                                         20 8
                                                                                                                                            19
                         8

                                 8

                                        8

                                               9

                                                      9

                                                             9

                                                                    9

                                                                           9

                                                                                  0

                                                                                         0

                                                                                                0

                                                                                                       0

                                                                                                              0

                                                                                                                     1

                                                                                                                            1

                                                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                                                          1

                                                                                                                                            1
                      19

                              19

                                     19

                                            19

                                                   19

                                                          19

                                                                 19

                                                                        19

                                                                               20

                                                                                      20

                                                                                             20

                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                         20




N OTES: This figure plots trade volume for Turkey, which is measured as the share of imports of goods & services and
exports of goods & services in GDP. Source: World Development Indicators.




      In order to account for the international linkages to fully capture the impact of final demand on

production, we utilize OECD Inter-Country Input-Output (ICIO) Tables.30 ICIO provides us with

input usages of industry i in country c from any industry in any country. As shown in Figure A.1,

we have 36 industries and 69 entities (corresponding to 65 countries), giving us a matrix of 2484 ×

2484 entries. The final demand vector has 2484 entries and we index the entries of this vector by j,

corresponding to each country-industry combination. By dividing the rows of ICIO matrix with the
     30 https://www.oecd.org/sti/ind/inter-country-input-output-tables.htm




                                                                                 28
total output of industry j, we obtain the direct requirements matrix A. This matrix summarizes the

usage of each intermediate input to generate $1 worth of output. Output of each industry is either

used as an intermediate input or consumed as final demand. Using matrix notation, we decompose

the total output into intermediate and final usage as:


                                                        Y = AY + F                                                             (22)


Here, Y denotes the output vector and F denotes the final demand vector whose entries are Yj and Fj

respectively, whilej is an index over all (c, i ) combinations.31 Therefore, we can solve for the output

to satisfy the final demand as:

                                                      Y = ( I − A ) −1 F                                                       (23)

From this equation, we write the total output of country c as:

                                                                 n
                                                         Yc =   ∑ Yc,i                                                         (24)
                                                                i =1



      Using the demand change from Equation (21) during the infection, the demand channel changes

the output as:

                                                  YtD = (I − A)−1 F̃ ( It ).                                                   (25)

where YtD represents the output and F̃ ( It ) represents the vector of demand at time t as a function of

the number of infections, It . Therefore, the output also changes with the dynamics of the pandemic.



4.4    Equilibrium

In equilibrium, production declines by the largest magnitude that is implied by either supply or

demand side. In other words, during the pandemic, we expect the output vector to be:


                                                   YtEQ = min(YtS , YtD )                                                      (26)


where min represents element by element minimum function for two vectors, namely YtS and YtD .
   31 With a slight abuse of the notation, we drop the subscript to refer to vectors or matrices of the variables.   For simplicity,
we often use (c, i ) to refer to an entry instead of j when we refer to vector entries


                                                               29
      The value-added of the output in industry i in country c is calculated from the shares of value

added in each industry during normal times as:


                                                EQ       EQ      VAc,i
                                              VAt,c,i = Yt,c,i                                               (27)
                                                                  Yc,i

Therefore, GDP of the country c at time t can be obtained through:

                                                            n
                                                EQ
                                             GDPt,c =     ∑ VAt,c,i
                                                              EQ
                                                                                                             (28)
                                                          i =1



4.5     Data

In our analysis, we use OECD ICIO Tables for 2015. As industrial classification, OECD uses an

aggregation of 2-digit ISIC Rev 4 codes to 36 sectors. Throughout our analysis, we will make use of

this classification labeled as OECD ISIC Codes.

      To calculate the industry level teleworkable share and the physical proximity measures, we use

the occupational composition of the industries. We use the list provided by Dingel and Neiman

(2020) for the occupations which can fulfill their tasks remotely. For the workers that continue to

do their jobs on-site, we assume that the infection rate depends on the physical proximity that is

required in their workplace. To calculate the proximity requirements for the occupations, we use

the self-reported Physical Proximity values available in the Work Context section of the O*NET

database.32 We divide the O*NET categories into 3 to have values larger than 1 if the reported

category for the physical proximity is 3 (Slightly close (e.g., shared office)) or higher. We create a

single proximity value for each occupation by weighting the normalized score with the percentage

of answers in each category. To obtain industry-level teleworkable share and proximity values, we

calculate the weighted average of the values corresponding to the occupations in each industry

using the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) provided by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics

(BLS). OES data follows four-digit NAICS codes to classify industries. In order to convert proximity

data to OECD ISIC codes, we make use of the correspondence table between 2017 NAICS and ISIC
  32 “O*NET  OnLine Help: Find Occupations.”         O*NET OnLine, National Center for O*NET Development,
www.onetonline.org/help/online/find occ. Accessed 1 April 2020. Dingel and Neiman (2020) also use several measures
from O*NET to identify which occupations are teleworkable.




                                                       30
Revision 4 Industry Codes, provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. We provide the teleworkable share

and the proximity index for the industries in Table A.2 of the Appendix.

   We obtain employment data from the Turkish Social Security (SGK) Agency. SGK follows four-

digit NACE Revision 2 codes to classify industries. In order to aggregate employment data to 36

OECD ISIC codes, we make use of the Eurostat correspondence table between NACE Revision 2

and ISIC Revision 4 Industry Codes. SGK lacks the data on the number of employees working in

the “Public Administration Sector,” so we fill this information using the relevant data provided by

the President’s office.

   We use publicly available credit card spending data from the CBRT to calculate the estimated

demand changes during the pandemic in each industry. The list of OECD ISIC industries, and the

expected changes are listed in Table A.3 of the Appendix along with explanations. In Table A.5

of the Appendix, we provide the matching we used with CBRT spending data and OECD ISIC

industries. The data on credit card spending is not available for the full set of sectors. In this case,

we use projections based on sectoral reports, experiences of other countries and historical data on

the specific sector as well as the whole manufacturing sector. While the aggregate demand shock is

computed as 23% when we focus only on the sectors with credit card spending data, it is 16% when

we consider the full set of sectors. Therefore, our sensitivity analysis indicate little or no change in

our findings qualitatively.

   Under full lockdown, only a few industries are active. We use the decree issued by Turkish Min-

istry of Interior on April 10, 2020 to identify these industries. Turkish full lockdowns are typically on

weekends and holidays and thus the list did not include some critical sectors. We supplemented the

list with the food sector as well as household and sanitary goods. The list of these sectors is given

in Table A.4 of the Appendix. From these industries and using the employment data at 4 digits, we

calculated the share of each OECD ISIC industry that would remain active during the lockdown.

Finally, we calculated the share of public employees that are not affected by the lockdown using the

publicly available information, which is listed in Table A.6 of the Appendix.




                                                   31
5     Quantitative Analysis

5.1     Infection Rates under Alternative Lockdown Scenarios

In this section, we illustrate the consequences of alternative lockdown scenarios within our frame-

work. In these scenarios, we impose changes on β 0 (i.e., the infection rate of the non-working pop-

ulation) and possibly on β i for (i.e., the infection rate of the working population in industry i) and

simulate the course of the pandemic. The decline in β reflects the effectiveness of a particular lock-

down scenario which depends on country characteristics such as demographic dynamics, whether

or nor there is a more authoritarian culture with less resistant public, the influence of the scientific

committees in shaping political decisions, or the ability of a trustworthy and independent media in

affecting public sentiment. The effectiveness of the lockdown also depends on the recovery rate that

depends on the quality of healthcare services as well as ICU capacity.

      We assume that the pandemic is successfully contained if the number of total infections declines

to 5000 after observing the peak. These simulations allow us to calculate the economic costs of

alternative lockdown scenarios.         33


      We start with the no lockdown scenario and compare it to partial lockdown where certain restric-

tions are imposed on daily life to incorporate social distancing rules while businesses remain open.

This implies that under partial lockdown β 0 is diminished compared to the case where no action is

taken, but β i for i = 1, . . . , n remain unchanged. We consider three cases of partial lockdown where

the infection rate, β 0 is reduced by the proportion of 0.5, 0.25 and 0.10 compared to the reference

setting. Figure 8 displays the evolution of the number of infected patients under these four scenar-

ios when a hypothetical lockdown is implemented for 240 days, starting early on the 10th day and

remains active until the 250th day.

      As can be seen from the figure, in case no action is taken against the COVID-19 pandemic, which

is shown with the blue line, the pandemic advances at a rate implied by the benchmark reproduction
   33 We note that the 5000 threshold that is assigned for the containment of the pandemic differs from the notion of

Critical Community Size (CCS) (Bartlett, 1960). CCS is the threshold for the number of susceptible individuals to die out
by itself. Instead, the 5000 threshold that we set in the model represents the number of infectious individuals who can be
feasibly tested, traced, and eventually quarantined so that the pandemic can be contained successfully. We assume that
for each infected individual, we need to test ten additional people on average. Thus, if there are 5000 patients, tracing the
infection requires about 50,000 tests, which is close to the current testing capacity in Turkey.



                                                             32
                                  Figure 8: No lockdown versus Partial Lockdown Scenarios


          1 0 00 p ers on s
      16,000                                                                                                                   16,000
                        No lockdo w n
      14,000            Partial lo ckdow n w it h 1 /2* bet a0                                                                 14,000
                        Partial lo ckdow n w it h 1 /4* bet a0
      12,000            Partial lo ckdow n w it h 1 /10 *be ta0                                                                12,000

      10,000                                                                                                                   10,000

      8,000                                                                                                                    8,000


      6,000                                                                                                                    6,000

      4,000                                                                                                                    4,000

      2,000                                                                                                                    2,000


           0                                                                                                                   0
                        25        50        75        100         125   150   175    200   225   250   275   300   325   350




rate of R0 = 2. This implies that the pandemic reaches its peak around the 150th day with a total toll

of around 14 million infections. Following this state of “herd immunity”, the number of infections

starts to decline. After approximately 300 days, the virus is taken under control. Under the no

lockdown scenario, 1.13 percent of the population dies if we assume a 1.5 percent mortality rate.

The GDP declines 11.0% in this case. We should remind the readers that the economic costs that

are expressed in terms of GDP should not be misinterpreted as annual growth forecasts. We merely

express the cost of the lockdown in terms of the GDP.

   Under partial lockdown scenarios, the reproduction number declines below 2 due to lower infec-

tion rates but remains above 1 in all three scenarios. Specifically, we assume that the lower infection

rate dampens the rate at which the pandemic evolves, nevertheless it is not sufficient to contain it

altogether. This is due to the fact that businesses remain open, which feeds the virus within the

industries and affects the overall course of the pandemic. If the infection rate is relatively high

(0.5 × β 0 ), which is shown with the red line, the GDP declines 11.6 percent. If the infection rate is

moderate (0.25 × β 0 ), shown with the green line, the GDP declines by 10.9 percent. If the infection

rate is relatively low (0.1 × β 0 ), shown with the black line, the GDP declines by 10.5 percent.

   None of the 240-day partial lockdown scenarios that we considered in Figure 8 were successful

in containing the pandemic. When the lockdown is removed on day 250, all three partial lockdown

scenarios have approximately the same number of infections. Once the lockdown is removed, how-


                                                                                33
ever, the virus follows a different course in each scenario. For the low infection rate scenarios (green

and black lines) the number of new cases increase rapidly, leading to peak levels within 50 days

after the lockdown. Meanwhile the high infection rate and no lockdown scenarios show a steady

decline (the blue and red lines). This is because less people get infected during partial lockdown

(and get immunity) under the low infection rate scenarios, shown by the area under the black and

green lines. Hence, by the time the lockdown is removed, the number of susceptible people are sig-

nificantly higher under the low infection rate scenarios, increasing the effective R0 (= β/γ). Thus, in

the absence of an efficient drug or vaccination, a partial lockdown may need to continue indefinitely,

until the number of cases decline to 5000. Figure 9 shows the simulation results if partial lockdown

lasts for a full year. As in Figure 8, we assume that the industries are operating as usual and thus

β i ’s (for i = 1, . . . , K) remain unaffected. In terms of the economic implications, the increase in the

number of infections through a second wave due to a premature reopening prevents the economy

from a jump start. Even though the supply side remains unrestricted, demand remains supressed

due to the increase in the number of infections, dragging the economic growth. These implications

are supported by a recent study Andersen et al. (2020b) that compares Denmark which had a full

lockdown, with Sweden, with partial and voluntary lockdown. Aggregate spending dropped 29

per cent in Denmark and 25 per cent in Sweden. These numbers suggest that merely opening the

economy does not imply that demand will be normalized until the outbreak is contained. Thus, a

partial lockdown policy might not yield the lowest economic costs as implied by our model.

                         Figure 9: Alternative Scenarios under Partial Lockdown for Full Year


          1 0 00 p ers on s
      16,000                                                                                                                   16,000
                        No lockdo w n
      14,000            Partial lo ckdow n w it h 1 /2* bet a0                                                                 14,000
                        Partial lo ckdow n w it h 1 /4* bet a0
      12,000            Partial lo ckdow n w it h 1 /10 *be ta0                                                                12,000

      10,000                                                                                                                   10,000

      8,000                                                                                                                    8,000


      6,000                                                                                                                    6,000

      4,000                                                                                                                    4,000

      2,000                                                                                                                    2,000

           0                                                                                                                   0
                        25        50        75        100         125   150   175    200   225   250   275   300   325   350




                                                                                34
   Compared to Figure 8, we observe that the main advantage of an extended partial lockdown is

that it flattens the curve by spreading the number of infections over time and allowing for a larger

recovery rate. In terms of the economic costs, the additional economic costs of the longer partial

lockdown hover around 0.5 percent of the GDP. The added costs despite the extended duration

of the lockdown are limited. This is due to the fact that the decline in demand already reaches a

maximum level at the earlier stages of the lockdown and successive reductions in production only

reflect the decline in supply due to increased number of infections.

   Figure 10 illustrates the implications of our model under full lockdown. If the lockdown is put

into practice when the number of infections is around 80,000, a fully effective procedure lowers the

reproduction rate to zero (R0 = 0), which is shown by the blue line, and contains the pandemic

within 39 days (the gray shaded area). The consequent decline in GDP is about 5.8 percent. If the

lockdown is not very effective and the infection continues to spread with some minimal reproduc-

tion number (R0 = 0.02), then the duration of the lockdown increases by 15 days (yellow shaded

area) to 54 days and the GDP declines by 7.6 percent.

                                          Figure 10: Alternative Scenarios under Full Lockdown


           1 00 0 p er so n s
      90                                                                                                                                      90

      80
                                                                                     Full lockdown s tarting from 91. day with R0=0           80
                                                                                     Full lockdown starting from 91. day with R0=0.02
      70                                                                                                                                      70

      60                                                                                                                                      60

      50                                                                                                                                      50

      40                                                                                                                                      40

      30                                                                                                                                      30

      20                                                                                                                                      20

      10                                                                                                                                      10

       0                                                                                                                                      0
                   10           20   30    40   50   60   70   80   90   100   110   120   130   140   150   160   170   180   190      200




   The costs of delaying full lockdown are shown in Figure 11. The benchmark scenario that is

illustrated in Figure 10 is shown with the blue line. If the lockdown is delayed by only one day, the

number of infections increases by more than 10,000. In the model, we assume that the number of

infections increases faster than the official statistics, which report only the tested patients. Under


                                                                         35
these circumstances, a 39-day lockdown is no longer sufficient to control the pandemic. Thus, in

exchange for a one-day delay, the lockdown needs to be extended by two more days (the red line),

which increases the costs of the lockdown to 5.9 percent of the GDP. If there is a two-day delay (the

green line), this time the duration of the lockdown increases to 43 days and the decline in GDP is 6.2

percent. If the lockdown is delayed by one week (the black line), the decline in GDP is 7.3 percent.

After 100 days, the virus starts to spread again and hence prematurely ending the lockdown is rather

ineffective.
                         Figure 11: Costs of Delay in Implementing Full Lockdown


       200                                                                                                                           200

                                                                         Full lockdown    starting   from 91. day until 130.   day
                                                                         Full lockdown    starting   from 92. day until 132.   day
       160                                                                                                                           160
                                                                         Full lockdown    starting   from 93. day until 136.   day
                                                                         Full lockdown    starting   from 98. day until 148.   day
       120                                                                                                                           120



        80                                                                                                                           80



        40                                                                                                                           40



         0                                                                                                                           0
               10   20   30   40   50   60   70   80   90   100   110   120   130   140      150      160   170    180   190      200




   As we compare the economic costs under full lockdown (Figures 10 and 11) with those of partial

lockdown (Figures 8 and 9), we note that the costs of full lockdown are lower than any of partial

lockdown scenarios.

   As we compare the the number of deaths under alternative scenarios, we observe that 0.001 per-

cent of the population dies under an effective full lockdown, compared to 1 percent of the population

under no lockdown and about 0.8 percent of the population under partial lockdown scenarios that

last for 250 days. If partial lockdown is extended to a full year, then the number of deaths decline to

about 0.5 percent of the population.




                                                            36
5.2     The Role of External Demand Shocks

The aggregate costs of COVID-19 shock that we calculated in the previous section embeds supply

and demand channels in Turkey as well as abroad. In this section, we illustrate the role of external

demand and supply in total costs. In order to better illustrate the role of international linkages for

the Turkish economy, we consider two alternative scenarios.

      The final demand of country c in industry i is met by domestic production and imports of final

goods. Formally, we write the final demand as:


                                            Fc,i =   ∑0 Fc,c0 ,i                                  (29)
                                                      c


where Fc,c0 ,i denotes goods or services produced by industry i in country c0 and consumed in country

c. Following Equation 21, we write the final demand in country c in industry i at the peak of the

pandemic as:

                                             F̄c,i = Fc,i δ̄c,i                                   (30)

Different than Equation 21, in this section we allow for country specific demand shocks. The corre-

sponding output to satisfy this final demand level is obtained by:


                                           Ȳ = (I − A)−1 F̄                                      (31)


From this equation, we write the total output of country c as:

                                                         n
                                             Ȳc =   ∑ Ȳc,i                                      (32)
                                                     i =1


The value-added portion of the output is calculated from the shares of value added in each industry

during normal times. The total value-added (GDP) in country c can thus be written as:

                                                     n
                                                             VAc,i
                                        GDPc =     ∑ Ȳc,i    Yc,i
                                                                   .                              (33)
                                                   i =1


The matrix for intermediate goods is obtained from the direct requirements matrix and the output




                                                     37
vector:

                                                    I NT = AȲ.                                      (34)

Each entry of the matrix I NT corresponds to the usage of intermediate goods by industry i in coun-

try c from industry i0 in country c0 . Combining imports of intermediate goods and final goods, we

write the total imports for country c as:

                                                                                                !
                                                      n                      n
                              importsc =     ∑∑              F̄c,c0 ,i +    ∑ I NT c,i,c0 ,i0        (35)
                                            c 0 6 = c i =1                 i 0 =1


Similarly the total exports by country c is:

                                                                                                !
                                                      n                      n
                              exportsc =    ∑∑               F̄c0 ,c,i +   ∑ I NT c0 ,i0 ,c,i        (36)
                                            c 0 6 = c i =1                 i 0 =1



   As a result, a decline in foreign demand for final goods will create sectoral output declines in

many domestic sectors, which will add to aggregate output decline in Turkey. To highlight this

mechanism, we present three scenarios.

   Scenario 1 assumes the same proportionate demand shock in Equation 30 for the whole world.

For example, if we estimate that the demand for automobiles decline by 60 percent based on Turk-

ish data, we assume that the demand for automobiles declines by 60 percent throughout the world.

Figure 12 shows how much total output, exports and imports change at the brunt of the pandemic

relative to normal times for alternative scenarios. In the baseline scenario, the decline in terms of

total output is 19.8 percent (Scenario 1 in Figure 12). Interestingly, imports decline less (17.9 percent)

compared to exports (23.4 percent). This is consistent with the nature of the Turkish economy which

is highly dependent on imports of intermediate goods. On the exports side, a further breakdown

indicates that the 27.4% decline in terms of final goods is higher than the 18.8% decline in interme-

diate goods (not shown). Similarly, on the imports side, the 19.7% decline in intermediate goods is

higher than the 16.1% decline in final goods (not shown).

   Under scenario 2, we assume that the demand in Turkey declines but the international demand

for final goods is back to its normal (see Scenario 2 in Figure 12). Using the automobile example

above, this implies that the domestic demand for automobiles shrinks to 60% of normal levels but


                                                             38
                     Figure 12: Demand Shocks for an Open Economy with I-O Links


                                                                  -.1




                                0
                                                                                                -3.2

                                                                                 -5.2




                                -5
                                -10



                                                          -14.6         -14.7
                                -15




                                               -17.9

                                       -19.8
                                -20




                                           -23.4                                        -23.3
                                -25




                                       Scenario 1         Scenario 2             Scenario 3

                                                       Output                   Exports
                                                       Imports



N OTES: This graph illustrates the impact of three different scenarios for demand shocks. In the first scenario, all the
countries are assumed to experience the same demand shifter during the pandemic. In the second scenario, only Turkey
experiences a demand shock but the international demand levels are intact. In the final scenario, the international
demand levels are down but the demand in Turkey is at pre-pandemic levels. The number written on each bar
corresponds to the percentage change in the relevant variable in the underlying scenario relative to its pre-pandemic
level.



the international demand remains at its normal levels. In this setting, the decline in terms of total

output is 14.6 percent at the brunt of the pandemic. The decline in imports is 14.7% but the decline

in exports is only 0.1%.

    Lastly, in scenario 3, we model the setting where the demand in Turkey is intact but the demand

in international markets has plummeted (see Scenario 3 in Figure 12). Under this scenario, the

decline in output is 5.2% solely because of international linkages. As expected, the exports are hit

the hardest with a decline of 23.3% and imports decline by 3.2%.

    If we compare Scenario 1 and Scenario 3, we can see the role of demand in total economic costs.

The decline in foreign demand solely account for almost 27 percent of the decline in aggregate out-


                                                            39
put. Notice that we run these scenarios under no lockdown policy in the absence of any policy

action.34



5.3     Sectoral Breakdown of Economic Costs

In this section, we analyze the economic costs at the sectoral level. Heterogeneity in sectoral costs

may stem from several channels. Sectors that are closed down due to isolation measures (i.e. nonessen-

tial sectors), those that are hit hardest by the collapse in demand such as the services sectors, or

those industries where teleworking is not very feasible will be hit harder. As for the role of inter-

national linkages, those sectors with greater exposure to international spillovers, particularly with

those countries that had larger domestic outbreaks would be more affected. Similarly, those indus-

tries that rely more on external finance would experience the pinch of tightening in global financial

conditions. In the next sub-section, we focus on the role of trade linkages. In the following sub-

section, we calculate the sectoral economic costs in our framework under different scenarios. Using

these sectoral costs, in the last sub-section, we disentangle the role of trade and external funding in

sectoral costs in a regression framework.



5.3.1    The Role of Trade Linkages in Sectoral Costs


In this section, we investigate the role of international linkages in determining sectoral costs. Inter-

national linkages would affect economic costs through trade relationships as well as capital inflows.

Those sectors that are more closely connected to international value chains as well as those sectors

that are dependent on external funding would be affected more from the global developments.

      Figure 13 allows us to get a glimpse of the role of trade from the international input-output tables.

The figure illustrates the share of imports in total intermediate inputs (the left panel) and the share

of exports in total output (the right panel). The left panel shows the potential role of supply chains
   34 The  work by Bonadio et al. (2020) shows that a third of the output loss is due to global supply chains. Different
from our framework where we have both supply and demand shocks, Bonadio et al. (2020) only assume sectoral supply
shocks. These shocks are caused by the fraction of workers not being able to work because of the measures adapted by the
country. Despite these differences, however, our predicted declines in GDP are similar because their supply shock, which
affects all the workers in the economy, is large. The supply shock is assumed to be caused by the workers not showing up
for work and is captured by the severity index of the lockdown by the Oxford Blavatnik School of Government Coron-
avirus Government Response Tracker https://www.bsg.ox.ac.uk/research/research-projects/coronavirus-government-
response-tracker. The severity index does not necessarily reflect the proportion of workers not able to work, however.


                                                          40
in COVID-19 crisis. While we do not explicitly incorporate these supply shocks into our model, they

are implicitly captured through changes in final demand. The left panel indicates that sectors such

as paper products, computers and electronics ,electrical equipment, rubber and plastic, coke and

refined petroleum, as well as pharmaceuticals rely more on intermediate inputs. Thus, we would

expect these sectors to be more severely affected from the pandemic, due to disruptions in supply

chains.

        Turning to the right panel, motor vehicles, transportation equipment, electrical equipment, com-

puter and electronics and tourism relates services sectors such as accommodation and food services

are the sectors that rely more on external demand. Thus, the deep recessions that are expected in

Turkey’s major export markets such as the Euro Area, UK, or the US would hit these sectors the

most, consistent with our analysis in Figure 12.

                                                                        Figure 13: Import and Export Share

                                              (a) Import Share in Intermediate Inputs                                           (b) Export Share in the Output
                         40




                                                                                                              50
    Share of Imports in Intermediate Inputs




                                                                                             Share of Exports in Total Output
                                                                                                                        40
                                  30




                                                                                                               30
                      20




                                                                                                      20
          10




                                                                                             10
                         0




                                                                                                              0
               M on ner g
           Fo inin -En gy)

               xt e pp )
                      s & rt
                     W Ap ob.
            ok Pa d P rel

               he Re r Pr .
             R m. f Pe d.
             O ber Pha ol.
                    er P a

      C Fa as -M ic
              p. ica Me tal
                     le d M ls
            ne le & al
                     & ica pt.

      O her tor ., N q.

                    an o s

                       b t .
      Tr hol on Wo g
      Ac sp le ruc s
     Pu om rt. & R on
       Te sh. Fo tora il
          le & od ge

      Fi I un dca v.
              nc & at t.
                     & he s

       Pu r B Rea ran f.
           bl us l E ce

                      m s S te
                                    .
             Ar So uca ef.
                    , E al n
                                   k
                                    .




                                                                                                        M on ner g
                                                                                                    Fo inin -En gy)

                                                                                                        xt e pp )
                                                                                                               s & rt
                                                                                                              W Ap ob.
                                                                                                     ok Pa d P rel
                                                                                                     C & R r P d.
                                                                                                      R m. f Pe d.
                                                                                                      O ber Pha ol.
                                                                                                             er P a
                                                                                                             Ba on- stic

                                                                                                       p. ica Me tal
                                                                                                              le d M ls
                                                                                                     ne le & al
                                                                                                              & ica pt.

                                                                                               O her tor ., N q.

                                                                                                             an o s

                                                                                                                b t .
                                                                                               Tr hol on Wo g
                                                                                               Ac sp ale ruc s
                                                                                              Pu om rt. & R on
                                                                                                Te sh. Fo tora il
                                                                                                   le & od ge

                                                                                               Fi I un dca v.
                                                                                                       nc & at t.
                                                                                                              & he s

                                                                                                Pu r B Rea ran f.
                                                                                                    bl us l E ce

                                                                                                               m s S te
                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                      Ar So uca ef.
                                                                                                             , E al n
                                                                                                                           k
                                                                                                                            .
                            . & rv




                                                                                                                    . & rv
                                  d




           er ra eh C


                    Pu fac Eq




                                 ec




                                                                                                    er ra eh C


                                                                                                             Pu fac Eq




                                                                                                                         ec
           Te d, B Su rgy




                                                                                                    Te d, B Su rgy
         bl . & S eta




                                                                                                  bl . & S eta
                 M nsp icle




         an es st rk




                  e Ot ion




                           . & or




                                                                                                          M nsp icle




                                                                                                  an es st rk




                                                                                                           e Ot ion




                                                                                                                   . & or
                   (N (E hin




                th & rm




         W C lic urin




         na T ic s


                           su In




                 ts ci tio




                                                                                                            (N (E hin




                                                                                                         th & rm




                                                                                                  W C lic urin




                                                                                                  na T ic s


                                                                                                                   su In




                                                                                                          ts ci tio
                  ile v. o




                                                                                                           ile v. o
                  m roa er




                                                                                                           m roa er
                    B on st

                 , E te ta




                                                                                                          , E te ta
         hi E ctr. et




                                                                                                  hi E ctr. et
                e pe ro
                                o




        O M Eq l E




                  Ad es ta




                                                                                                         e pe ro
                                                                                                                        o




                                                                                                 O M Eq l E




                                                                                                           Ad es ta
        th T V E




                                                                                                 th T V E
                         in e




                                                                                                                 in e
                                r



        om br ic e




                                                                                                                        r



                                                                                                 om br ic e
                        oo pa




                ry ctr O




          c o & ti




                  & Ed D




                                                                                                                oo pa




                                                                                                         ry ctr O




                                                                                                   c o & ti




                                                                                                           & Ed D
                        & T




                                                                                                                & T
                               R




                                                                                                                       R
                        nt W




                                                                                                                nt W
               ub & t




                                                                                                        he e r
                                                                                                        ub & t
                       N la




                                                                                                                N la
              co B S




                                                                                                       co B S
                                                                                               C a s M
                        In r

              ic in s




                                                                                                                In r

                                                                                                       ic in s
               o g e




                                                                                                        o g e
                        u rt




                                                                                                                u rt
            in ng is




                                                                                                     in ng is
         in ini F




                                                                                                  in ini F
      M M re &




                                                                                               M M re &
                     m




                                                                                                              m
                      a
                    &




          t o




                                                                                                   t o
                  tu




                                                                                                           tu
               ul




                                                                                                        ul
               g




                                                                                                        g
            lth




                                                                                                     lth
                                                                                                      F
          ric




            C




                                                                                                   ric
           e




                                                                                                    e
            i




                                                                                                     i
          C




                                                                                                   C
        ea




                                                                                                 ea
        th




                                                                                                 th
   Ag




                                                                                         Ag
      ac




                                                                                               ac
      O




                                                                                               O
      H




                                                                                               H
    M




                                                                                             M




N OTES: (a) This figure plots the share of imports in the intermediate inputs. (b) This figure plots the exports as a share of
output for each sector. Source: OECD ICIO Tables.




5.3.2                                         Sectoral Breakdown of Economic Costs under Different Scenarios


In the previous sub section, we highlighted the role of international linkages in sectoral costs. Armed

with this intuition, we now illustrate how the economic costs related to the COVID-19 shock differ

across industries under the alternative lockdown scenarios. Figure 14 shows how hard each sector

is hit from the pandemic under alternative lockdown scenarios. Consistent with our earlier find-

                                                                                        41
ings, we observe that the full lockdown has the lowest economic costs compared to the alternatives.

In terms of sectoral heterogeneity, we note that teleworkable or essential sectors are less severely

affected because they continue functioning for all lockdown scenarios (such as education, IT, pub-

lic administration). Meanwhile, non-essential sectors or those that require on-site work are more

severely affected (such as accommodation and food services, arts, entertainment, and recreation,

construction).

                                                                                                             Figure 14: Sectoral Heterogeneity in terms of Economic Cost of COVID-19 Shock

(a) Scenario 1: No Lockdown,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (b) Scenario 2: Full Lockdown,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (c) Scenario 3: Partial Lockdown,
β = 0.14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              91-131, R0 =0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10-250, 0.25 × β 0
       40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                40
            30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     30
   VA loss (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VA loss (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VA loss (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
      20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                  Accommodation & food services

                                                  Arts,entertainment & recreation

                                                                                    Real estate activities

                                                                                                             Construction

                                                                                                                            Manufacturing

                                                                                                                                            Transportation & storage

                                                                                                                                                                       Mining & quarrying

                                                                                                                                                                                            Other business sector services

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Electricity, water & waste

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Education

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Information & communication

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Wholesale & Retail

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Agriculture, forestry & fishing

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Public Adm.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Human health & social work




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Accommodation & food services

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Construction

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mining & quarrying

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Arts,entertainment & recreation

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Human health & social work

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Manufacturing

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Real estate activities

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Other business sector services

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Agriculture, forestry & fishing

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Public Adm.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Education

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Transportation & storage

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Information & communication

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Electricity, water & waste

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Wholesale & Retail




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Accommodation & food services

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Arts,entertainment & recreation

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Real estate activities

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Construction

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Manufacturing

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Transportation & storage

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Mining & quarrying

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Other business sector services

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Electricity, water & waste

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Education

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Information & communication

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wholesale & Retail

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Agriculture, forestry & fishing

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Public Adm.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Human health & social work
N OTES: This figure shows how the economic cost of COVID-19 shock differs across sectors in a particular lockdown
scenario. The panels show three alternative scenarios: (a) No action is taken against the COVID-19 pandemic; (b) A
lockdown is put into practice between the 91st and 131st days of the pandemic and is fully effective with zero
reproduction number; (c) A partial lockdown is put into practice between 10th -250th days of the pandemic that evolves
with a moderate infection rate (0.25 × β 0 ). For each scenario, we measure the sector-level economic cost as the
percentage change in overall economic activity (proxied by value added) for a given sector during pandemic relative to
its pre-pandemic level. Economic costs are aggregated from the 2-digit OECD ISIC codes to the 1-digit NACE code using
2-digit sector value added values that we obtain from the OECD ICIO Tables. NACE 1-digit sectors are A, B C, D&E, F,
G, H, I, J, L, M&N, P, Q, R&S. In each panel, the sectors are ranked in a descending order according to the magnitude of
economic cost under the corresponding scenario.



                 After documenting the heterogenous economic costs of the pandemic for different sectors, we

investigate whether these costs are accrued from demand or supply pressures. Figure 15 counts the

days in which output implied by the demand channel or supply channel prevails to bring about the

equilibrium output in a given industry.

                 To interpret the findings present in this figure, we consider three benchmark scenarios: Panel (a)

compares the no lockdown (blue line in Figure 8) scenario against full and effective lockdown

(blue line in Figure 10), and partial lockdown with moderate infection rate (green line in Figure 9).

Panel (a) suggests that under the no lockdown scenario, the demand channel, shown by the red bars,

drives output in almost all days until the virus is fully contained. The supply channel, presented by


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        42
the blue bars, prevails only in the early days of the pandemic (not shown). Among the 15 industry

groups, “Accommodation and food services,” “Arts, entertainment, recreation and other service ac-

tivities,” and “Real estate activities” are those that result in the highest economic costs of 36%, 33%,

and 20% of the value added generated in those sectors, respectively. This is not only because goods

produced in those categories (which are all provided by the services sector) cannot be consumed

from home, but also because people prefer delaying their consumption until the uncertainty regard-

ing the containment of the pandemic resolves. Furthermore, another aspect of sectoral heterogeneity

is clearly seen under no lockdown scenario such that the demand channel prevails longer in those

sectors. This is because households are more likely to cut back on their expenditure on the goods

produced by those non-essential sectors following the COVID-19 shock .

                                                                                 Figure 15: Supply and Demand Pressures under Benchmark Lockdown Scenarios

(a) Scenario 1: No Lockdown,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (b) Scenario 2: Full Lockdown,                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (c) Scenario 3: Partial Lockdown,
β = 0.14                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        91-131, R0 =0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10-250, 0.25 × β 0
                                                                                                                      Number of days                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Number of days                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Number of days
  400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               400
         295 295 294 294 241 265 256 262 256 260 239 208 180 70 70                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      28 27 27 28 297 66 27 27 27 297 27 67 54 67 67                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               263 264 264 263 243 263 263 263 263 263 225 138 98 101 101
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       337 338 338 337     338 338 338 338
  300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               300
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               311
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     295 295                                                           299                 298     298 298
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               267 264 264
  200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 200




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          227

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   185
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              157
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            140
  100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               100
                                                                                                      124                                                                                                                                       126                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               122
                                                                                                                      100 109 103 109 105                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            102 101 101 102                                                                                              102 102 102 102 102
           70 70 71 71                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            68                                                                                                                                      68
  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
         Accomm. & food services
                                   Arts,enter. & recreation
                                                              Real estate activities
                                                                                       Construction
                                                                                                      Manufacturing
                                                                                                                      Transportation & storage
                                                                                                                                                 Mining & quarrying
                                                                                                                                                                      Other business sector services
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Electricity, water & waste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Education
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Information & communication
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Wholesale & Retail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Agriculture, forestry & fishing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Public Adm.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Human health & social work




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Accomm. & food services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Construction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mining & quarrying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Arts,enter. & recreation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Human health & social work
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Manufacturing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Real estate activities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Other business sector services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Agriculture, forestry & fishing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Public Adm.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Education
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Transportation & storage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Information & communication
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Electricity, water & waste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Wholesale & Retail




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Accomm. & food services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Arts,enter. & recreation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Real estate activities
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Construction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Manufacturing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Transportation & storage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Mining & quarrying
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Other business sector services
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Electricity, water & waste
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Education
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Information & communication
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Wholesale & Retail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Agriculture, forestry & fishing
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Public Adm.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Human health & social work
                                                                                                                Supply                                                                                                                                             Demand                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Supply                                                                                                                                   Demand                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Supply                                                                                                                                             Demand




N OTES: In this figure, each bar shows the number days in which the supply channel (shown by the blue bars) or the
demand channel (shown by the red bars) prevails to bring the economy into equilibrium in a given industry. The panels
show three alternative scenarios: (a) No action is taken against the COVID-19 pandemic; (b) A lockdown is put into
practice between the 91st and 131st days of the pandemic and is fully effective with zero reproduction number; (c) A
partial lockdown is put into practice between 10th -250th days of the pandemic that evolves with a moderate infection rate
(0.25 × β 0 ). For each scenario, we measure the sector-level economic cost as the percentage change in overall economic
activity (proxied by value added) for a given sector during pandemic relative to its pre-pandemic level. Economic costs
are aggregated from the 2-digit OECD ISIC codes to the 1-digit NACE code using 2-digit sector value added values that
we obtain from the OECD ICIO Tables. NACE 1-digit sectors are A, B C, D&E, F, G, H, I, J, L, M&N, P, Q, R&S. In each
panel, the sectors are ranked in a descending order according to the magnitude of economic cost under the
corresponding scenario.




        Under full lockdown scenario, the supply channel drives output due to the closure of all non-


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             43
essential industries, whereas the demand channel prevails approximately 30 days before the re-

strictions are implemented (Panel (b)). Among the 15 industry groups, “Accommodation and food

services,” “Construction” and “Mining and non-quarrying of non-energy producing products” are

those that result in the highest economic costs of 12%, 9.5%, and 9.1% of the valued added generated

in those sectors, respectively. Different from the no lockdown scenario, sectoral heterogeneity is not

highly pronounced in terms of supply and demand pressures under this scenario. To be specific,

after the restrictions are implemented the supply channel dominates for all the sectors excluding

“Human health & social work,” and “Public administration.”

   Panel (c) shows that under partial lockdown that is put into practice between 10th -250th days of

the pandemic and evolves with a moderate infection rate (0.25 × β 0 ), the supply channel dominates

in the first 100 days of pandemic. On the other hand, demand drives output for the rest of the year,

including the days in which new peak levels are reached after the partial lockdown is prematurely

removed. This is because of the fact that businesses remain open, which feeds the virus within the

industries and increases the uncertainty about the containment of the pandemic. Among the 15

industry groups, “Accommodation and food services,” “Arts, entertainment, recreation and other

service activities,” and “Real estate activities” are those that result in highest economic costs of 36%,

34%, and 21% of the value added generated in those sectors, respectively. We note that sectoral

heterogeneity in terms of supply and demand pressures is very similar to the no lockdown scenario.



5.3.3   The Role of External Finance in Sectoral Cost


In the previous sub-section, we calculated the economic costs of COVID-19 for each sector. There is

heterogeneity among these sectors regarding their external finance needs. Although we have shown

that the role of foreign demand is substantial in those sectoral estimates, we want to also identify

the role of external finance needs in the calculated economic costs.

   To do this, we consider a regression specification at the sector-level. Specifically, we regress the

economic cost in each sector onto its I-O link as well as the capital needs in that sector. For sector

economic costs we will use both the costs calculated under no lockdown scenario and the ones

calculated under full lockdown scenario. We proxy for the sector-level external finance needs by



                                                   44
generating an interaction term that captures the degree to which each sector is open to capital flows.

This sector-level proxy is computed as a weighted sum of net I-O trade of country-sector pairs where

the weights are country specific capital flows divided by the number of countries.35,36

    A priori, we expect tradable sectors to be hit harder from the COVID-19 shock because they are

exposed to adverse foreign demand shocks in addition to domestic shocks. However, via I-O links,

even a non-tradeable sector can get hit hard and hence we capture both of these channels via our

I-O trade variable. Furthermore, the more a particular sector relies on external borrowing, the larger

should be the economic costs during COVID-19 crisis due to increased risk aversion.

    In order to test these hypotheses, we run the following regression:



                             ∆Yi = β 0 + β 1 I-O Tradei + β 2 I-O Trade Financei + ε i                                   (37)

where ∆Yi stands for the economic cost of the COVID-19 shock for sector i for i = 1, . . . , K, that

we estimate under no lockdown scenario in which no policy action is taken against the pandemic.

We measure the sector-level economic cost as the percentage change in overall economic activity

(proxied by output (Yi ) or value added (VAi ), where value added equals total production minus in-

termediate inputs i.e., VAi =Yi -INTi .) for a given sector during pandemic relative to its pre-pandemic

level. I-O Tradei is the I-O trade linkage for sector i and I-O Trade Financei is the sector-level proxy

variable that captures the interdependence between trade linkages and external finance needs.37

    In equation (37), β 1 captures the impact of I-O trade linkages on COVID-19 related economic

losses; β 2 captures the impact of interdependence between trade linkages and external finance needs

on COVID-19 related economic losses; and β 1 + β 2 captures the total impact of being a small econ-

omy linked to production networks and borrowing externally to finance those links.

    As a robustness check, we add sectoral FX debt (measured as the ratio of foreign currency debt
                                                                                  n
   35 We   calculate the sector-level proxy as follows: I-O Trade Financei =      ∑ (((Exportsc,i − Importsc,i )/Outputi ) ×
                                                                                 c =1
Capital Flowsc )/n where Exportsc,i , Importsc,i and Outputi refer to final goods and intermediate goods made in sector
i to be sold in the corresponding country c, final goods and intermediate goods that are bought from the corresponding
country c to be used in sector i, and total output produced in sector i, respectively.
    36 The related data on capital flows is obtained from BIS and it is publicly available at https://stats.bis.org/statx/srs/

table/A6.2?c=TR&p=20194&m=. Capital flows data of Turkey from 26 countries refers to data on Turkish banking sector
external liabilities vis-a-vis those countries for 2019-Q4. We normalize flows by GDP as of 2019.
    37 See the footnotes 38 and 39 for further details on the calculation of this variable.




                                                             45
                                     Table 1: S ECTOR - LEVEL R EGRESSIONS

 Scenario                               No Lockdown                                          Full Lockdown
                         (1)           (2)          (3)             (4)         (5)           (6)         (7)       (8)
 Dep. Var.           Output Loss   Output Loss    VA Loss         VA Loss   Output Loss   Output Loss   VA Loss   VA Loss

 I-O Trade            15.9829**      16.4862**   16.0273**    16.5283**       1.7337        2.0190      1.1996     1.4767
                        (6.402)        (6.426)     (6.388)      (6.412)       (1.688)       (1.576)     (1.919)    (1.847)
 I-O Trade Finance    34.7770*       35.6340**   34.9502*     35.8033**       5.4198        5.9057      4.8717     5.3435
                       (17.351)       (17.256)    (17.331)     (17.234)       (4.593)       (4.218)     (5.274)    (4.988)
 FX                                   0.1579**                 0.1572**                    0.0895***              0.0869**
                                       (0.076)                  (0.076)                     (0.023)                (0.034)

 R2                      0.12           0.2         0.12            0.2        0.007         0.16        0.004      0.11


N OTES: Table 1 reports the results of estimation of equation (37) for two alternative scenarios. No Lockdown: No action
is taken against the COVID-19 pandemic; Full Lockdown: A lockdown is put into practice between the 91st and 131st
days of the pandemic and is fully effective with zero reproduction number. Dependent variable is defined as sector-level
economic cost of the COVID-19 shock that is measured as the percentage change in overall economic activity for a given
sector during pandemic relative to its pre-pandemic level. In Columns (1)-(2); (5)-(6) economic activity is proxied by
output, and by value added in Columns (3)-(4); (7)-(8), respectively. Heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors are
reported in parentheses. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




in total debt as of 2016) to equation (37) as an additional explanatory variable. This variable also

captures domestic borrowing in foreign currency in each sector as opposed to only international

borrowing that the I-O Trade Finance variable captures. I-O Trade Finance variable might be skewed

towards tradeable sectors, while FX debt variable also captures the domestic foreign currency bor-

rowing of non-tradeable sectors such as construction as reflected in Figure 2.

      The regression results are highly consistent with our expectations. The positive and highly sig-

nificant coefficient estimates in the first columns of Table 1, confirm the importance of international

linkages on sectoral COVID losses under no lockdown. The results suggest that sectors with stronger

I-O links suffer from larger COVID-19 related losses. They further suggest that sectors who finance

these stronger production links through capital flows and sectors with higher FX exposure suffer

even more, highlighting the additional adverse impact of COVID-19 on EMs with high external

debt and domestic FX debt.

      Interestingly, when we use the sectoral COVID losses that we estimate under full lockdown sce-

nario on the left hand side in columns (5) to (8), the strong relation between sectoral output losses

and I-O trade and finance linkages disappear. This is because now there is almost no sectoral vari-

ation on the left hand side that can be linked to open economy linkages. The coefficient on FX debt


                                                             46
stays positive and significant with a similar magnitude as this debt is mostly borrowed domesti-

cally and hence still linked to the sectoral variation in COVID losses as higher FX debt sectors are

also the ones with close proximity jobs and hence higher COVID losses. The sectoral breakdown

of the Turkish inflation data as of June 2020 provides an early confirmation of these findings. It is

observed that the service sectors that are hit the hardest from COVID, such as transportation, food

and accommodation, or arts and entertainment are the ones that experienced the highest monthly

price increases. Given the substantial withdrawal of demand in these sectors, the increase in the

price level reflects supply side pressures because these sectors have high external debt, domestic FX

debt, and I-O linkages.



5.4   Taking Stock

When we take a look at the experiences of the countries over the course of the pandemic, we note

that there are several paths adopted by different countries:


  (i) Full lockdown: Greece, New Zealand and Denmark provide good examples for an effective

      full lockdown. Our analysis indicates that this is the policy that minimizes economic costs by

      containing the pandemic in the most effective way.

 (ii) No lockdown: Very few countries considered no lockdown since the beginning of the pan-

      demic. No lockdown approach might yield lower economic costs but the death toll is signifi-

      cantly higher. The economic costs are mostly dependent on the changes in demand.

 (iii) No lockdown followed by a full lockdown: At the beginning of the crisis, UK adopted a no

      lockdown approach. However, this approach was abandoned later on due to public pressure

      as the death toll rose. UK then adopted a full lockdown policy to contain the pandemic. Our

      analysis indicates that if the lockdown was not delayed, there would be less mortality and the

      economic costs would be lower because the lockdown would begin with a smaller number of

      infections.

 (iv) Partial lockdown followed by full lockdown: Many countries followed this route including

      Italy, France, Germany, Spain, Iran, Russia among others. Several of these counties recently


                                                 47
      announced that they will gradually lift restrictions. The duration of full lockdown is longer

      than it could have been, had it been implemented earlier. In Italy, for example, a full lockdown

      went into effect on March 10, and the restrictions are announced to be removed by May 4, after

      approximately two months under full lockdown.

  (v) Enhanced Partial lockdown: Turkey started with immediate partial lockdown measures which

      were enhanced over the course of the pandemic. Schools were closed on March 16 and the

      businesses were encouraged to work remotely where possible. On March 21, a curfew was

      imposed for people above the age of 65 and those with chronic diseases. The curfew was

      extended to those younger than 20 on April 5, effectively putting close to 40% of the popula-

      tion under full lockdown. Furthermore, a full lockdown was implemented on weekends and

      national holidays starting on April 9 in 31 largest cities which constitute approximately 87%

      of the population.38 After about 45 days since the beginning of enhanced partial lockdown

      measures, R0 is reduced below 1 and the number of new patients is lower than the number of

      recovered patients as of the last week of April.


    Where does this take us? Our analysis indicates that a full lockdown at the early stages of the cri-

sis can bring the pandemic under control relatively quickly. There are countries who implemented

this successfully but also countries such as India, who tried an early full lockdown but did not suc-

ceed. The individual performance of the country depends on several factors that affect the recovery

and the infection rates. An evaluation of Turkey’s performance, two months after the introduction

of lockdown measures indicates that Turkey did reasonably well. Potential reasons for the superior

performance are the remarkable ICU capacity, young population, less care homes, as well as the

generally compliant population where government decrees are not challenged.                        39   If an enhanced

partial lockdown is already in place, which is successful in lowering R0 below 1, then the need for

full lockdown may not be imminent. However, our results reflect that the duration of the lockdown

would have been shorter if more restrictive measures were adopted right away.

    An emerging question at this stage is the removal of restrictions once the pandemic is taken un-
    38 These cities include the 30 metropolitan municipalities and Zonguldak, which constitute close to 79% of the pop-

ulation. On top of these, the age-based restrictions are intact in the rest of Turkey, which increases the number close to
87%.
    39 See https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/covid19/2020/06/04/how-has-turkey-done-in-its-fight-against-covid-19-the-jury-is-

still-out/ for a detailed evaluation of Turkey’s performance based on our framework


                                                           48
der control. As the duration of lockdown increases, policy makers get anxious about opening up

their economies. In this paper, we model demand as a function of the number of infections and

combine this with actual spending decline during COVID-19, measured in the data with credit card

purchases. Thus, our framework implies that demand would not normalize by the mere attempt of

removing the restrictions, so long as the number of infections are sizable. What is worse is that the

number of infections would increase again as businesses open. In the model, we do not explicitly

incorporate expectations about infections and implicitly assume that the two are highly correlated.

Meanwhile, one can imagine a forward looking demand curve, which could be a function of infec-

tion expectations rather than the actual number of infections. In this case, leaders might be able to

affect expectations about the number of infections and revive demand by removing the restrictions.

To the extent that leaders can successfully convey a more optimistic outlook, the negative demand

effect that we model in this paper may weaken and the economic costs of prematurely ending a

lockdown might decline.

    Another imminent issue is the potential second wave once the restrictions are removed. This is

particularly a problem for those countries that adopted a full lockdown at the early stages of the

crisis and controlled the pandemic in their own countries. If they open their borders, there is the

risk of a second wave. If they do not open their borders, then they cannot fully normalize and suffer

from an extended partial lockdown given the importance of the amplification effects on economic

costs for open economies. The takeaway at this stage is that if a second wave of the COVID-19 virus

hits, then an immediate and potentially global lockdown would work in the most effective way.



6   What are the policy options for EMs?

The previous sections illustrate the economic costs of the pandemic due to a fall in the GDP given

the large supply and demand shocks for a small open economy. A lockdown increases the short-

term costs but increases the long-term gains by leading the way to a faster recovery. One of the

shortcomings of the model is that it does not incorporate the damage to the productive capacity

that are caused by company closures. We simply assume that the productive capacity remains intact

and the companies jump back to production once the pandemic is over. This is an overly optimistic


                                                 49
assumption and in the absence of a comprehensive support program, the liquidity issues would turn

into solvency issues. This could lead to unnecessary bankruptcies, a deeper recession and a sluggish

recovery.40 Indeed, this is exactly why our estimates in the previous section should be interpreted as

the lower bound costs of a stimulus package that is necessary to offset the damages of the COVID-19

crisis and keep the economic units alive.

      A quickly implemented stimulus package that compensates the income loss due to the lockdown

and enables a faster recovery would minimize the long term damage in the production capacity. If

the stimulus packages are delayed, on the other hand, more companies would fail, more workers

would be laid-off, and demand would decline further. This would then feed into more bankruptcies

and elevate the economic costs that quickly become unmanageable. In fact, just as a drowning

person needs immediate help or else her organs start to fail, the economy needs immediate help

before the companies start to fail. Fiscal transfers can help to ensure that the supply chains are not

destroyed, the economic units are functional and ready to go back to production once the pandemic

is contained and demand returns. Fortunately, many governments around the world took decisive

action. In the case of EMs, however, policy options are limited given the limited fiscal space. As

put by former Colombian finance minister, Mauricio Cardenas:41 “We do not live in whatever it

takes region, we can do whatever we can.” Thus, we next discuss the possible ways to finance the

economic costs related to COVID in EMs.



6.1     Quantitative Easing or Debt Monetization? What is the difference?

The buzz-word in advanced countries for the funding needed to deal with the crisis is ”helicopter

money.” In economists’ jargon, this is called monetary financing where the central bank prints

money and transfers resources to firms and households either directly, as in the Federal Reserve’s

recent policy of purchasing commercial paper and corporate debt, or indirectly by purchasing gov-

ernment bonds and enabling the government to use the proceeds to deal with the crisis.

      In the process of monetary financing of the debt, the central bank’s balance sheet will enlarge,

either through direct loans to institutions or through large scale asset purchases (i.e. the so called
  40 See   Kalemli-Özcan et al. (2018), Gourinchas et al. (2020), and https://voxeu.org/article/proposal-negative-sme-tax
  41 The   Economist, May 25, 2020.



                                                            50
“quantitative easing” (QE) programs). In a QE, the central bank prints money and buys sizeable

amounts of government bonds. In the recent history, this was observed after the Great Recession

both in the US and in Europe. The advantage of direct lending is that the liquidity is drained more

easily when the loans are paid back.

    How is debt monetization different? A central bank typically purchases securities through open

market operations to meet the liquidity needs, consistent with its goal of price stability. The techni-

cal difference between money printing through an open market purchase and monetizing the debt

is slim (Mishkin, 2007). Thus, one might argue that QE policies are effectively debt monetization

(Orphanides, 2017). The Federal Reserve begs to differ and argues that debt monetization refers to

a “permanent” source of funding for the government by the central bank and separates QE policies

from debt monetization.42, 43 So as long as the central bank commits to inflation targeting and nor-

malizes its balance sheet when inflationary pressures kick in, asset purchases in the form of QE are

not considered debt monetization (Andolfatto and Li, 2013). Based on this nuance, one can argue

that QE and debt monetization are “observationally equivalent” in the short run, and the difference

becomes apparent in the long run, with the central bank’s ability to shrink its balance sheets to coun-

teract inflationary pressures. Hence, using the Federal Reserve’s usage of the term, the criterion for

bond purchases to be considered debt monetization is whether the central bank fails to drain the

money effectively later on and the money remains in the system permanently such that it leads to

inflationary pressures.

    In advanced economies, the distinction between QE and debt monetization can be easier to ascer-

tain where the inflation rate is well-anchored and central bank credibility is well established. In fact,

the inflation rate has not exceeded the 2 percent target in the US or Europe in the aftermath of large

scale quantitative easing policies after the Great Recession. The distinction between QE and debt

monetization can get blurry in EMs, however, particularly for those with a history of high inflation

and weak credibility.
   42 In  the FAQs prepared by the Federal Reserve Board (https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/money 12853.htm), it is
noted that “The term “printing money” often refers to a situation in which the central bank is effectively financing the
deficit of the federal government on a permanent basis by issuing large amounts of currency. This situation does not exist
in the United States.”
    43 In response to a question from the lawmakers on June 3, 2009, then-chairman Bernanke had noted that the “Federal

Reserve will not monetize the debt”: https://www.c-span.org/video/?c4546512/user-clip-bernanke-debt-monetization




                                                           51
   The key to a successful QE is policy credibility. A badly managed QE would erode credibility

of the monetary policy making and de-anchor inflation expectations. This would only escalate the

existing crisis by pushing the inflation rate on a higher trajectory and causing sharp depreciations

in domestic currency. Hence, if it is not executed properly and the money is not drained from the

system at the right time, QE can turn into inflationary debt monetization. In that respect, QE is far

more challenging for EM central banks with weaker track records who need to be extra careful to

clearly communicate their QE policies for policies to be credible.44

   How does this apply to Turkey? There is a rapid increase in CBRT’s bond holdings (Figure 16),

which reflects sizable balance sheet expansion. Although the the size of purchases is currently lim-

ited to 10% of CBRT’s balance sheet, the statement on March 31 suggests that these limits might be

adjusted as needed. Thus, even though the data on purchases is publicly available, there is not yet

an announcement of an explicit QE program with a clear exit strategy as is typically done in the

advanced economies. We argue that transparent communication on this issue will be even more

important going forward and hence rather than the absolute limit on the purchases, how foreign

investors’ sentiments change with these purchases is more important. If the limits announced can

be data driven and tied to economic conditions in the country in question, they will be more trans-

parent.   45

  44 Foreign investors sentiments are aligned with this view, see https://www.ft.com/content/6a63d700-3a59-4e3f-8092-

4c818ffaa9d8.
   45 See https://www.ft.com/content/6a63d700-3a59-4e3f-8092-4c818ffaa9d8.




                                                        52
                                             Figure 16: CBRT’s Holdings of Government Bonds

                              50000


                              45000


                              40000


                              35000
                 Million TL




                              30000


                              25000


                              20000


                              15000


                              10000
                                       -01
                                                 -01
                                                       -01
                                                              -01
                                                                    -01
                                                                           -01
                                                                                 -01
                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01

                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                              20 02-0
                                      -01
                                            -02
                                                   -03
                                                         -04
                                                                -05
                                                                      -06
                                                                             -07
                                                                                   -08
                                                                                          -09
                                                                                                    -10
                                                                                                    -11
                                                                                                    -12
                                                                                                    -01


                                                                                                    -03
                                                                                                    -04
                                                                                                    -05
                                                                                                    -06
                                                                                                    -07
                                                                                                    -08
                                                                                                    -09
                                                                                                    -10
                                                                                                    -11
                                                                                                    -12
                                                                                                    -01
                                                                                                    -02
                                                                                                    -03
                                                                                                    -04
                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                 18




                                                                                                 19
                                  18
                                            18
                                                  18
                                                         18
                                                               18
                                                                      18
                                                                            18
                                                                                   18
                                                                                         18
                                                                                              18


                                                                                                 18
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                 19


                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                   20




                                                                                              20
                                 20
                                       20
                                                 20
                                                       20
                                                              20
                                                                    20
                                                                           20
                                                                                 20
                                                                                        20
                                                                                              20


                                                                                              20
                                                                                              20
                                                                                              20


                                                                                              20
                                                                                              20
                                                                                              20
                                                                                              20
                                                                                              20
                                                                                              20
                                                                                              20


                                                                                              20
                                                                                              20
                                                                                              20
                                                                                              20
                                                                                              20
N OTES: This figure plots the holdings government bonds of the CBRT. Source: Turkey Data Monitor




    If you face a 1.5 percent inflation rate as in the US, and a deep recession is on its way, inflationary

consequences of QE may not be imminent. This is because the public does not expect inflation to

get out of control despite these excessive measures. There is still belief that the Fed will drain the

money from the system at the right time and establish price control. Furthermore, because market

participants do not expect the US government to default on its debt, there will not be a sharp decline

in demand for US government bonds, which will keep interest rates under control. Turkey has been

missing its 5 percent inflation target for some time now and the market sentiment is such that policy

credibility eroded over the course of years (see Cakmakli and Demiralp (2020).                               46


    The ultimate goal is to convince the market participants that QE will not turn into inflationary

debt monetization. A detailed bond purchase calendar can be communicated with spending targets

and the conditions under which the money will be drained from the system.47 One way to increase
   46 See e.g. https://www.ft.com/content/a2a178f8-a109-11e9-974c-ad1c6ab5efd1 or https://www.wsj.com/articles/

turkish-lira-falls-after-central-bank-defiantly-leaves-rates-unchanged-1532433561 for the unfavorable perception of
credibility in alternative media outlets
   47 See Unsal, Papageorgiou and Garbers, 2020 on central bank communication for unconventional policies.




                                                                                                        53
the transparency of QE could be through a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV). An SPV would allow

central banks to buy government bonds through this entity and separate these COVID-19 related

bond purchases from the daily maintenance of monetary policy. The extent of monetary expansion

that is solely due to COVID-19 crisis could be easily trackable in this manner. In turn, the money

that is generated through this program should be spent in targeted sectors and announced by the

government.

      While a transparent and well executed QE could provide immediate funding that is necessary to

deal with COVID-19 crisis, it would likely be insufficient. The case of Turkey, as several other EMs,

requires a joint thinking of fiscal needs and capital flows given foreign financing needs. In the next

section, we discuss the magnitude of external funding needs in Turkey.



6.2     External Funding Needs, Capital Controls, and the Role of External Anchor

Considering the facts that (i) the total amount of external debt that needs to be paid or rolled-over

in 2020 is 23 percent of GDP and (ii) the current open FX position of the entire corporate sector as

of January 2020 (which is -$175 billion) is almost 25 percent of GDP, Turkey has serious external

funding needs. Our analysis in the earlier sections highlighted that those sectors with stronger trade

linkages and higher external funding needs are more vulnerable during COVID-19 crisis. In order

to get a sense of the economic outlook for these sectors and highlight the potential risks, this section

investigates the external funding needs for the Turkish economy in the post COVID-19 world.

      The rapid increase in the risk premium (Figure 3) shows that cost of external borrowing is getting

higher for most EMs, which will make it harder to rollover external debt. News reports reflect

that the investor sentiment is deteriorating given the large short-term external debt of the banking

sector.48 Many EMs are in a similar spot where the largest capital outflow so far was observed

in Brazil with 12 billion USD outflow from the stock market and 19 billion USD outflow from the

bond market before May 2020. Investors cited “fear” not only about the pandemic but also about

the uncertainty surrounding the economic policies.49 These sizable numbers for large EMs such as

Turkey and Brazil suggest that several out-of-the-box policies may be needed.
  48 See   https://www.reuters.com/article/turkey-banks-funding-idUSL8N2DF21S.
  49 See   Financial Times, June 2, 2020, Brazil Record Outflows.



                                                       54
    In terms of policy alternatives for Turkey, a rate hike to compensate for the risk premium could

be an option. Nevertheless, even in the absence of a large demand shock such as COVID, tight

monetary policy may not be fully effective under a large risk-off shock, as shown by Kalemli-Özcan

(2019). During risk-off shocks, raising policy rates to defend the currency and to bring back the capi-

tal flows backfires based on historical experiences, especially in countries with low policy credibility

and high risk premia. In addition, given the large negative demand shock, the necessary accom-

modation can only be provided by loosening the monetary policy as many EMs, including Turkey,

have done so far. On the other hand, EMs with high external debt cannot rely on rate cuts entirely

either and need to find the balance between supporting domestic demand and limiting the volatility

of their domestic currencies.50

    A swap agreement with the Federal Reserve or another international institution51 can help to

address the liquidity needs arising from COVID-19 crisis, but this may not be enough on its own if

the pandemic extends and weakens the businesses ability to remain in operation and service their

debt, given the size of the domestic fiscal needs and external financing needs.52 On May 20, Turkey

announced that the existing swap line with Qatar is expanded to $15 billion. However, no swap

arrangements with G20 countries with whom Turkey has sizable trade relationships has been an-

nounced yet. It should also be noted that the Federal Reserve did not expand the list of countries

that are eligible for a swap line since the GFC. Because Turkey was not it the original list during

GFC, it is rather unlikely that a swap line can be arranged with the Fed at this time.53

    Yet another alternative is to introduce capital controls to trap both residents’ and non-residents’

foreign currency assets in Turkey, which in turn will limit the TL depreciation. Notice that, while

capital controls on inflows during a boom might reduce the future probability of a sudden stop and

protect financial stability,54 capital controls on outflows during a large risk-off shock might have un-

intended consequences.55 Historically, capital controls on outflows have not been very effective (see

Loungani and Mauro (2000)). Most likely, what EMs need is more capital inflows, not controls on
  50 See  , Basu et al. (2020) who models optimal policy mix for EMs that will allow them monetary policy autonomy.
  51 The   average emergency swap agreement granted by the IMF is about $11bn, https://www.imf.org/en/News/
Articles/2020/04/07/sp040920-SMs2020-Curtain-Raiser, and the total outstanding amount granted by the Federal Re-
serve’s international swap lines is $18.9 bn as of April 14, https://apps.newyorkfed.org/markets/autorates/fxswap.
   52 https://blogs.imf.org/2020/03/16/policy-action-for-a-healthy-global-economy/#.Xm9rH3Oc-7A.twitter
   53 https://yetkinreport.com/en/2020/05/11/would-the-fed-establish-a-swap-line-with-turkey/
   54 Mendoza (2010), Basu et al. (2020).
   55 Bartolini and Drazen (1997).



                                                        55
outflows. If EMs breach contracts, they might face legal action by private creditors, which compro-

mises their future access to capital markets. Especially when there is significant foreign investment

in local currency bonds of EMs, a panic by foreign investors would put even more pressure on local

currency and inflation. As a result, such controls might further erode the policy credibility and scare

foreign capital during the recovery phase when it will be most needed, especially for a country like

Turkey who is already heavily dependent on external funding.56 Hence, going back to our previous

analogy, one might try to keep horses in the barn but needs to be also careful about not scaring the

horses that can scar them for a longer time.

    Since the beginning of COVID-19 outbreak, Turkey took certain steps that were perceived as

as mild forms of capital control by the markets, mostly on domestic residents.57 Such steps took

the form of limiting TL supply in international swap markets, notifying the government regarding

sizable FX transfers abroad, or restricting the TL transactions of large custodian banks. More recently

on May 24, the tax on exchange rate and gold transactions has been increased from 0.2 percent to

1 percent. These measures deter foreign investors not only because they limit their ability to move

their capital around but also because they give the impression of random changes in the legislation.

Unpredictable changes in regulations that are viewed as interventions to the free market mechanism

have the potential to discourage future capital inflows and damage policy credibility.58 If the global

recovery takes longer than a few years, interest rates would remain low in advanced countries and

foreign investors would likely be willing to invest in riskier EM assets driven by search for yield

motives similar to the period after 2007-2009 crisis. In that case, costs of too early capital controls

might be not accessing finance in the medium term since it is well known that once capital controls

on outflows put in place, it takes a long time to remove them.59 In terms of their benefits, it could

be argued that capital controls would prevent further dollarization that might be triggered by the

TL liquidity injected through the QE program. Nevertheless, dollarization can also be prevented

without capital controls if there is enough policy credibility to keep inflation expectations anchored.
   56 These arguments reflect the views of foreign investors. See e.g. https://www.reuters.com/article/turkey-banks-

funding-idUSL8N2DF21S.
   57 See, e.g., Financial Times article on February 9 https://www.ft.com/content/8eb51526-4bd5-11ea-95a0-

43d18ec715f5 or on April 30 https://www.ft.com/content/06c85177-39ae-42fd-90cb-1d6bc6cbb11a
   58 See a nice summary of restrictions during COVID-19 period by Avci, 2020: https://yetkinreport.com/en/2020/05/

14/will-turkey-attract-foreign-investments-after-covid-19/
   59 For example, it took Iceland 10 years to lift the controls put during the 2007-2008 crisis. See https://voxeu.org/

article/capital-controls-21st-century.



                                                          56
     One final alternative is a debt moratorium on foreign lenders. However, since foreign lenders are

private creditors (and not official creditors), this would involve complicated debt default and debt

restructuring. Unless private creditors offer the moratorium in a synchronized way as suggested

by Rogoff and Reinhart (2020), a disorderly one would again hamper the medium to long-term

credibility.

     While there are still significant uncertainties regarding the future course of the pandemic, the

alternatives that we laid out in this section aim to provide a better sense of potential scenarios if the

crisis lengthens and global financial conditions tighten. If the external financial needs cannot be met

through the market mechanism, then granting FX liquidity through arrangements with international

institutions seem to be the optimal solution that would minimize future risks and speed up economic

recovery. Our estimates in this paper suggest that those sectors that rely more on external borrowing

are hit harder during COVID-19. Thus, keeping the flow of FX credit is particularly important for

these sectors to maintain their production capacities.

     Although EMs did not observe a crisis similar to COVID-19, their history is full of crises, where

different stabilization policies were employed. Turkey’s own historical experience involves a trans-

parent QE program to meet the immediate liquidity needs combined with guaranteed external fi-

nance through an international institution in the aftermath of 2001 crisis. This was a combination

of banking crisis, sovereign debt crisis and a balance of payments crisis. During that time, Turkey

employed a sizable asset purchase program under an IMF program, keeping inflation expectations

in check with a transparent inflation targeting framework. We lay out the details of this episode in

the next section.



7     Lessons from History: Bond Purchases under an IMF program

When the financial crisis hit in February 2001, Turkey already had a standby agreement with the

IMF, ongoing since December 1999.60 State banks and Savings Deposit Insurance Fund (SDIF) ex-

perienced significant losses during the 2001 crisis, which elevated their liquidity needs. In order

to meet their liquidity needs and recapitalize these institutions, government securities were trans-
    60 The
         history of lending arrangements with the IMF are available at the following link: https://www.imf.org/
external/np/fin/tad/extarr2.aspx?memberKey1=980&date1key=2008-03-31.


                                                      57
ferred to these institutions. The securities were then sold to the CBRT to receive cash to cover their

liquidity needs. The size of securities purchases reached approximately 8 percent of GDP during

that time. In turn, the CBRT drained the excess liquidity gradually through conventional methods

(i.e., either through reverse repos or through its overnight borrowing facility) in order to prevent

an unintended decline in market rates (see Statement of Intent, 2001).61 When the ongoing 1999

program was deemed to be insufficient, a new and more comprehensive standby agreement was

signed in 2002 which particularly aimed at lowering inflation expectations by strengthening policy

credibility.62

    The asset purchases that were undertaken in the post-2001 period took place at the same time

Turkey started a new regime to take inflation under control. An amendment to the Central Bank

Law (no: 1211) in 2001 granted operational independence. In the same amendment, it was stated

that direct bond purchases from the government would continue until November 2001. The bond

purchase program (debt monetization) was acknowledged in the 2002 agreement as well.63 Figure

17 displays the overall size of CBRT’s total assets in real terms. We observe that CBRT’s total assets

increased about 122 percent, from January 2000 to November 2001. To provide perspective, the

Federal Reserve’s balance sheet increased 100 percent after four rounds of QEs from December 2008

through October 2014.
   61 https://www.imf.org/external/np/loi/2001/tur/02/index.htm
    62 As stated in Statement of Intent, 2001: “This program is a continuation of the one initiated in late 1999, with the

support of a stand-by arrangement with the International Monetary Fund. It shares the same strategy: disinflate the
Turkish economy, strengthen the fiscal accounts, and reform the structure of the Turkish economy as a condition for setting
economic growth on a sustainable basis and moving Turkey closer to its goal of joining the European Union. However, the
program’s policies have been significantly strengthened, in response to the recent crisis that led to the float of the Turkish
lira on February 22, 2001, including through increased emphasis on transparency, accountability, and good governance
in both the private and public sectors. In support of our strengthened program, we request that the arrangement be
augmented by the equivalent of SDR 6.3624 billion and that the purchases scheduled through end-2001 be rephased and
would consequently be subject to reviews which are expected to be completed during May, June, July, September, and
November 2001.”
    63 https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2016/12/30/Turkey-2002-Article-IV-Consultation-and-First-

Review-Under-the-Stand-By-Arrangement-Staff-15925




                                                             58
                                                          Figure 17: Total Assets of CBRT

                     1000



                      900



                      800



                      700



                      600



                      500



                      400
                            -01

                                  -07

                                        -01

                                              -07

                                                    -01

                                                          -07

                                                                -01

                                                                      -07

                                                                            -01

                                                                                  -07

                                                                                        -01

                                                                                              -07

                                                                                                    -01

                                                                                                          -07

                                                                                                                -01

                                                                                                                      -07

                                                                                                                            -01

                                                                                                                                  -07

                                                                                                                                        -01

                                                                                                                                              -07

                                                                                                                                                    -01

                                                                                                                                                          -07

                                                                                                                                                                -01

                                                                                                                                                                      -07

                                                                                                                                                                            -01

                                                                                                                                                                                  -07
                            95

                                  95

                                        96

                                              96

                                                    97

                                                          97

                                                                98

                                                                      98

                                                                            99

                                                                                  99

                                                                                        00

                                                                                              00

                                                                                                    01

                                                                                                          01

                                                                                                                02

                                                                                                                      02

                                                                                                                            03

                                                                                                                                  03

                                                                                                                                        04

                                                                                                                                              04

                                                                                                                                                    05

                                                                                                                                                          05

                                                                                                                                                                06

                                                                                                                                                                      06

                                                                                                                                                                            07

                                                                                                                                                                                  07
                         19

                                 19

                                       19

                                             19

                                                   19

                                                         19

                                                               19

                                                                     19

                                                                           19

                                                                                 19

                                                                                       20

                                                                                             20

                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                                 20
N OTES: This figure plots total assets of CBRT in real terms, normalized by CPI. The figure ends prior to 2007-2009 global
crisis. After this date, CBRT’s balance sheet expanded again thanks to capital inflows in the post-crisis environment.
Source: Turkey Data Monitor.




    The 2002 standby agreement with the IMF not only met the external funding needs but it also

provided the much needed credibility to boost confidence in the program and prevent excessive

depreciation in the local currency. The comprehensive package of reforms that was supported by

the standby agreement was instrumental in limiting domestic funding needs. In turn, this restricted

the volume of asset purchases, taking the pressure off inflation expectations. Once the liquidity

needs subsided, the liquidity was drained from the system promptly and transparently. As a result

of these coordinate efforts, there was a successful disinflation performance as shown below in the

absence of volatility in the exchange rate (Figures 18a and 18b).

    An essential part of disinflationary policies in the post crisis period involved lowering inflation

expectations. The program anchored inflation expectations by ensuring that large scale bond pur-

chases would not turn into debt monetization. In order to prevent bond purchases from causing a

substantive increase in inflation expectations and restore investor confidence in the program, public



                                                                                              59
finance and debt management laws were introduced to improve fiscal transparency and accountabil-

ity. Furthermore, the budgetary impact of the additional funds needed to restructure the banking

system was offset by increasing public savings in other areas to keep the overall budget under con-

trol. This step limited the extent of public borrowing and prevented market interest rates from rising

further.

                                                                                                             Figure 18: Inflation Rate and Exchange Rate

                                                                (a) Inflation Rate                                                                                                                                                                     (b) USD/TL Exchange Rate

      75                                                                                                                                                                                                   7.5
      70                                                                                                                                                                                                    7
      65                                                                                                                                                                                                   6.5
      60                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
      55                                                                                                                                                                                                   5.5
      50                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
      45                                                                                                                                                                                                   4.5
      40                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
      35                                                                                                                                                                                                   3.5
      30
                                                                                                                                                                                                            3
      25
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2.5
      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2
      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                           1.5
      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1
       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                            .5
       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            1-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1-0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -01
              1

                        1

                                 1

                                          1

                                                   1

                                                            1

                                                                     1

                                                                              1

                                                                                       1

                                                                                                1

                                                                                                         1

                                                                                                               -01


                                                                                                                          1

                                                                                                                                   1

                                                                                                                                            1

                                                                                                                                                     1

                                                                                                                                                              1

                                                                                                                                                                       1

                                                                                                                                                                                1

                                                                                                                                                                                         1

                                                                                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       -0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -0
              -0

                      -0

                               -0

                                        -0

                                                 -0

                                                          -0

                                                                   -0

                                                                            -0

                                                                                     -0

                                                                                              -0

                                                                                                       -0




                                                                                                                        -0

                                                                                                                                 -0

                                                                                                                                          -0

                                                                                                                                                   -0

                                                                                                                                                            -0

                                                                                                                                                                     -0

                                                                                                                                                                              -0

                                                                                                                                                                                       -0

                                                                                                                                                                                                -0




                                                                                                                                                                                                             00

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         01

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    02

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               03

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          04

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     05

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                06

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           07

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      08

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 09

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            10

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  11

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  12

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  13

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  14

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  16

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  17

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  18

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
           00

                   01

                            02

                                     03

                                              04

                                                       05

                                                                06

                                                                         07

                                                                                  08

                                                                                           09

                                                                                                    10

                                                                                                             11

                                                                                                                     12

                                                                                                                              13

                                                                                                                                       14

                                                                                                                                                15

                                                                                                                                                         16

                                                                                                                                                                  17

                                                                                                                                                                           18

                                                                                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
       20

                   20

                            20

                                     20

                                              20

                                                       20

                                                                20

                                                                         20

                                                                                  20

                                                                                           20

                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                     20

                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                                         20

                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                                                                             20




N OTES: (a) This figure plots inflation rate for Turkey, which measured as year-on-year change of CPI. (b) This figure plots
USD/TL nominal exchange rate for Turkey. Source: Turkey Data Monitor




8    Conclusion and Policy Implications

Containing the pandemic as soon as possible is an urgent obligation to save human lives. Neverthe-

less, we have to act now also to deal with the economic fallout from the pandemic as the economic

costs can be substantial. As put by the IMF (2020), this is “a crisis like no other” with potentially far

more disastrous implications for emerging markets and developing economies relative to advanced

economies.

    We develop a small open economy SIR-multi-sector-macro model and calibrate it to Turkey using

real time data. The annual cost of the COVID-19 crisis that we estimated ranges between 5.8 percent

(full) and 11 percent (partial) of the Turkish GDP depending on the effectiveness and the duration

of the lockdown. We estimate that the most cost effective full lockdown scenario implies a quarterly


                                                                                                                                                                                                      60
GDP contraction of 17 percent. Delays in full lockdown, prematurely ending the lockdown, or a

combination of full lockdown with partial lockdown increases the toll. While the numbers are rather

scary and unforgiving, we take comfort in our prologue that ”Best safety lies in fear” and urge

caution in removing the lockdown restrictions, not only to save more lives but also to minimize the

economic toll. Large economic costs do not come from lockdowns but rather from the fear factor,

which can only go down once the disease is under control.

   To understand the policy options for EMs, we have to be aware of their key characteristics. Large

EMs are part of global supply chains and they have domestic and external debt, both denominated

in local currency and in foreign currency. They generally have lower policy credibility relative to

advanced economies. Most are heavily dependent on capital inflows to meet the demand in their

fast growing economies, where these inflows also finance the supply chains. EMs learned their

lessons from the crises of 1990s and early 2000s in the sense that they have manageable fiscal deficits

and better capitalized banking systems as they face the COVID-19 crisis. Nevertheless, they will

still operate with low fiscal space during their response to the COVID-19 shock given the size of the

shock, domestic health needs and capital flow reversals that lead to increasing external finance gaps.

   In terms of policy implications, EMs are in a position of difficult trade-offs. For a typical EM,

a large part of its external debt is in the form of domestic banks borrowing from global banks and

hence debt relief from official lenders will not help.64 If domestic banks cannot rollover their external

debt due to increased borrowing costs and insolvency risks of domestic firms, then there is a poten-

tial threat not only to domestic financial stability but also to global financial stability from elevated

stress in such EMs. The risk of a deep recession could be reduced under a targeted and transparent

asset purchase program by EM central banks, accompanied by external funding granted by an inter-

national institution in the absence of any financing from international capital markets. The literature

shows that asset purchases programs require policy credibility to keep inflation expectations under

control so that such programs do not turn into long term monetary financing of government debt.65

With rising country risk premia under COVID shock, the perceptions of global investors and the

market sentiment will be key determinants of capital flows.66 In this context, international financial
  64 Avdjiev  et al. (2017), Bruno and Shin (2015).
  65 See    https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/Bernanke ASSA lecture.pdf   for   Chairman
Bernanke’s ASSA lecture and the references therein.
   66 Rey (2015) and Kalemli-Özcan (2019).



                                                    61
institutions and central banks of reserve currency countries such as the Federal Reserve, can play a

key role in assuring global investors and changing the risk perceptions so that EMs will have access

to international financial markets.

   Turkey has large external financing needs, with an upcoming external debt payment in 2020

as large as 23 percent of the GDP ($169 bn). Given these numbers, it seems rather challenging

for Turkey to rollover its foreign currency debt and finance its domestic debt solely through a QE-

type program unless monetary policy is transparent and communicated clearly similar to the QE

policies of advanced countries. A well-designed and comprehensive package of macroeconomic and

structural reforms will increase policy credibility and reduce external borrowing costs and spreads.

Funding from international institutions would further signal support for the policy package and

help to cover the financing gap in international markets. This would further lower the external

finance premium and ease financial strains faced during the pandemic.

   There are still substantial uncertainties ahead of us regarding the course of the pandemic.67 In

the absence of global coordination, countries that successfully contain the virus struggle about how

to enable international trade and travel with the fear of a second wave. In this paper, we highlight

that the role of global coordination is essential for open economies with international I-O linkages.

If the lockdown could be implemented with global synchronization, demand would return to pre-

pandemic levels faster and the economic costs of the pandemic could be kept at a minimum level.

As this is not done so far, all the policy options should be on the table for EMs given the dynamic

nature of this crisis with new information arriving every day. Looking ahead, should a second wave

hit, a globally coordinated full lockdown would allow for the fastest global recovery.




  67 See   Baker et al. (2020) and Ludvigson et al. (2015) on the role of uncertainty shock linked to COVID-19.


                                                             62
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Vasco M. Carvalho, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Alireza Tahbaz-Salehi, “The Net-
  work Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 2012, 80 (5), 1977–2016.
  , Victor Chernozhukov, Iván Werning, and Michael D Whinston, “A Multi-Risk SIR Model with
  Optimally Targeted Lockdown,” Working Paper 27102, National Bureau of Economic Research
  May 2020.
Alfaro, Laura, Oscar Becerra, and Marcela Eslava, “EMEs and COVID-19 Shutting Down in a World
  of Informal and Tiny Firms,” Working Paper 27360, National Bureau of Economic Research June
  2020.
Allen, Linda JS, “A primer on stochastic epidemic models: Formulation, numerical simulation, and
  analysis,” Infectious Disease Modelling, 2017, 2 (2), 128–142.
Alon, Titan M, Minki Kim, David Lagakos, and Mitchell VanVuren, “How Should Policy Re-
  sponses to the COVID-19 Pandemic Differ in the Developing World?,” Working Paper 27273, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Alvarez, Fernando E, David Argente, and Francesco Lippi, “A simple planning problem for
  COVID-19 lockdown,” Working Paper 26981, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Andersen, Asger Lau, Emil Toft Hansen, Niels Johannesen, and Adam Sheridan, “Consumer Re-
 sponses to the COVID-19 Crisis: Evidence from Bank Account Transaction Data,” CEPR Discus-
 sion Papers 14809, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers 2020.
  , , , and , “Pandemic, Shutdown and Consumer Spending: Lessons from Scandinavian
  Policy Responses to COVID-19,” 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04630.
Andolfatto, David and Li Li, “Is the Fed monetizing government debt?,” 2013. Economic Synopses,
 Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.
Arellano, Cristina, Yan Bai, and Gabriel Mihalache, “Deadly Debt Crises: COVID-19 in Emerging
  Markets,” Working Paper 27275, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Atkeson, Andrew, “How Deadly is COVID-19? Understanding the Difficulties with Estimation of
  its Fatality Rate,” Working Paper 26965, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Avdjiev, Stefan, Bryan Hardy, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Luis ServÃ c n, “Gross Capital Flows
  by Banks, Corporates and Sovereigns,” Working Paper 23116, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search January 2017.
Baker, Scott R, Nicholas Bloom, Steven J Davis, and Stephen J Terry, “COVID-induced economic
  uncertainty,” Working Paper 26983, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
Baldwin, Richard and B Weder di Mauro, Economics in the Time of COVID-19, Vol. 26, Centre for
  Economic Policy Research, London, 2020. A VoxEU. org Book.
Baqaee, David and Emmanuel Farhi, “Nonlinear Production Networks with an Application to the
  COVID-19 crisis,” Working Paper 27281, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.
  and , “Supply and Demand in Disaggregated Keynesian Economies with an Application to the
  COVID-19 crisis,” Working Paper 27152, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

                                              63
  , , Michael J. Mina, and James H. Stock, “Reopening Scenarios,” Working Paper 27244, Na-
  tional Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Barrot, Jean-Noel, Basile Grassi, and Julien Sauvagnat, “Sectoral effects of social distancing,” 2020.
  Available at SSRN.

Bartlett, M. S., “The Critical Community Size for Measles in the United States,” Journal of the Royal
  Statistical Society: Series A (General), 1960, 123 (1), 37–44.

Bartolini, Leonardo and Allan Drazen, “Capital-Account Liberalization as a Signal,” The American
  Economic Review, 1997, 87 (1), 138–154.

Basu, Suman, Emine Boz, Gita Gopinath, Francisco Roch, and Filiz D. Unsal, “Integrated Mone-
  tary and Financial Policies for Small Open Economies,” in “NBER, Summmer Institute 2020 Inter-
  national Finance & Macroeconomics” 2020.

Bendavid, Eran and Jay Bhattacharya, “Is Coronavirus as Deadly as They Say?,” Wall Street Journal,
  2020, 24.

Bonadio, Barthelemy, Zhen Huo, Andrei A Levchenko, and Nitya Pandalai-Nayar, “Global Supply
  Chains in the Pandemic,” Working Paper 27224, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Bruno, Valentina and Hyun Song Shin, “Capital flows and the risk-taking channel of monetary
  policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2015, 71, 119 – 132.

Bürümçekçi, Haluk, “Not Defterimden, Günlük Bülten, 20 Nisan 2020,” Technical Report,
  Bürümçekçi Research & Consulting 2020. Dünya ve Türkiye’de Ekonomi ve Piyasaların Gündemi.

Cakmakli, Cem and Selva Demiralp, “A Dynamic Evaluation of Central Bank Credibility,” 2020.
  Mimeo, Koc University.

  , , Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Sevcan Yesiltas, and Muhammed Ali Yildirim, “Macro and Fi-
  nancial Policy Responses for Turkey in its fight against COVID-19,” Working Paper 2011, Koc
  University-TUSIAD Economic Research Forum 2020.

Carvalho, Vasco M, Stephen Hansen, Álvaro Ortiz, Juan Ramon Garcia, Tomasa Rodrigo, Sevi Ro-
  driguez Mora, and Pep Ruiz de Aguirre, “Tracking the Covid-19 crisis with high-resolution trans-
  action data,” CEPR Discussion Paper DP14642 2020.

Chetty, Raj, John N Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, and The Opportunity In-
 sights Team, “How Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment?
 A New Real-Time Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data,” Working Paper 27431, Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

del Rio-Chanona, R. Maria, Penny Mealy, Anton Pichler, Francois Lafond, and Doyne Farmer,
  “Supply and demand shocks in the COVID-19 pandemic: An industry and occupation perspec-
  tive,” 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06759.

Dewatripont, Mathias, Michel Goldman, Eric Muraille, and Jean-Philippe Platteau, “Rapidly
 identifying workers who are immune to COVID-19 and virus-free is a priority for restarting the
 economy,” Working Paper, VOX CEPR Policy Portal 2020.



                                                 64
di Giovanni, Julian, Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Mehmet Fatih Ulu, and Yusuf Soner Baskaya, “In-
  ternational spillovers and local credit cycles,” Working Paper 23149, National Bureau of Economic
  Research 2019.

Dingel, Jonathan I and Brent Neiman, “How many jobs can be done at home?,” Working Paper
  26948, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Eichenbaum, Martin S, Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt, “The macroeconomics of epi-
  demics,” Working Paper 26882, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Farboodi, Maryam, Gregor Jarosch, and Robert Shimer, “Internal and external effects of social
  distancing in a pandemic,” Working Paper 27059, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Fauci, AS, HC Lane, and RR Redfield, “COVID-19-Navigating the Uncharted.,” The New England
  Journal of Medicine, 2020, 382 (13), 1268–1269.

Goolsbee, Austan and Chad Syverson, “Fear, Lockdown, and Diversion: Comparing Drivers of
 Pandemic Economic Decline 2020,” Working Paper 27432, National Bureau of Economic Research
 2020.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, Şebnem Kalemli-Özcan, Veronika Penciakova, and Nicholas Sander,
 “COVID-19 and Business Failures,” 2020. Mimeo.

Greenstone, Michael and Vishan Nigam, “Does social distancing matter?,” CEPR COVID Eco-
 nomics, 2020, 1 (7), 1–22.

Guerrieri, Veronica, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and Iván Werning, “Macroeconomic Impli-
 cations of COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages?,” Working Paper
 26918, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Kalemli-Özcan, Şebnem, “US monetary policy and international risk spillovers,” 2019. Proceedings
 of the Jackson Hole Symposium, forthcoming.

  , Luc Laeven, and David Moreno, “Debt overhang, rollover risk, and corporate investment: Ev-
  idence from the European crisis,” Working Paper 24555, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2018.

  , Se-Jik Kim, Hyun Song Shin, Bent E Sørensen, and Sevcan Yesiltas, “Financial shocks in pro-
  duction chains,” in “American Economic Association meetings, January” 2014.

Krueger, Dirk, Harald Uhlig, and Taojun Xie, “Macroeconomic dynamics and reallocation in an
  epidemic,” CEPR COVID Economics, 2020, 1 (5), 21–55.

Li, Ruiyun, Sen Pei, Bin Chen, Yimeng Song, Tao Zhang, Wan Yang, and Jeffrey Shaman, “Sub-
  stantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (SARS-
  CoV2),” Science, 2020.

Linton, Natalie M, Tetsuro Kobayashi, Yichi Yang, Katsuma Hayashi, Andrei R Akhmetzhanov,
  Sung mok Jung, Baoyin Yuan, Ryo Kinoshita, and Hiroshi Nishiura, “Incubation period and
  other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus infections with right truncation: a
  statistical analysis of publicly available case data,” Journal of Clinical Medicine, 2020, 9 (2), 538.



                                                  65
Loungani, Prakash and Paolo Mauro, “Capital Flight from Russia,” IMF Policy Discussion Papers
  00/6, International Monetary Fund 2000.

Ludvigson, Sydney C, Sai Ma, and Serena Ng, “Uncertainty and business cycles: exogenous im-
  pulse or endogenous response?,” Working Paper 21803, National Bureau of Economic Research
  2015.

Mendoza, Enrique G., “Sudden Stops, Financial Crises, and Leverage,” American Economic Review,
 December 2010, 100 (5), 1941–66.

Mishkin, Frederic S, The economics of money, banking, and financial markets, Pearson Education, 2007.

Orphanides, Athanasios, “Central bank policies and the debt trap,” Cato J., 2017, 37, 223.

Pichler, Anton, Marco Pangallo, R Maria del Rio-Chanona, François Lafond, and J Doyne Farmer,
  “Production networks and epidemic spreading: How to restart the UK economy?,” 2020. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2005.10585.

Pindyck, Robert S, “COVID-19 and the welfare effects of reducing contagion,” Working Paper
  27121, National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Rey, Hélène, “Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Indepen-
  dence,” Working Paper 21162, National Bureau of Economic Research May 2015.

Rogoff, Kenneth and Carmen M. Reinhart, “The argument for suspending debt payments for
  emerging economies throughout the pandemic,” 2020. World Economic Forum.

Stock, James H, “Data gaps and the policy response to the novel coronavirus,” Working Paper 26902,
  National Bureau of Economic Research 2020.

Stoppok, Lucie and Christoph Trebesch, “Sovereign Debt Rollover Crises: The One Million Bond
  Project,” 2020. Mimeo, Kiel University.

Vogel, Gretchen, “New blood tests for antibodies could show true scale of coronavirus pandemic,”
  Science, March 19 2020.




                                                 66
A    APPENDIX

List of Figures and Tables:

    • Figure A.1: The Structure of OECD Inter-Country Input-Output Table

    • Figure A.2: Sovereign Bond Issuance in Turkey

    • Table A.1: Fiscal Responses to the COVID-19 Shock in the G20 Countries

    • Table A.2: Proximity Index and Teleworkable Share Across Industries

    • Table A.3: Demand Changes Across Industries

    • Table A.4: List of the Lockdown Sectors

    • Table A.5: CBRT Credit Card Spending Titles Corresponding to OECD ISIC Sectors

    • Table A.6: List of the Active Sectors in Public Administration during full lockdown




                                                67
                        Figure A.1: The Structure of OECD Inter-Country Input-Output Table

                                                    Intermediate use                                  Final Demand
                                                                                                                                     Output

                                      country 1 x industry 1 […] country 69 x industry 36   country 1 x fd 1 […] country 69 x fd 7
        country 1 x industry 1
        country 1 x industry 2
                  …
                  …                                           (Z)                                            (F)                      (Y)
       country 69 x industry 1
                  …
      country 69 x industry 36
 Value added + taxes - subsidies on
                                                             (VA)
       intermediate products
              Output                                          (Y)


N OTES: This table illustrates the structure of OECD Inter-Country Input-Output Table (ICIO), which represents the
breakdown of output corresponding to 36 industries and 69 countries, giving us a matrix of 2484×2484 entries. In any
industry-country combination, the output (Y) equals intermediate use (Z) plus final demand (F) of 36 industries in 69
countries. Industry list can be found in Table A.2. Further, in any industry-country combination, final demand sums the
following components of expenditures over 69 countries. fd1: Households Final Consumption Expenditure (HFCE); fd2:
Non-Profit Institutions Serving Households (NPISH); fd3: General Government Final Consumption (GGFC); fd4: Gross
Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF); fd5: Change in Inventories and Valuables (INVNT); fd6: Direct purchases by
non-residents (NONRES); fd7: Statistical Discrepancy (DISC).




                                                                           68
             Table A.1: F ISCAL R ESPONSES TO THE COVID-19 S HOCK IN THE G20 C OUNTRIES

   Country                    % GDP   Explanation

   Argentina                    3     Adopted measures (totaling about 3.0 percent of GDP, 1.2 percent in the budget and 1.8 percent off-budget, based on
                                      authorities’ estimates)
   Australia                   10.8   Total expenditure and revenue measures of A$194 billion (9.9 percent of GDP). The Commonwealth government has
                                      committed to spend almost an extra A$5 billion (0.3 percent of GDP). State and Territory governments also announced
                                      fiscal stimulus packages, together amounting to A$11.5 billion (0.6 percent of GDP)
   Brazil                      6.5    The authorities announced a series of fiscal measures adding up to 6.5 percent of GDP. Public banks are expanding
                                      credit lines for businesses and households, with a focus on supporting working capital (credit lines add up to over 3
                                      percent of GDP), and the government will back a 0.5 percent of GDP credit line to cover payroll costs.
   Canada                      8.4    Key tax and spending measures (8.4 percent of GDP, $193 billion CAD).
   China                       3.8    An estimated RMB 2.6 trillion (or 2.5 percent of GDP) of fiscal measures or financing plans have been announced.
                                      The overall fiscal expansion is expected to be significantly higher, reflecting the effect of already announced additional
                                      measures such as an increase in the ceiling for special local government bonds of 1.3 percent of GDP.
   France                      19     The authorities have announced an increase in the fiscal envelope devoted to addressing the crisis to e110 billion
                                      (nearly 5 percent of GDP, including liquidity measures), from an initial e45 billion included in an amending budget
                                      law introduced in March. A new draft amending budget law has been introduced on April 16. This adds to an existing
                                      package of bank loan guarantees and credit reinsurance schemes of e315 billion (close to 14 percent of GDP).
   Germany                     31.6   The federal government adopted a supplementary budget of e156 billion (4.9 percent of GDP). The government is
                                      expanding the volume and access to public loan guarantees for firms of different sizes and credit insurers increasing
                                      the total volume by at least e757 billion (23 percent of GDP). In addition to the federal government’s fiscal package,
                                      many state governments (Länder) have announced own measures to support their economies, amounting to e48 billion
                                      in direct support and e73bn in state-level loan guarantees (Authors: Another 3.7% of GDP).
   India                       1.1    Finance Minister Sitharaman on March 26 announced a stimulus package valued at approximately 0.8 percent of GDP.
                                      These measures are in addition to a previous commitment by Prime Minister Modi that an additional 150 billion
                                      rupees (about 0.1 percent of GDP). Numerous state governments have also announced measures thus far amount to
                                      approximately 0.2 percent of India’s GDP.
   Indonesia                   2.8    In addition to the first two fiscal packages amounting to IDR 33.2 trillion (0.2 percent of GDP), the government an-
                                      nounced a major stimulus package of IDR 405 trillion (2.6 percent of GDP) on March 31, 2020.
   Italy                       26.4   On March 17, the government adopted a e25 billion (1.4 percent of GDP) ‘Cura Italia’ emergency package. On April 6,
                                      the Liquidity Decree allowed for additional state guarantees of up to e400 billion (25 percent of GDP).
   Japan                       21.1   On April 7 (partly revised on April 20), the Government of Japan adopted the Emergency Economic Package Against
                                      COVID-19 of Y117.1 trillion (21.1 percent of GDP)
   Mexico                      0.7    to request additional resources from Congress, that could reach up to 180 billion pesos (0.7 percent of 2019 GDP). AND
                                      The week of April 19 the President further announced an austerity program for public expenditures including wage
                                      reductions and a hiring in order to free up 2.5 percent of GDP to finance additional health expenditures and priority
                                      investment.
   Republic of Korea           10     Direct measures amount to 0.8 percent of GDP (approximately KRW 16 trillion. On March 24, President Moon an-
                                      nounced a financial stabilization plan of KRW 100 trillion (5.3 percent of GDP). This was augmented by a further KRW
                                      35 trillion (1.8 percent of GDP) on April 22 through additional measures. On April 22, President Moon announced a
                                      key industry stabilization fund would be established for KRW 40 trillion (2.1 percent of GDP)
   Russian Federation          2.1    The total cost of the fiscal package is currently estimated at 2.1 percent of GDP.
   Saudi Arabia                 5     A SAR 70 billion ($18.7 billion or 2.8 percent of GDP) private sector support package was announced on March 20. they
                                      will reduce spending in non-priority areas of the 2020 budget by SAR 50 billion (2.0 percent of GDP) to accommodate
                                      some of these new initiatives within the budget envelope. on April 3, the government authorized the use of the
                                      unemployment insurance fund (SANED) to provide support for wage benefits, within certain limits, to private sector
                                      companies who retain their Saudi staff (SAR 9 billion, 0.4 percent of GDP). On April 15, additional measures to mitigate
                                      the impact on the private sector were announced, including temporary electricity subsidies to commercial, industrial,
                                      and agricultural sectors (SAR 0.9 billion) and resource support to the health sector was increased to SAR 47 billion.
   South Africa                0.2    https://www.globalpolicywatch.com/2020/04/south-africas-economic-response-to-the-covid-19-pandemic/
   Spain                       11.7   Key measures (about 1.6 percent of GDP, e18 billion; depending on the usage and duration of the measures the amount
                                      could be higher). In addition, the government of Spain has extended up to e100 billion government guarantees for
                                      firms and self-employed. Other measures include additional funding for the Instituto de Credito Oficial (ICO) credit
                                      lines (e10 billion); introduction of a special credit line for the tourism sector through the ICO (e400 million);
   Turkey                       5     A TL100 billion package was announced. This consists of TL75 billion ($11.6 billion or 1.5 percent of GDP) in fiscal
                                      measures, as well as TL 25 billion ($3.8 billion or 0.5 percent of GDP) for the doubling the credit guarantee fund.
                                      Gradually, this package increased to be 5% of GDP.
   United Kingdom              18.8   Policy measures adding £86 billion in 2020-21. Coronavirus business interruption loan scheme and the Covid Cor-
                                      porate Financing Facility: the business interruption loan scheme was announced as up to £330 billion of support for
                                      businesses. Source: https://obr.uk/coronavirus-reference-scenario/
   United States of America    13.6   US$484 billion Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act . An estimated US$2.3 trillion (around
                                      11% of GDP) Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economy Security Act (“CARES Act”). US$8.3 billion Coronavirus Prepared-
                                      ness and Response Supplemental Appropriations Act and US$192 billion Families First Coronavirus Response Act .
                                      They together provide around 1% of GDP.



N OTES : This table reports the COVID-19 relief packages (as percent of GDP) by the G20 countries along with the details
of the fiscal packages. Source: IMF Policy Tracker unless otherwise noted. Access Date: April 29, 2020.




                                                                             69
                                 Figure A.2: Sovereign Bond Issuance in Turkey


                                                           Turkey
                                        Rollover risk, bonds issued, bonds due
      8       6
in billion USD
      2
      04




            2000q1                    2005q1                2010q1                2015q1                 2020q1

                             Crisis spell          Crisis x ratio<1          Bonds due             Bonds Issued

                  Note: The graphic shows external bonds issued against bonds due on a quarterly basis between
                  2000q1 and 2020q2. Crisis spells, i.e. periods of severe currency and financial crises, are
                  highlighted in grey. Red areas (2001q2, 2008q4, 2018q2, 2020q2) represent periods during which
                  Turkey experienced a financial crisis and the rollover ratio fell below 1.




                                                            70
            Table A.2: P ROXIMITY I NDEX AND T ELEWORKABLE S HARE A CROSS I NDUSTRIES

  OECD ISIC      Definition                                                                     Proximity    Teleworkable
    Code                                                                                          Index          Share

     01T03       Agriculture, forestry and fishing                                                  0.86           0.06
     05T06       Mining and extraction of energy producing products                                 1.08           0.32
     07T08       Mining and quarrying of non-energy producing products                              1.06           0.14
       09        Mining support service activities                                                  1.21           0.20
     10T12       Food products, beverages and tobacco                                               1.12           0.13
     13T15       Textiles, wearing apparel, leather and related products                            1.09           0.20
       16        Wood and products of wood and cork                                                 1.03           0.15
     17T18       Paper products and printing                                                        1.08           0.22
       19        Coke and refined petroleum products                                                1.11           0.22
     20T21       Chemicals and pharmaceutical products                                              1.06           0.25
       22        Rubber and plastic products                                                        1.10           0.18
       23        Other non-metallic mineral products                                                1.08           0.18
       24        Basic metals                                                                       1.09           0.14
       25        Fabricated metal products                                                          1.08           0.21
       26        Computer, electronic and optical products                                          1.03           0.54
       27        Electrical equipment                                                               1.07           0.29
       28        Machinery and equipment, nec                                                       1.06           0.29
       29        Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers                                         1.09           0.19
       30        Other transport equipment                                                          1.06           0.31
     31T33       Other manufacturing; repair and installation of machinery and equipment            1.07           0.32
     35T39       Electricity, gas, water supply, sewerage, waste and remediation services           1.08           0.29
     41T43       Construction                                                                       1.21           0.19
     45T47       Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles                               1.13           0.37
     49T53       Transportation and storage                                                         1.18           0.21
     55T56       Accomodation and food services                                                     1.26           0.10
     58T60       Publishing, audiovisual and broadcasting activities                                1.11           0.69
       61        Telecommunications                                                                 1.07           0.58
     62T63       IT and other information services                                                  1.01           0.88
     64T66       Financial and insurance activities                                                 1.02           0.79
       68        Real estate activities                                                             1.10           0.54
     69T82       Other business sector services                                                     1.09           0.46
       84        Public admin. and defence; compulsory social security                              1.16           0.39
       85        Education                                                                          1.22           0.86
     86T88       Human health and social work                                                       1.28           0.35
     90T96       Arts, entertainment, recreation and other service activities                       1.18           0.34


N OTES: This table provides the physical proximity index along with the share of those who can work remotely for the
industries. To obtain these two industry-level values, we calculate the weighted average of the values corresponding to
the occupations in each industry using the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) provided by the U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics (BLS). OES data follows four-digit NAICS codes to classify the industries. In order to convert the
proximity data to OECD ISIC codes, we make use of the correspondence table between 2017 NAICS and ISIC Revision 4
Industry Codes, provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. We obtain the physical proximity values at the occupation level
from the O*NET datase. O*NET collects the physical proximity information through surveys with the following
categories: (1) I don’t work near other people (beyond 100 ft.); (2) I work with others but not closely (e.g., private office);
(3) Slightly close (e.g., shared office); (4) Moderately close (at arm’s length); (5) Very close (near touching). We divide the
category values by 3 to make category (3) our benchmark. Specifically, a proximity value that is larger than 1 indicates a
closer proximity than the “shared office” level, and a proximity value that is smaller than 1 corresponds to sparse
working conditions. We create a single physical proximity value for each occupation by taking the weighted average of
the normalized category values. We calculate the proximity values at the industry level after removing the teleworkable
portion of the employees. We use Dingel and Neiman (2020)’s list of teleworkable occupations to capture the proportion
of employment that can be fulfilled at remote locations in each industry.




                                                              71
                                                                         Table A.3: D EMAND C HANGES A CROSS I NDUSTRIES

       OECD        Definition                                                 Change   Explanation
       ISIC

       01T03   Agriculture, forestry and fishing                              100%     Based on projections on the manufacturing sector using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT and computations using
                                                                                       historical data.
       05T06   Mining and extraction of energy producing products             100%     Based on projections on the manufacturing sector using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT and computations using
                                                                                       historical data.
       07T08   Mining and quarrying of non-energy producing products          100%     Based on projections on the manufacturing sector using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT and computations using
                                                                                       historical data.
       09      Mining support service activities                              100%     Based on projections on the manufacturing sector using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT and computations using
                                                                                       historical data.
       10T12   Food products, beverages and tobacco                           100%     Based on projections on the manufacturing sector using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT and computations using
                                                                                       historical data.
       13T15   Textiles, wearing apparel, leather and related products         50%     Based on estimates using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT.
       16      Wood and products of wood and cork                              90%     Based on projections on the manufacturing sector using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT and computations using
                                                                                       historical data.
       17T18   Paper products and printing                                     90%     Based on projections on the manufacturing sector using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT and computations using
                                                                                       historical data.
       19      Coke and refined petroleum products                             75%     Based on estimates using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT.
       20T21   Chemicals and pharmaceutical products                           90%     Based on estimates using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT.
       22      Rubber and plastic products                                     90%     Based on projections on the manufacturing sector using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT and computations using
                                                                                       historical data.
       23      Other non-metallic mineral products                             90%     Based on projections on the manufacturing sector using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT and computations using
                                                                                       historical data.
       24      Basic metals                                                    90%     Based on computations using historical data and sectoral reports,
                                                                                       https://tr.steelorbis.com/celik-haberleri/guncel-haberler/abd-ham-celik-uretimi-haftalik-181-dustu-1141735.htm
       25      Fabricated metal products                                      90%      Based on computations using historical data and sectoral reports.
       26      Computer, electronic and optical products                      100%     Based on estimates using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT.
       27      Electrical equipment                                           90%      Based on projections on the manufacturing sector using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT and sectoral reports,
                                                                                       https://www.ibisworld.com/industry-insider/media/4637/covid-19-special-report.pdf
       28      Machinery and equipment, nec                                    90%     Based on projections on the manufacturing sector using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT and computations using
                                                                                       historical data.
       29      Motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers                      70%     Based on other countries’ experiences and sectoral reports,




72
                                                                                       https://edition.cnn.com/2020/04/01/business/car-sales-coronavirus/index.html
                                                                                       https://econsultancy.com/how-coronavirus-is-impacting-sales-marketing-in-the-automotive-industry/
       30      Other transport equipment                                       70%     Same as automobiles.
       31T33   Other manufacturing; repair and installation of machinery       90%     Based on projections on the manufacturing sector using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT and computations using
               and equipment                                                           historical data.
       35T39   Electricity, gas, water supply, sewerage, waste and remedi-    100%     No change.
               ation services
       41T43   Construction                                                    75%     Based on computations using historical data and sectoral reports,
                                                                                       https://www.ft.com/content/3c27d23e-befe-4a53-be52-325adacdb929
       45T47   Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles           110%     Based on estimates using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT.
       49T53   Transportation and storage                                     80%      B ased on other countries’ experiences and sectoral reports,
                                                                                       https://www.mckinsey.com/∼/media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/Risk/Our%20Insight/COVID%2019%20Implications%
                                                                                       20for%20business/COVID%2019%20March%2030/COVID-19-Facts-and-Insights-April-3-v2.ashx
       55T56   Accomodation and food services                                 25%      Based on estimates using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT.
       58T60   Publishing, audiovisual and broadcasting activities            85%      Based on estimates using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT.
       61      Telecommunications                                             100%     Based on estimates using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT.
       62T63   IT and other information services                              100%     Based on other countries’ experiences and sectoral reports,
                                                                                       https://www.reuters.com/article/us-heatlh-coronavirus-technology/coronavirus-may-cut-global-corporate-tech-spending-4-1-in-
                                                                                       2020-survey-idUSKBN21I38C
                                                                                       https://www.fiercetelecom.com/telecom/coronavirus-flushes-it-spending-to-a-2-7-decline-idc
       64T66   Financial and insurance activities                             100%     Based on estimates using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT.
       68      Real estate activities                                          60%     Based on estimates using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT.
       69T82   Other business sector services                                  85%     Based on estimates using data on credit card spending from the database of CBRT.
       84      Public admin. and defence; compulsory social security          125%     Median Package size 5%. Public spending is close to %20 of GDP.
       85      Education                                                       85%     In line with other business services.
       86T88   Human health and social work                                   100%     Based on other countries’ experiences and sectoral reports,
                                                                                       https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/
                                                                                       NationalHealthAccountsHistorical https://www.fairhealth.org/publications/briefs
       90T96   Arts, entertainment, recreation and other service activities    25%     Based on other countries’ experiences and sectoral reports,
                                                                                       https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/04/11/business/economy/coronavirus-us-economy-spending.html



     N OTES: This table provides the demand changes at the sectoral level along with the explanations. We use publicly available data and the credit card spending data
     from the Central Bank of Republic of Turkey (CBRT) to calculate the estimated demand change during the pandemic in each industry, which is categorized based
     on OECD ISIC Codes.
                                  Table A.4: L IST OF THE L OCKDOWN S ECTORS

    Panel A: Lockdown Sectors

            NACE Rev. 2            Definition

                 01                Crop and animal production, hunting and related service activities
                1071               Manufacture of bread; manufacture of fresh pastry goods and cakes
                1811               Printing of newspapers
                1920               Manufacture of refined petroleum products
                 21                Manufacture of basic pharmaceutical products and pharmaceutical preparations
                 35                Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply
                 36                Water collection, treatment and supply
                4646               Wholesale of pharmaceutical goods
                4730               Retail sale of automotive fuel in specialised stores
                4773               Dispensing chemist in specialised stores
                4774               Retail sale of medical and orthopaedic goods in specialised stores
                4920               Freight rail transport
                4941               Freight transport by road
                5224               Cargo handling
                 53                Postal and courier activities
                 60                Programming and broadcasting activities
                 61                Telecommunications
                 639               Other information service activities
                 75                Veterinary activities
                 86                Human health activities
                 87                Residential care activities

    Panel B: Additional Sectors

            NACE Rev. 2            Definition

                 10                Manufacture of food products
                1722               Manufacture of household and sanitary goods and of toilet requisites
                 463               Wholesale of food, beverages and tobacco
                4711               Retail sale in non-specialised stores with food, beverages or tobacco predominating
                 472               Retail sale of food, beverages and tobacco in specialised stores
                4781               Retail sale via stalls and markets of food, beverages and tobacco products


N OTES: This table provides the list of the lockdown sectors. We use the decree issued by the Turkish Ministry of Interior
on April 10, 2020 to identify these industries. This lockdown was effective for only two days and cover those given in
Panel A. We supplement the list with those available in Panel B.




                                                            73
  Table A.5: CBRT C REDIT C ARD S PENDING T ITLES C ORRESPONDING TO OECD ISIC S ECTORS

                          CBRT    Definition                                 OECD ISIC Code

                           1      Total
                           2      Car Rental                                      69T82
                           3      Car Rental-Sales/Service/Parts                  45T47
                           4      Petrol Stations                                   19
                           5      Various Food                                    10T12
                           6      Direct Marketing                                45T47
                           7      Education/Stationary                            45T47
                           8      Electric & Electronic Goods, Computers            26
                           9      Clothing and Accessory                          13T15
                           10     Airlines                                        49T53
                           11     Service                                   58T60 & 68 & 69T82
                           12     Accomodation                                    55T56
                           13     Club/Association/ Social Services               55T56
                           14     Casino                                          55T56
                           15     Jewellery                                       45T47
                           16     Marketing and Shopping Centers                  45T47
                           17     Furnishing and Decoration                       31T33
                           18     Contractor Services                             41T43
                           19     Health/Health Products/Cosmetics                20T21
                           20     Travel Agencies/Forwarding                      69T82
                           21     Insurance                                       64T66
                           22     Telecommunication                                 61
                           23     Building Supplies, Hardware, Hard Goods           25
                           24     Food                                            55T56
                           25     Government/Tax Payments                           84
                           26     Private Pensions                                64T66
                           27     Others
                           28     E-commerce Transactions                          62T63
                           29     Mail or Phone Shopping
                           30     Customs Payments                                   84


N OTES: This table provides the concordance that we use to match the titles used in the CBRT’s credit card spending data
with the OECD ISIC Codes.




Table A.6: L IST OF THE A CTIVE S ECTORS IN P UBLIC A DMINISTRATION DURING FULL LOCKDOWN

    Type           Size         Source

    Public (All)   2820095      http://www.sbb.gov.tr/kamu-istihdami/
    Security       273000       https://tr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emniyet Genel M%C3%BCd%C3%BCrl%C3%BC%C4%
                                9F%C3%BC
    Gendarmerie    150000       https://www.jandarma.gov.tr/jandarma-genel-komutanligi-2019-yili-faaliyet-raporu
    Health         642184       https://www.saglik.gov.tr/TR,11588/istatistik-yilliklari.html

    Share          37.77%


N OTES: This table provides the list of occupations in Public Administration that work during full lockdown, together
with the number of people within those occupations. The data sources are provided as well. The share of the active
sub-sectors in the entire sector is 37%.




                                                           74
