NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DO THE ELDERLY FORM EXPECTATIONS?
AN ANALYSIS OF RESPONSES TO NEW INFORMATION

B.

Douglas Bernheim

Working Paper No. 2719

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1988

This paper was prepared for the NBER's conference on
Aging", held at The Boulders, Arizona, on May 20 and
the National Institute on Aging through its grant to
acknowledged.
Any opinions expressed here are those
those of the National Bureau of Economic Resesrch.

"The Economics of
21, 1988. Funding from
the NBER is gratefully

of the author and not

NBER Working Paper #2719
September 1988
HOW DO THE ELDERLY FORM EXPECTATIONS?
AN ANALYSIS OF RESPONSES TO NEW INFORMATION

ABSTRACT

In this paper, I outline and test a simple theory that describes

the

evolution of expectations concerning social security benefits during the
pre-retirement period.

After correcting for the presences of measurement

error, I obtain results that are consistent with this theory:

expectations

appear to evolve as a random walk, and innovations in this process are
unrelated to previously available information.
expectations to the arrival of new information.
indicates

I also estimate responses of

Although previous research

that individuals do not form expectations on the basis of all

available information (and in particular ignore much of the information contained in concurrent statutory entitlements to social security benefits),
responses to new information during the period immediately preceding retirement appear to be highly rational.

The bulk of information affects the

evolution of expectations only through its impact on actual benefit calculations.

Furthermore,

assessments

the data support the view that individuals form accurate

of the ultimate impact of new information on actual benefits.
B. Douglas Bernheim

Kellogg Graduate School
of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208

1.

INTRODUCTION
A large fraction of

the existing work on the economics of aging

aiid the retirement period procedes on the basis of life cycle assumptions,
which hold that individuals form very rational and deliberate long range
plans. Implicit in these assumptions is the notion that individuals develop
well-informed opinions about the economic factors that will affect their
well-being in the future. Despite the existence of a small body of work on
the accuracy of expectations concerning social security benefits (Bernheim
[1987a]), the timing of retirement (Hall and Johnson [1970], Fames and
Nestel [1981], Anderson, Burkhauser, and Quinn [1986], Wolpin and
Göniil [1987], and Bernheim [1987b]), and inflation (see Zarnowitz [1984]
and the references contained therein), very little is actually known about
the manner in which individuals incorporate new information into
expectations.
The purpose of this paper is to examine the evolution of selfreported expectations about social security benefits during the preret irement period, and to examine the responses of these expectations to

the arrival of new information. The central questions are as follows: Do
expectations evolve in the manner predicted by theory? What kind of
information leads individuals to revise their expectations, and what is the
nature of the responses? Are revisions "rational", in the sense that they
the effects of new information on objective measures of
expected benefits? Since models of consumer decision making inevitably

closely resemble

invoke a host of assumptions concerning expectations, these questions

logically precede any analysis of behavior. I plan to study the relationship
3

between self-reported expectations and behavior in subsequent work.
The current investigation employs a data sample drawn from the
Retirement History Survey. The longitudinal nature of this survey makes
it possible to observe and compare expectations reported by the same
households at different points in time, and to relate observed changes to
intervening events. My central conclusions are as follows.

a

variety of simple tests appear to reject the most basic
implications of the theory that forms the basis for this analysis. As in
Bernheim [1987a], I attribute these apparent failures to the fact that
First,

reported expectations are extremely noisy. When one corrects for the
presence of reporting error through the appropriate use of instrumental
variables, the resulting estimates are generally consistent with the theory.
In particular, one cannot reject the hypotheses that expectations evolve as

a random walk, and that innovations in

this process are unrelated to prior

information.
Having concluded that the data are supportive of these basic
implications, I use the theory to formulate an empirical specification that
relates changes in expectations to the arrival of new information. Using
this specification, I estimate responses of expectations to informational
events, and test for the rationality of these responses. The results are
Responses to new information during the period immediately
The bulk of
preceding retirement appear to be highly rational.
information affects the evolution of expectations only through its impact
striking.

on actual benefit levels computed from contemporaneous benefit formulas
and earnings histories. Furthermore, the data support the view that
4

individuals form accurate assessments of the ultimate impact of new
information on actual benefits.
These results contrast sharply with findings based upon analyses
of expected benefit levels, rather than changes in expected benefits. In
I found that certain variables -- especially current
Bernheim
[1987a],
statutory social security benefit entitlements -- were highly correlated with

subsequent forecast errors. This implies that individuals do not make
complete use of all the information contained in these variables.
Nevertheless, these same individuals are very good at processing
information that arrives just prior to retirement. Specifically, while they

are apparently incompletely informed about the level of benefits associated
with contemporaneous benefit formulas, they revise expectations as if they
understand how new information affects the benefits prescribed by these
formulas on I/ic marg2n. This result suggests that individuals formulate
expectations about the retirement period much more carefully as
retirement approaches, and therefore corroborates some speculative
conclusions based on more sketchy evidence that appeared in Bernheim
[1987a].

At

the same time, this finding supports the hypothesis that,

because individuals appreciate the links between behavior and benefits at
the margin, benefit formulas may have incentive effects. This hypothesis
has formed the basis for many previous studies of the retirement decision(see Hurd [19831).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
presents the basic model of expectations. I discuss the data in section 3.
Section 4 contains tests of the model's central implications, and section 5
5

examines responses of expectations to new information. The paper closes
with a brief conclusion.
2. A MODEL OF EXPECTA TIONS

that at each point in time i, an individual forms an
expectation, X, about the value of a variable X that is realized at some
point in the future. During period he has access to certain information,
which I denote
Throughout, I assume that the individual's memory is
perfect, so that all information available at time I is also available in
Suppose

,

period I

+ 1.

Formally,

= (1, w1+i),

where

w11

information that becomes available between periods I and I +

represents

1.

In subsequent sections, I interpret X as social security benefits.
When an individual reports expected social security benefits, there is, of
course, some ambiguity as to what this means. While he may have in
mind something like a mathematical expectation, it is also possible that
his report reflects his view of the most likely outcome (i.e. the mode). As
long as the distribution of X is approximately symmetric and singlepeaked, this ambiguity is probably of very little consequence. However, it
is important to bear in mind that the mathematical interpretation that
expectation becomes a joint hypothesis with any
other proposition that one wishes to test. In particular, failure of tests for
"rationality" (discussed below) could simply reflect misinterpretation of
one places on

a reported

the reported data. With this qualification in mind, I henceforth focus on
the hypothesis that individuals report expected values, i.e.

6

=
where

is the expectations operator.
From equation (1), it follows that

(2)

=

(X+llQL) =

4.

This expressiondescribesthe stochastic evolution of expectations through
time, and is the basis for the conclusion that expectations should follow a
random walk. In particular, (2) implies that
ye

—
—

ye +
'L

where

=
Furthermore,

0.

a
of new information received since
+1 should be function

period t, Wt+l.
The analysis of this paper is based upon the simple model
described in equations (3) and (4). Using these as the basis for an
empirical specification, I investigate the manner in which expectations
respond to new information. The validity of my empirical results depends
critically upon the appropriateness of this underlying framework. It is
therefore essential to test the framework as thoroughly as possible.
7

Fortunately, the model lends itself to
Note that we can write

(5)

Var(X7+i)

= Var(X) +

a

number of direct tests.

Var(7)t+i)

= Var(X) +
Var(X7+i_X)
> Var(X).
Two implications follow directly from equation (5). First, the population
variance of expectations reported at a particular point in time should be
greater than the population variance of expectations reported at earlier
points in time. Second, the difference between these population variances
should be exactly the variance of their differences. In Bernheim [1987a], I
studied the first of these implications, and found the data somewhat
supportive. However, since the focus of that study was a comparison of
expectations and realizations (rather than a comparison of expectations at
different points in time), I did not consider the second implication.
Equations (3) and (4) also suggest a regression format that
facilitates further testing of the underlying model. Suppose in particular
that we use ordinary least squares to estimate an equation of the form
(6)

x7+1,1

=

a

+

13x,e,

+ Q2,7 +

where i indexes individuals. Theory implies that we should obtain

8

a=7

=

=

4.

measures
This test
Furthermore, our estimate of
is quite demanding, in that the underlying hypothesis includes the
assertion that, in forming his expectation, the individual actually uses -and uses efficiently -- all information observed by the econometrician. I
0

and fi

1.

therefore refer to it as a test of "strong" rationality. One can also conduct
a weaker, less demanding test by omitting the informational variables, and
on X. Theory implies that the intercept and
simply regressing
slope coefficients should be zero and one, respectively. This test allows for
the possibility that individuals do not form expectations on the basis of all

X1

available information. However, the underlying hypothesis retains the key
feature that expectations evolve as a random walk, responding only to new
inforniation.
If the tests of the underlying model prove favorable, then one can
use the model of expectations embodied in equations (3) and (4) to
is
measure responses of expectations to new information. Since
related exclusively to new information, I write it as a function of surprises:

-

=
Substitution

into (3) yields an expressionfor adjustments in expectations:

x1 x
—

=

—

This in turn suggests a regression of changes in expectations on variables
that contain new information received after period i. The coefficients in

9

this regression will reflect the magnitude of responses to particular types of
information. Implementing this strategy is somewhat problemmatic, in
that all variables have both expected and unexpected components, and
therefore measure blends new and old information.

I take up specific

estimation issues in section 5.
3. DATA
The data for this study are drawn from the Social Security
Administration's Retirement History Survey (RHS), which followed a
sample of retirement-aged households (58 to 63 years old in 1969) for a
period of 10 years, beginning in 1969. Each household was surveyed once
every two years (1969, 1971, 1973, 1975, 1977, and 1979). Although the
initial wave included more than 11,000 households, there was substantial

attrition over successive waves.
In 1969, 1971, and 1973, respondents reported the level of social
security benefits that they expected to receive upon retirement. In
subsequent sections, the variables ESS71 and ESS73 (expected social
security in 1971 and 1973, respectively) reflect answers to these questions,
adjusted to an annual basis. Inspection of the data for 1969 revealed a

in part to survey skip patterns), as well as a high
frequency of nonsensical values. I have therefore confined attention to
responses given in 1971 and 1973. In what follows, the variable CESS
low response rate (due

measures the change in expectations between these two years (i.e. CESS

=

ESS73 — ESS71).

Unfortunately, interpretation of expected benefits is somewhat
10

problematic, in that the treatment of inflation is ambiguous. Certainly,
the survey instrument does not specify whether the individual is to report
a real or nominal figure. Throughout, I simply assume that respondents
report expected benefits in current (i.e. survey year) dollars. This seems
the most natural choice, since respondents would otherwise have had to
forecast future inflation rates before formulating an answer to the
question. To the extent my assumption is incorrect, the scale of
expectations may vary somewhat between 1971 and 1973.
Tests of the strong rationality hypothesis, as well as some of the
other exercises conducted in section 5 of this paper, require the collection
of informational variables that are candidates for inclusion in

c.

In this

paper, I employ essentially the same informational variables as in
Bernheim [1987a]. I group these into three distinct categories.

The first category contains variables which measure other reported
since they
expectations. These are natural candidates for inclusion in
necessarily reflect information that the individual has used to generate
forecasts. If any of these variables appear with significant coefficients in
estimates of equation (6), it would indicate that, at a minimum,
individuals use different kinds of information to form different
expectations. Definitions of specific variables follow.

ERET69:

Expected date of retirement reported in 1971.
Expected date of retirement reported in 1969.

E0171:

Expected retirement income other than social security,

ERETT1:

reported in 1971.
11

E0169:

Expected retirment income other than social security,
reported in 1969.

Data on expectations is, of course, incomplete -- many individuals who
report expected social security benefits do not, for example, report an
expected date of retirement. Accordingly, I also use dummy variables,
DRET71 and DRET69, which equal 1 if the individual reports the
associated expectation, and 0 otherwise. In the final sample (described
below), all individuals responded to questions about retirement income
other than social security, so that no companion dummies for the E0171

and E0169 variables were required.

The second category includes various demographic variables and
other household characteristics which might be useful in predicting future
social security benefits. The list of variables includes:
AGE:

The respondent's age.

SAGE:

The respondent's wife's age.

ED:

The respondent's education (measured in number of

SED:

years).
The respondent's wife's education.

W:

The household's net wealth (including financial assets,
businesses, and real property).

HGOOD:

A dummy variable, indicating whether the respondent

reports his health as being better than average for his
age (1 = better, 0 = other).

12

HBAD:

A dummy variable, indicating whether the respondent
reports his health as being worse than average for his
age (1

KIDS:

= worse, 0 = other).

Number of living children.

COMPRET: A dummy variable, indicating whether the
respondent's employer maintains a compulsory
retirement age (1
MOVE:

= yes, 0 = no).

A dummy variable, indicating whether the respondent

has moved within the past two years (1
0

= has moved,

has not moved).

The third and final category consists of a single variable, which is
the individual's current social security entitlement, CSS71, defined as the
level of benefits he would receive under current law if he retired
immediately. CSS71 is, theoretically, part of each individual's information
set in 1971, in that it depends only upon his own past earnings history,
and upon current law (which is public information). Special treatment of

is warranted in light of my earlier findings (Bernheim [1987a]),
which indicated that individuals fail to use much of the information
contained in this variable, and furthermore that, quantitatively, this is by
CSS71

far the most important source of unused information.
the responses of expectations to new
information, it is also essential to compile a list of variables that are
Since this study focuses on

candidates for inclusion in

Each of the following variables describes
w.
and
an individual's status between
1971

some aspect of a change in

13

1973,

and could conceivably be related to the ultimate realization of social
security benefits.
HBET:

A dummy variable, indicating whether the self-

reported index of health status improved (1 =
improvement, 0 = other).

HWOR:

A dummy variable, indicating whether the self-

reported index of health status deteriorated (1
deterioration, 0

=

= other).

WIDM:

A dummy variable, indicating whether the wife died
between 1971 and 1973 (1 = wife died, 0 = other).

WIDW:

A dummy variable, indicating whether the husband
died between 1971 and 1973 (1 = husband died, 0

LJOB:

other).
A dummy variable, indicating whether the respondent
was employed in 1971 but not in 1973 (1 = lost job, 0

= other).
GJOB:

A dummy variable, indicating whether the respondent
was employed in 1973 but not in 1971 (1

= obtained

job, 0 = other).
CJOB:

that the respondent
was employed in different jobs in 1971 and 1973 (1 =
A dummy variable, indicating
different jobs, 0

NMOVE:

= other).

A dummy variable, indicated whether the respondent
moved between 1971 and 1973 (1 = moved, 0 =
other).
14

CW:

The change is the respondent's wealth between 1971
and 1973.

CCSS:

The change in the respondent's statutory social
security entitlement between 1971 and 1973.

in
Finally, while the focus of this analysis is on changes
expectations (rather than on the accuracy of expectations per se), some of
tl1e exercises in section 5 require measures of ultimate realizations. I
calculate each realization by applying the benefit formula in effect at the
individual's date of retirement to earnings histories from matching
administrative records provided by the Social Security Administration.
For details, I refer the reader to Bernheim [1987a].
The basic sample population for this analysis consisted of RHS
respondents who in 1971 were married and not yet receiving social security
Individuals who failed to report expectations about social
values
security beneflts in 1971, as well as a few who reported non-sensical
benefits.

In order to compare
(in excess of $20,000 per year) were dropped.
still
expectations across years, I restricted attention to respondents who
had not begun to receive social security benefits in 1973, and who reported
an expectation in that year as well. I dropped a small number of
observations for which key variables (marital status in 1973, health status
in 1973, spouses age, number of children, and compulsory retirement) were
The resulting sample contained one
either missing, or non-sensical.
individual who failed to report an expectation about retirement income
other than social security in either 1969 or 1971 -- rather than create a
dummy variable like DRET71, I simply dropped this observation. This
15

left

a total

of 370 observations.

Since

the sample used here is a rather small fraction of the total

survey population, one naturally wonders whether it is very representative.
In particular, the majority of individuals fail to report expectations. Nonreporting might itself reflect a failure to think seriously about the
retirement process. If so, statistical analysis based on the fraction of the
sample that reports expectations may be very misleading.
Fortunately, non-reporting appears to be fairly random, and is
perhaps more commonly attributable to fatigue resulting from the length
of the survey instrument, or to the styles of different interviewers. If nonreporting reflected a failure to think seriously about and plan for the
retirement period, then one would expect non-reporting of expected
benefits and non-reporting of expected retirement dates to be highly
correlated.

In fact, this is not the case.

Of those married men who

reported expected social security benefits in 1971, 42% also reported an
expected retirement date. For those who did not report expected benefits

the figure was only slightly lower (40%). Of those who reported
expected benefits in 1973, 34% also reported an expected retirement date.
For those who did not report expected benefits in 1973, the figure was
slightly higher (36%). In addition, there is only a mild correlation
in 1971,

between reporting of expected benefits in 1971, and reporting of expected
benefits in 1973. 45% of married males reported expected benefits in 1971,

as did 39% in 1973. Of those who reported expected benefits in 1971, only
49% also reported this expectation in 1973.

One might also argue that those who reported expected benefits in
16

both 1971 and 1973 could be atypical. Some insight into this issue can be
gained from considering a few summary statistics. Table 1 contains means
and standard deviations for the variables that measure expectations about
security benefit levels (ESS71 and ESS73), the change in
expectations (CESS), and the actual realization (SS). Note that the
social

average expected benefit; rose just over 2% between 1971 and 1973. In
1971, expectations were about 10% lower than realizations, while in 1973
they were about 8% lower. All of these numbers (including the standard
deviations) coincide very closely to summary statistics presented in
Bernheim [1987aJ. Those earlier calculations were based upon much larger

to the fact that it was not necessary to restrict attention to
respondents who reported expected benefits boLh in 1971 and in 1973 (in
that paper, the object was to compare expectations to realizations, rather
samples, due

than to subsequent expectations). The similarity of these summary
statistics suggests that the smaller sample is representative.
to analysis of the data, it is important to discuss
two potential problems. The first concerns sample selection biases. Many
of the criteria for dropping observations are based on characteristics that
were observed in 1971. In principle, such factors are part of Q71, the
respondent's information set in 1971, and, according to theory, are
Before passing on

Sample selection of this sort is therefore not
likely to produce systematic biases. Other selection criteria are based on
characteristics that; are observed after 1971. In principle, these could be
therefore unrelated to

p173.

systematically related to new information, and hence to 173. In Bernheim
[1987a], I argued that some of these (e.g. attrition due to death) are not

17

likely to create significant problems. Unfortunately, due to the nature of
the current excercise, I have had to impose more demanding requirements
on data availability during the period after an expectation is reported
(most importantly, the individual must report an expectation in 1973, as

in 1971). This enhances significantly the probability that one or
more of the selection criteria are in fact problematic. I have therefore
given some explicit attention to these issues in the econometric
well as

implementation.
The second and perhaps more serious problem concerns nonindependence of realizations. Tests such as those described in section 2 are
most commonly conducted with time series data on the same individual or
set of individuals, so that, under the null hypothesis, independence of the
error terms is guaranteed. When one instead relies primarily on crosssectional data from a short panel such as the RIIS, theory does not rule
out systematic correlation of error terms across observations. Correlation
could arise for

a variety of reasons.

The most important potential source of correlation is a macro
event that affects a significant fraction (perhaps all) of the sample
simultaneously. Suppose, for example, that subsequent to the date at
which
is recorded, Congress unexpectedly raises benefits by 20%.
Assuming that individuals process this information, one would presumably
discover that on average ij
+1 is significantly positive. Such an event did
in fact occur

in September 1972. However, this was for the most part an

across-the-board increase in benefit levels. As a result, it probably affected
little more than the scale of expectations. To put it another way, one
18

be surprised to find 3 > 1 in estimates of equation (6), and one
should not construe this as contrary to theory. Indeed, through estimates
of 3, one can hope to discern the extent to which this change was either
would not

anticipated ex anie, or ignored ex posL Finally, one would still expect to
find n = = 0 if the theory is accurate. The data would fail to satisfy
these restrictions only if elements of 71 were related to the probability of
processing information about the new law (or processing it correctly), or to
the nature of behavioral responses to the law. I tend to discount both
possibilities. In particular, the results in Bernheimn [1987a] suggest that the
1972 legislation was largely anticipated, and

the summary statistics in

show little evidence of an upward surge in expectations after 1972.
Furthermore, the analyses of Burtless [1986] and Bernheim [1987b] suggest
Table

1

that the impact of the 1972 legislation on the timing of retirement was
small.
4.

TESTS OF THE MODEL

In this section, I test various implications of the model presented
in section 2 using the data described in section 3. This nature of these
tests is very similar to those in Bernheim [1987a], except that in my earlier
work I focused on the relationship between realizations and expectations,

rather than between expectations at different points in time. Many
findings from my earlier study are relevant to, and corroborated by the
results of this section. Most importantly, the previous study found that
survey responses to questions about expected benefits are quite noisy, and
that failure to deal with this problem leads to apparent rejection of the

19

theory. However, when the noise is treated through an appropriate
instrumental variables technique, the results are highly favorable to the
hypothesis of weak rationality, and indeed indicate that individuals are
quite good at forming expectations based upon the subset of information
that they do use. These issues reappear in the current context, and must
be dealt with explicitly.
4.1. TESTS

OF WEAK RATIONALITY

Section 2 describes a theory of information processing. That
theory does not necessarily assume or imply that individuals use all of the
information that is in principle available to them. Fortunately, even in
the absence of any prior knowledge about what kinds of information
individuals do and don't use to form expectations, the theory still has
some testable implications. As I have already discussed, there are several
natural tests based upon equation (5), and these certainly do not require
In addition, since X is (trivially) part of the
knowledge of
information set used in forming expectations at time i, expectations
always evolve according to equation (3), where in place of (4) we

substitute

=

0,

(that is, they always follow a random walk). Thus, another minimalistic
test would be based upon ordinary least squares estimation of the equation
(8)

X

= c +
20

i3X7

+

contains, theory implies that a = 0 and /9
Regardless of what
This section is devoted to the implementation of these tests.

I begin with tests based upon equation (5).

=

1.

The summary

are certainly consistent with the prediction that
this corroborates the finding of
Var(X+i) > Var(X), and indeed
Beraheim [1987a]. However, on the basis of these statistics it is also
evident that support for the theory is superficial at best. In particular, the
statistics in Table

difference

between

1

the variances cannot equal the variance of the

differences (i.e. Var(CESS)), since the latter by itself exceeds Var(ESS73).
Indeed, the standard deviation of ESS73 would have to be about 30%

larger than its actual value in order to satisfy the equality in (5).
One can make this same point through estimation of equation (8).
Results for ordinary least squares are contained in collumn 1 of Table 2.
Note that the intercept is quantitatively large and statisticallysignificant,

than one-half and estimated with great precision.
On the basis of these estimates, one would be inclined to conclude that the
data resoundingly reject even the simplest implications of our central
while the slope is less

hypothesis.
As
Fortunately, this negative conclusion is premature.
emphasized in Bernheim [1987a], much evidence indicates that
expectations about social security benefits are reported with a great deal of
This may at first seem peculiar. With a variable like wealth or
income, noise may arise from imprecise measurement on the part of
respondents. In contrast, an individual creates his own expectations, and
noise.

21

therefore cannot have any problem measuring them. There are, however,
other sources of noise. Some individuals may tend to exaggerate,
reporting a higher number than they believe, while others may be prone to
understate their assets. Alternatively, individuals may use relatively
precise figures when formulating financial plans, but provide oniy "ball
park" figures to interviewers. Respondents might also think in terms of
replacement rates (i.e. the percentage of pre-retirement income provided
by social security) rather than absolute levels, and may err in the process
of converting one to the other. Finally, some noise is undoubtably
attributable to recording and coding errors.
The analysis of my previous paper established that a standard
errors-in-variables specification, combined with the basic theory of
expectations outlined above, explained the relationship between
expectations and realizations rather well. It is therefore quite possible that
reporting error also accounts for the apparent failure of the theory in the
current context.
Unfortunately, one cannot in the absence of additional information
adjust the tests based on equation (5) for the presence of reporting error.
Nevertheless, one can "back out" the variance of the measurement error

that

would make

the observed variances consistent with theory. This is

accomplished as follows.
Suppose that for each

r we observe X., which

follows:

= XCr+pr,
22

is related to X. as

where p1- is uncorrelated with

Suppose further

X..

that the

u-

are
Then

independently and identically distributed, with variance
equation (5) implies that

Var1)

From this expression,
2

—
—

= Var() + Var(31

—

—

—

33

it follows that

Var() +

—

—

Var(1)

2

Substitution of the summary statistics from Table

= 682,

1

into this formula

that approximately 60% of the variance in
ESS71, and 35% of the variance in ESS73 is attributable to measurement

reveals that

so

error.
\'Vhile the preceding calculation assumes the existence of reporting

error, one can actually test this hypothesis through estimation of equation
The standard prescription for reporting error is to employ
(8).
instrumental variables. One requires that the instrument is uncorrelated
Accordingly, valid
instruments must be related to information which the individual actually
uses to construct X. Thus, one necessarily tests the basic theory and the
measurement error hypothesis jointly with the assumption that individuals
with both

and

p,

but correlated with

X.

actually use certain information (i.e. that contained in the instruments) in
a manner consistent with theory.

23

The second column in Table

contains estimates of (8) for which
I have instrumented ESS71 with measures of other expectations (i.e. the
2

first group of variables discussed in section 3 as candidates for inclusion in

The use of these variables as instruments is based upon the plausible
assumption that individuals' expectations are internally consistent, in the
sense that all expectations are based on the same information. The results
in Bernheim [1987a] lend strong support to this assumption. Note that
the estimated coefficients change dramatically. The intercept is now

negative and statistically insignificant, while the slope coefficient rises to
1.27 and is statistically indestinguishable from unity.
The third column in Table 2 contains estimates of (8) for which I
have instrumented ESS71 with various socio-economic and demographic
variables (i.e. the second group of variables discussed in section 3 as
candidates for inclusion in c?). The useof these variables as instruments
is supported by the findings in Bernheim [1987a] -- while individuals do
not appear to use all of this information efficiently, the extent of the
departure from theory is not of much quantitative importance. Once
again, the estimated coefficients change dramatically. The intercept
becomes negative and statistically insignificant, while the slope coefficient
rises

=

to 1.16 and is statistically indistinguishable from unity.

For both sets of estimates, one cannot reject the hypothesis that c
0 and 3 = at reasonable levels of confidence. Of course, this is in

I

large part due to the fact that standard errors are enormous. By itself,
this evidence is only weakly supportive of the underlying hypotheses. It
becomes far more persuasive in the context of my earlier results. In
24

regressions of realizations on expectations (see Bernheim [1987aJ), precisely
the same pattern emerged -- simple regressionsproduced large positive
intercepts and slope coefficients of roughly 0.5, while instrumental
variables techniques drove the intercepts towards zero and generated slope
coefficients of about 1.1. Furthermore, since the earlier study made use of
much larger samples, the precision of these estimates was substantially
greater. The fact that the predicted pattern arises in two different
estimation contexts lends strong support to the underlying joint
hypotheses.
from the IV
It is also possible to "back out" estimates of
results. Standard calculations reveal that the bias in the OLS estimate of
the slope parameter is proportional to the noise-to-signal ratio.
Furthermore, the IV estimates are consistent. Using these facts, it is easy

to show that

& (1 — o1s'iv)

c,

where
is the population variance of
yields a consistent estimate of
and
are respectively the OLS and IV estimates of 3.
and

X,

The preceding paragraphs describe two sets of IV results. For the first set,
is 728, while for the second it is 712. Since the
the implied value of
estimated j3's are quite close to unity, these values are not far from the
figure derived from equation (5) (i.e. 682). Moreover, one can undertake a
similar exercise for the regressions of realizations on expectations contained
in Bernheim [1987a]. The implied variance for measurement error for

25

1971 is 660, which is

in the same ballpark. The striking similarity of

estimates obtained from two distinct empirical excercises again lends
support to the joint hypotheses outlined above.

In section 3, I mentioned that this analysis suffers from potential
sample selection problems. To assess the importance of these factors, I
introduced a statistical correction based upon the procedure outlined by
Heckman [1976]. First, I created a larger data sample containing the
original sample plus all the observations that were excluded on the basis of
characteristics observed after 1971. Next, I estimated a probit relationship
that explained inclusion in the original sample as a function of the
instrument list, and used these estimates to form inverse Mill's ratios. I
then augmented equation (8) with the inverse Mill's ratio term and
estimated it with two-stage-least-squares, using both the original
instrument list and the inverse Mill's ratio as instruments. This procedure
treats both the endogeneity of ESS71 and the sample selection problem
simultaneously, and yields consistent estimates.
Results for the two instrument lists discussed above appear in
columns 4 and 5 of Table 2. While the slope coefficients rise slightly, this
change is dwarfed by the original standard errors. In addition, the Mill's
ratios do not appear to enter significantly (note however that I have not
adjusted the standard errors for the fact that these terms are estimated,

rather than observed). Overall, the sample selection correction appears to
make very little quantitative or qualitative difference. Indeed, none of the
estimates in this paper were significantly affected by the introduction of
similar corrections. In subsequent sections, I have conserved space by
26

presenting only uncorrected OLS and IV estimates. Results based on
sample selection corrections are available upon request.
In summary, the data are consistent with the hypothesis of weak
rationality. This fact is obscured by the presence of significant reporting
error, which biases simple regression estimates, and leads to apparent
rejections of the theory. Unfortunately, estimates which correct for the
presence of measurement error are imprecise, so that the associated tests
have little power. However, taken in conjunction with previous work, this
analysis validates the use of weak rationality as a maintained hypothesis
in subsequent sections.

4.2. TESTS OF STRONG RATIONALITY
In my previous study of expectations and realizations (Bernheim
[1987a]), I found that while the data were consistent with the hypothesis
of weak rationality, they were highly inconsistent with strong rationality.
In particular, individuals appeared to ignore much of the information
contained in current statutory entitlements, and to a lesser extent failed to
make complete use of several socio-economic variables.
In the current context, tests of strong rationality have a much
different flavor. To understand these differences, consider equation (6). If
we replace

X7 with X (so that the equation explains realizations rather

than later expectations), then any failure to process information contained
in
should show up as non-zero components in the coefficient vector
however, as the equation stands, elements of y will be non-zero only if
either (i) individuals are slow to adjust expectations, and incorporate

.

27

into their forecasts sometime after period I and
that are useful
before period 1+1, or (ii) individuals ignore elements of
in predicting events that these individuals will subsequently incorporate
certain aspects of

into their forecasts. Failure to reject the hypothesis that = 0 does not,
in the current context, imply that individuals process all information
correctly. Most obviously, if individuals never adjust their expectations,
then we will certainly estimate 'y = 0, despite the fact that expectations
are not informationally effieient. Thus, the tests of strong rationality have
power against a much narrower range of alternatives in the current context
than in my earlier paper.

I implement these tests through estimation of equation (6). In
light of my conclusions concerning the presence of reporting error, it is
hardly surprising that OLS estimates of (6) are highly at variance with the
theory. I therefore omit these results, and turn directly to procedures that
correct for this problem.
There are two alternative methods of dealing with measurement
error. First, one can impose the constraint that = 1, thereby moving
to the left hand side of the equation. The term p1 then becomes part

X7
of the standard regression error; while it renders the estimates less precise,
it does not affect consistency. One can then test the hypotheses that a =
7 = 0. Second, one can estimate (6) with instrumental variables. It is
then possible to test all of the relevant constraints (including = 1). The
drawback of this approach is that, as in the previous section, in order to
identify instruments one must maintain the hypothesis that individuals
actually use certain information.
28

Table 3 contains the results of the procedures outlined in the
preceding paragraph. Estimates in the first column are generated by
regressing the change in expectations (CESS) on the full list of
informational variables. Note that none of the
corresponding coefficients
is significant at the 95% level of confidence. Even
CSS71, which played
such

a

large role in my earlier analysis of expectations and realizations,
appears to explain very little of the change in expectations. In fact, the F-

statistic for the hypothesis that y = 0 is 0.834, and the F-statistic for the
joint hypotheses that a = = 0 is 0.829, so that it is impossible to reject
strong rationality at any standard level of confidence.
Failure to reject might, of course, be attributable to
imprecision.
It is therefore appropriate to consider the magnitudes of point estimates.
Certain coefficients stand out as very large relative to the mean value of
expected benefits. The most notable among these are DRET71 and
DRET69. The reason for this is simply that the variables ERET71 and
ERET69 have also been included in the regression. Since the mean value
of ERET71 is around 74, the product of this variable with its coefficient is
typically around 2900. The corresponding dummy variable simply takes

out the mean of this product so that the fitted value of CESS is not
substantially different for those who do and do not report ERET71. Since
the t-statistic for the coefficient of ERET71 is small, the standard error for
the coefficient of DRET71 must be enormous.
Other variables with quantitatively significant coefficients are
HGOOD, HBAD, COMPRET, and MOVE. Of these, only the coefficient
of COMPRET approaches statistical significance. Nevertheless, it is
29

somewhat disturbing that the standard deviations of these coefficients are
so large. For example, although the point estimates indicate that a recent
move is associated with roughly an 8% decline in expected benefits during

the subsequent period, we are unable to determine with any reasonable
confidence whether or not this association is the result of chance.
The second column of Table 2 contains IV estimates, where the
instrument list consists of other reported expectations (i.e. the first set of
variables listed in section 3 as candidates for inclusion in '2t) The
coefficient of ESS71 is only slightly changed from the corresponding
regression in Table 2. Of the various informational variables, only
COMPRET appears with a significant coefficient. Of course, with a large
number of informational variables, it is hardly surprising that one should
appear with a coefficient that is significant at the 95% level of confidence.
A formal test of the hypothesis that none of the informational variables
matters (-y = 0) reveals that this hypothesis cannot be rejected.

Similarly, the data fail to reject the full implications of strong rationality
-

a=

=

0

and/I = 0--at the 95% level of confidence.

These conclusions follow with even greater force from estimates
based on the use of socio-economic and demographic variables (i.e. the
second set of variables listed in section 3 as candidates for inclusion in
The associated results appear in the third column of
Table 3. Note that the intercept is nearly 0, that the estimate of /3 differs
only slightly from unity, and that none of the informational variables
as instruments.

appears with either a statistically significant or quantitatively important
coefficient (recall my earlier comments concerning the interpretation of the
30

coefficient

for DRET71).

Not surprisingly, one cannot reject the
hypothesis of strong rationality on the basis of these estimates.
Taken together, these results bear out the strongest implications of
the theory outlined in section 2. One should, however, be cautious in
interpreting these results. In this regard, it is worth reiterating some of
the opening remarks for this subsection. This evidence suggests that we

the possibilities that (i) individuals incorporate certain
information into their expectations only after a lag, and (ii) information
that individuals fail to use is highly correlated with subsequent events that
they do incorporate into their expectations. The evidence does not allow
us to conclude that individuals make efficient use of all available
information, and indeed the results of Bernheim [1987a] suggest the
can rule out

contrary.
5.

RESPONSES TO NEW INFORMATION

The analysis of section 4 lends support to the theoretical model of
expectations outlined in section 2. Unfortunately, it does not tell us very
much about the manner in which individuals process new information.
For example, this evidence does not rule out the possibility that
individuals form expectations at some early date, and thereafter cling
stubbornly to their original forecasts, ignoring all new information. The
current section is therefore devoted to an analysis of the manner in which
new infomation affects

the evolution of expectations.

On the basis of the simple summary statistics in Table 2, it seems
apparent that some adjustment of expectations occurs. For one thing, the
31

variance of CESS is very large.
Of course, this could be partly
attributable to the fact that both ESS71 and ESS73 contain measurement
error -- indeed, the observed variance of CESS could in principle be
entirely spurious. If the variance of measurement error remains constant
over time, then the variance of CESS simply equals the variance of the
true change in expectations plus two times the variance of the
In section 4.1, I presented several different
measurement error,

u.

estimates of Cp, all of which clustered around 700. Combining this figure
with the observed standard error of CESS, it is possible to recover the
variance of the true change in expectations. Specifically, I calculate the
standard error of the true change to be 728. Thus, individuals appear to
have adjusted their expectations significantly between 1971 and 1973. One
can illustrate this same point simply by comparing the variances of ESS71
and ESS73 -- unless measurement error increased dramatically between
these years, the rise in variance must reflect the processing of new
information.

The observations raise two important questions. First, what kind
of information leads individuals to revise their expectations, and what is
the nature of the response?
Second, do individuals process new
information "rationally", in the sense that the adjustment of observed
expectations closely resembles an adjustment to some objective expectation
of the realized value? The next two subsections are devoted to analyses of
these questions.

32

5.1. MEASUREMENT OF RESPONSES

The starting point for this analysis is equation (7), which relates
changes in expectations to unanticipated events. To the extent that such
events determine subsequent earnings, applicable statutes, or the timing of
retirement, they may also have large impacts on eventual benefits.
Estimation of equation (7) requires some notion of what the function
looks like, as well as some technique for distinguishing between anticipated
and unanticipated events. Lacking any prior information about the form
of
I simply estimate a linear approximation. In addition, I try out

,

three different procedures for measuring unanticipated events.

It is natural to begin with the simple assumption that
expectations are largely myopic, so that any change in status is
unanticipated. This motivates a regression of CESS on the set of variables
listed in section 2 as candidates for inclusion in
Since my earlier
study (Bernheim [1987a]) suggested that individuals ignore much of the
information contained in current statutory entitlements, I begin with a
regression that omits CCSS (the change in current entitlement) from this
list. The results appear in column 1 of Table 4.
Only one of the variables in this regression -- WIDW -- appears
with a coefficient that is significant at the conventional 95% confidence
level.

However, many of

the other coefficients have t-statistics in the
therefore not surprising that the F-statistic for

neighborhood of 1.5. It is
the hypothesis that all of these coefficients equal zero is 2.09, which is
significant at the 95% level of confidence. This joint hypothesis test
indicates that some of the change in expectations observed between 1971
33

and 1973 is a response to the information contained in these variables.
also clear that the lack of statistical significance for a number
of individual coefficients reflects imprecision, rather than small point
estimates. Several of the dummy variables have coefficients in the

It

is

neighborhood of 600, which indicates that the event changes expectations
by about 25% of its mean value. Nevertheless, standard errors are simply
too large to say with confidence that the specific event (as opposed to
events collectively) has an impact on expectations. Unfortunately, several
coefficients also have counterintuitive signs. Specifically, finding a job
depresses expected benefits, while losing a job raises them.

It is particularly interesting to compare these results with the
second column of Table 4, which differs from the first only in that I have
added CCSS (the change in statutory entitlement). Note first that the
coefficient of this variable is statistically significant, which indicates that
individuals do to some extent process information that affects their benefit
levels through the benefit formulas. Furthermore, the addition of CCSS
renders all other coefficients individually insignificant. Indeed, the F-

statistic for the hypothesis that all of these other coefficients equal zero is
1.71, which is significant at the 90% confidence level, but not at the 95%
level. Closer inspection reveals that the introduction of CCSS renders the
other coefficients jointly insignificant by reducing the estimated effects of
several key variables (especially GJOB and WJDW), rather than by
reducing the precision of these coefficients.
These results raise the interesting possibility that events affect
expectations only through their impacts on actual benefit calculations.
34

This would entail

a

very high degree

of rationality with respect to the

of information received on the margin -- certainly a much
greater degree of rationality than was apparent in my analysis of the levels
of expectations (see Bernheim [1987a]). Much of the following analysis is
designed to investigate this possibility in greater detail.
processing

The problem with the preceding set of estimates is, of course, that
much of the observed changes in status may have been anticipated. This
is especially important for the CCSS variable, in that statutory
(what an individual would obtain upon immediate
retirement) rise steeply during the period immediately prior to retirement.
Thus, much of the change in CSS may have been anticipated. This would
entitlements

tend to bias the coefficient of CSS toward 0, thereby overstating the extent
to which other events impacted expectations through channels other than

the benefit formulas.
The next logical step is therefore to reestimate this specification
using a more elaborate model for distinguishing between anticipated and
unanticipated events. The object is to measure the component of an event
that is unanticipated, given whatever method individuals actually use to
forecast these events. Since we do know that individuals use information
contained in ESS71, one possibility is to forecast (through regressions) the
informational events on the basis of ESS71, and to use the residuals as
measures of the unanticipated components.
Results based on this procedure appear in the third column of
Table 4. The list of independent variables should now be interpreted as
measures of unanticipated changes, constructed as described above. Note
35

that the coefficient of CCSS rises dramatically to 0.441, and its t-statistic
now exceeds 5. In addition, the absolute value of every other coefficient
declines, in some cases very significantly, and none of these other
coefficients is even close

to being statistically significant. Jointly, the

of these other coefficients is no longer even marginal -- the Fstatistic for the hypothesis that they all equal zero is 0.65, which does not
significance

permit rejection at any meaningful level of confidence.
Even with this second procedure, measures of unanticipated events

may still contain anticipated components. I therefore implement a third
procedure in which the informational events are regressed on the full array
as well as
of variables listed in section 3 as candidates for inclusion in

I then use the residuals from these variables as measures of the
unanticipated changes. The justification for this procedure is that it is
better to overexplain, rather than underexplain the changes in status
between 1971 and 1973. If one uses more information than do the
respondents, then one's prediction will better than theirs, and the residual
will then certainly reflect only unanticipated changes in status. Since the
respondents' forecasts are presumed to be inferior, part of the predicted
on ESS71.

change will also be unanticipated. Fortunately, the nature of regression
analysis is such that these other unanticipated components must be
orthogonal to the residuals, and consequently the omission of these
components will not bias the coefficients in
residuals.

a regression of CESS on the

The results of this procedure appear in column 4 of Table 4. The
coefficient of CCSS again increases significantly to 0.546, and it remains
36

highly significant. The absolute values of the coefficient estimates
continue to decline significantly for WIDM, WIDW, GJOB, and CJOB.
In fact, for WIDW, the coefficient is reduced practically to zero. In
contrast, the coefficients for HBET and NMOVE rise somewhat. The
statistical significance of these other individual coefficients continues to be
low, and one cannot reject the

joint hypothesis that they are all zero at

any reasonable level of confidence.
Note that the second and third procedures described above
implicitly treat the increase in average benefits between 1971 and 1973 as
anticipated. Thus, the relative importance of CCSS does not simply
reflect the fact that most individuals were aware of the benefit increase,
and adjusted their expectations accordingly. Rather, these results suggest
that cross-sectional variation in unanticipated changes of statutory
entitlements is the most important factor explaining cross-sectional
variation in changes of expected benefits.

Two qualifications are in order. First, for the second and third
procedures I have not adjusted the standard errors for the fact that the
residuals are estimated, rather than observed. It is in principle possible to
obtain correct standard errors, as well as more efficient estimates, by
estimating the entire system simultaneously through the use of seeminglyunrelated-regression (SUR) techniques.
Unfortunately, computational
requirements for SUR estimation of the full system exceeded the capacity
of the available computer facilities. Second, the power of the tests
discussed above is questionable in light of the fact that the standard errors
of many coefficients are, from an economicpoint of view, extremely large.
37

pattern of results, and especially the
progression of coefficients through the second, third, and fourth columns in
Table 4, lends significant support to a remarkable conclusion: despite the
fact that individuals do not appear to use all information contained in
Nevertheless, the general

their statutory entitlements, the bulk of new, marginal information is
incorporated into expectations through its effect on statutory entitlements.
Although individuals do not appear to be well informed about the level of
benefits, they appear to have
formulas operate on the margin.

a

very good sense for how

the benefit

The remaining question is whether these responses to new
information are rational, in the sense that they closely resemble
adjustments to an objective measure of expected benefits. Even if
individuals incorporate new information as if they evaluate its impact on
statutory entitlements, it is still possible that they do not fully exploit this
they misperceive the relationship between
entitlements and ultimate benefits. These issues are the subjects of the
information,

or

that

next subsection.
5.2. EVALUATION OF RESPONSE QUALITY
In order to test the rationality of responses to new information, it
is necessary to add some additional structure to the basic model. I will
suppose that the objective expectation concerning the realization of X is
given by a linear function of information:

=

38

When new information arrives, the objective expectation adjusts in
response to unanticipated shocks. In particular, I suppose that

=

(9)

I

—

+

the possibility that reported expectations differ
from objective expectations. Suppose in particular that subjective
expectations are given not by equation (9), but rather by
now allow for

=

(10)

+

H+i

—

Then, combining (9) and (10), and using the fact

X =

+

where v is uncorrelated with

we

X

(11)
—

that

—

+ [w,+i

have

X
—

=

(wj+iIflj)]((2

—

02)

+ v.

The empirical analysis in Bernheim {1987a] established that individuals do
—
not process all available information in a fully rational manner (i.e.

i

0). In this paper, I focus on the processing of new information (i.e.
—
on the value of
02).

39

To estimate the value of

—

I regress the forecast error from

expectations reported in 1973 on the 1971 information set, as well as on
measures of unanticipated events that occurred in the intervening period.
I present estimates of equation (11) based upon the three distinct methods
of measuring unanticipated events discussed in the preceding subsection.
It should be noted that the use of the first two procedures does not
conform strictly to the theory outlined above.
Results appear in Table 5. In order to conserve space, I have
omitted coefficients for all of the Q variables, and concentrate exclusively
on the effects of new information. It is worth mentioning that the pattern
variables was very similar to that obtained in my
Most importantly, CSS71 entered with a positive,

of coefficients for the
previous study.

economically significant, and statistically significant coefficient, indicating
that individuals fail to process all of the information contained in

statutory entitlements.
The first thing to notice about Table 5 is that the results differ
very little across the three procedures. There is a particularly striking
similarity between the second and and third set of estimates. This should
not be surprising -- were it not for the presence of ESS71 in the first stage
the independent variables would be related by a linear
transformation, and the estimated coefficients for the new information
regressions,

variables would in fact be identical across procedures. The second and
third sets of estimates differ only because the first stage estimates for the
coefficients of ESS71 differ.
Note that none of the variables in Table 5 appears with a
40

statistically significant coefficient in any regression (although the change
in wealth variable, CW, does have t-statistics ranging from 1.8 to 1.9). In
each case, one cannot reject the hypothesis

that

—

02

= 0 at

any

reasonable level of confidence. The data therefore support the view that
individuals rationally process new information.

It is worth emphasizing that the CCSS variable has a statistically
insignificant coefficient in each of these equations, and that the point
estimates of this coefficient are small in economic terms. Although
individuals do not appear to use all information contained in statutory
entitlements, they do seem to act rationally towards new information that
changes statutory entitlments on the margin.
6. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, I have outlined and tested a simple theory that
describes the evolution of expectations concerning social security benefits
during the pre-retirement period. While the raw data do not appear to
support the empirically testable implications of this theory, the evidence
indicates that this failure is attributable to the presence of measurement
error. After correcting for the presence of this error, I find that
expectations do appear to evolve as a random walk, and that the
innovations in this process are unrelated to previously available
information.
After concluding that the data support the theory, I estimate
responses of expectations to the arrival of new information, and test for

the rationality of these responses. The results here are striking. Although
41

individuals do not form expectations on the basis of all available
information, and in particular ignore much of the information contained in
concurrent statutory entitlements to social security benefits, responses to
new information during the period immediately preceding retirement
appear to be highly rational. The bulk of information affects the evolution
of expectations only through its impact on actual benefit calculations.
Furthermore, the data support the view that individuals form accurate
assessments of the ultimate impact of new information on actual benefits.
These findings corroborate more speculative results from Bernheim [1987a]
which suggested that individuals formulate expectations about the
retirment period much more carefully as retirement approaches.

42

REFERENCES
Anderson, Kathryn H., Richard V. Burkhauser, and Joseph F. Quinn
The Effect of
[1986], "Do Retirement Dreams Come True?
Unanticipated Events on Retirement Plans," Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 39, 518-526.
Bernheim, B. Douglas [1987aJ, "Social Security Benefits: An Empirical
Study of Expectations and REalizations," in E. Lazear and R.
Ricardo-Campbell (eds.), Issues

Contemrorary Retirement,

Hoover Institution, forthcoming.

Bernheim, B. Douglas [1987b], "The Timing of Retirement: A Comparison
of Expectations and Realizations," in D. Wise (ed.),
Economics
of Aging, NBER-University of Chicago Press: Chicago, forthcoming.
Burtless, Gary [1984], "Social Security, Unanticipated Benefit Increases,
and the Timing of Retirement," Review Economic Studies 53,

f

781-806.

j

Hall, Arden and Terry Johnson [1980], "The Determinants of Planned
Labor Relations Review 33, 240Retirement Age," Industrial
255.

Heckman, James J. [1976], "The Common Structure of Statistical Models
of Truncation, Sample Selection, and Limited Dependent Variables
43

and a Sample Estimator for such Models," Annals of Economic
Social Measurement 5, 475-492.
Hurd, Michael [1983], "The Effects of Sicial Security on Retirement:
Results and Issues," mimeo, SUNY, Stoney Brook.
Parnes, H. S. and G. Nestel [1981], "The Retirement Experience," in H. S.
Parnes (ed.), Work
Retirement, MIT Press: Cambridge,
Massachusetts, 1981.
Wolpin, Kenneth I. and Fürsun Gönül [1987], "On the Use of
Expectations Data in Micro Surveys: The Case of Retirement,"
mimeo, Ohio State University.
Zarnowitz, Victor [1984], "Business Cycle Analysis and Expectational
Survey Data," NBER Working Paper No. 1378.

44

Table 1: Summary Statistics on Expectations
Variable

Mean

ESS71

2307

881

E5573

2362

1164

CESS

55

1229

2550

1003

SS

Standard deviation

45

Table 2: Tests of Week Rationality
Equation
Variable
1

2

3

Technique

OLS

W

Intercept

1429
(176)
0.400
(0.0791)

ESS71

4

5

W

W-Heckit

W-Heckit

-559
(1287)

-307

-93.1
(879)

-213
(685)

1.27
(0.557)

1.16

1.37
(0.400)

1.22

-897

-314
(546)

(661)
(0.285)

MILLS

(757)

46

(0.373)

Table 3: Tests of Strong Rationality
Equation

Variable

2

3

ESS73

ESS73

IV

IV

-4427
(6352)

(554)

1

Dependent Variable CESS
Technique
Intercept

OLS
-3593

(2913)
ESS71

ERET71

1.24
(0.688)

10.2

0.966

(0.286)

40.1
(46.8)

51.4

DRET71

-2801
(3446)

-3519
(3708)

E0171/100

-0.184

-0.230

(0.173)

(0.335)

ERET69

8.89
(39.9)

1.51
(39.0)

DRET69

-649
(2920)

-130
(2848)

E0169/100

-1.92

-1.68

(2.89)

(3.10)

(50.3)

(continued)

47

Table 3 (continued)
-0.102
(0.0744)

-0.162
(0.202)

AGE

49.5
(50.8)

63.0
(108)

SAGE

13.8
(14.3)

9.74
(27.1)

ED

-3.99
(12.1)

-5.15
(12.7)

SED

1.14
(11.5)

-2.84

0.481
(8.41)

-1.05

-156
(141)

-175

HBAD

-122
(223)

-158
(251)

KIDS

5.18
(39.0)

3.16
(38.2)

COMPRET

329
(179)

408

-203
(223)

-219

CSS71

W/104
HGOOD

MOVE

(16.4)

(10.2)

(157)

(200)

(259)

48

-0.0284
(0.0892)

Table 4: Estimates of Responses to New Information
Equation

Variable
1

2

3

4

Intercept

52.7
(81.4)

-163
(116)

55.1
(60.2)

55.1
(61.0)

HBET

-633
(379)

-639

-38.2

-280

(352)

(275)

(384)

HWOR

-604
(693)

-692
(697)

-322
(646)

-316
(686)

WIDM

-659
(414)

-591
(408)

-313
(384)

-234
(412)

WIDW

-804
(306)

-531
(304)

-181

(379)

-11.7
(372)

190
(145)

199
(143)

-46.7

-47.2

(141)

(147)

-602

-480

-444

-298

(388)

(402)

(439)

(491)

636
(377)

605
(354)

581

363
(415)

239
(170)

264
(169)

(166)

253
(183)

-0.442

-0.450

-0.307

-0.307

(0.345)

(0.337)

(0.416)

(0.383)

0.177

0.441
(0.0844)

0.546
(0.114)

LJOB
GJOB
CJOB
NMOVE
CW/100
CCSS

(0.0694)

49

(387)
191

Table 5: Estimates of Response Quality
Equation
Variable
1

2

3

FIBET

-28.0
(688)

33.5
(643)

34.1
(655)

HWOR

473
(334)

493
(347)

496
(342)

WIDM

9.95

(232)

54.8
(246)

50.5
(243)

\VIDW

-174
(250)

-101
(270)

-121
(264)

LJOB

-205

(139)

-229
(137)

-228
(137)

GJOB

325
(373)

357
(378)

348
(376)

CJOB

-346
(442)

-352
(442)

-356
(442)

NMOVE

-178

(191)

-186
(191)

-186
(191)

CW/1000

6.68
(3.64)

6.91
(3.62)

6.87
(3.63)

CCSS

0.0141
(0.103)

0.0654
(0.122)

0.0532

50

(0.118)

