                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          IR&D PROJECT DATA AND
                        THEORIES OF R&D INVESTMENT




                            Frank Lichtenberg




                          Working Paper No. 2720




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                        1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                              September 1988




This research is part of NBER's research program in Productivity. Any
                                                     of the National Bureau
opinions expressed are those of the author not those
of Economic Research.
                                           NBER Working Paper #2720
                                           September 1988


                              IR&D PROJECT OATA AND
                            THEORIES OF R&D INVESTMENT


                                     ABSTRACT


        This paper analyzes data on a large sample of research and development

                                                                  R&O Oata
(R&D) projects documented in the Defense Department's Independent

                                                               at the
Bank, both to provide some stylized facts about R&O investment

                                                                    model
project level and to test the implications of a control-theoretical

developed by Grossman and Shapiro.     We calculate moments of the marginal

distributions and elasticities of cost with respect to time, by type of

project (e.g. basic research,    development),   and discriminate between alter-

native hypothesis concerning the shape of the hazard function of R&D invest-

ment.     Consistent with the major implication of the Grossman-Shapiro model,

the rate of investment in a project tends to increase as the project

approaches completion.


                                           Frank Lichtenberg
                                           Graduate School of Business
                                           Columbia University
                                           726 Uris Hall
                                           New York, NY 10027
     An important body of theoretical literature on the conduct of

research and development (R&D) projects has been accumulating for almost

20 years.     (See, for example, Kamien and Schwartz (1971),   Lucas (1971),

Roberts and Weitzman (1981), Grossman and Shapiro (1986), and the refer-

ences cited therein.)     Some, if not all, of the models in this literature

have (in principle) testable implications concerning firms' patterns of

investment in R&D projects.     But due, perhaps, to the general paucity of

data on R&D investment at the project level, few "stylized" empirical

facts about R&D investment have been available to test these theories and

to guide further theoretical modeling efforts.

        The objectives of this article are (1) to provide some salient

stylized facts about R&D investment behavior at the project level, and

(2) to test the major implications of one specific, control-theoretic

model of investment behavior.     To achieve these objectives, we analyze

data contained in the Defense Department's (DOD's) Independent Research

and Development Data Bank, a computerized data base which contains infor-

mation about the rate and duration of investment in thousands of R&D

projects conducted by defense contractors since the late 1970s.

        This paper is organized as follows.   En Section I we describe DOD's

policies regarding so-called "Independent R&D" (IR&D),     its requirements

for contractor reporting of IR&D activity to the IR&D Data Bank, and the

nature of the data reported therein.     In Section II we present statistics

characterizing the joint distribution of completed projects by time and

cost (cumulative investment).     In particular, we present moments of the

                                                                       to
marginal distributions and estimated elasticities of cost with respect

time,    separately by type of project (e.g. basic research, development).

We also discriminate between alternative hypotheses concerning the shape
 of the "hazard function" by fitting a flexible probability density func-

 tion to the empirical distribution of completed durations.           In Section

 III we briefly review the assumptions and implications of Grossman and

Shapiro's recent model of R&D investment, and determine whether the IR&D

data are consistent with that model.        Section IV provides a aummary and

concluding remarks.

I.    DOD's IR&D Policy and the IR&D Data Bank

      DOD contracts with industrial firms to perform a considerable amount

of military R&D.   In l9B3 the value of such DOD contracts was $14.3

billion, which represents about one-fourth of total R&D performed in

industryJ But DOD sponsors or promotes defense-related R&D in industry
in ways other than directly awarding R&D contracts.            Two related DOD

policies provide firms with incentives to use their own funds to finance

defense-related R&D.      First, DOD awards contracts for major weapons

systems by a method of acquisition known as "procurement by design and

technical competition," whereby a contract is awarded to the firm (or

team of firms) that submits the best technical proposal.            Such proposals

entail considerable technical effort (they may be 40,000 pages long),

and DOD generally doesn't issue contracts for the preparation of bids

and proposals.2

      DOD recognizes that firms incur expenses for defense-related R&D

that are not reimbursable under R&D contracts, and wishes to encourage

(or at least make it possible for) them to do so -- hence its           Independent
R&D policy.   (The term    "Independent"   indicates   that   the R&D is not

performed under a contract.) Under this policy, some of the firm's

non-contract R&D expenses are "allowable (overhead) costs," costs that

are eligible for reimbursement under any cost-based contracts (including
                                     3



non-R&D or procurement contracts) that the firm has with DOD. In 1983

firms incurred $3.9 billion worth of IR&D costs, $1.7 billion (42 per-

cent) of which was reimbursed   by DOD. Each year DOD negotiates an

advance agreement with the contractor, which imposes a ceiling on the

amount of allowable IR&D cost.    Before the negotiations begin, the firm

must submit a Technical Plan, which includes a detailed description of

each IR&D project and is used by DOD to evaluate the reasonableness,

technical quality, and potential military relevance of a contractor's
             3
IR&D program.

     Each project report begins with a one-page synopsis of the project

on a standard form (DTIC Form 271) which is subsequently entered into the

Defense Technical Information Center's IR&D Data Bank.    Among the data

items included in a project report are:

     Project Number

     Report Date

     Report Type (New, Continuing, or Completed Project)

     Project Category (Basic research, Applied Research,

      Development, or Systems and other Concept Formulation

      Studies)4

     Project Start Date

     Project Completion Date (Actual or Estimated)

     Cumulative Investment to Date (in professional

      man years of effort)

     Estimated Investment in Next Year (in professional
                   S
      man years)

     Two limitations of the data should be noted.    First, our measure of

investment (professional manyears) should be regarded as an imperfect
                                            4




proxy for total R&D cost, since wages of R&D personnel account for just

under half of total R&D expense.6

      Second, although in principle the presence of the project number,

which is supposed to be used by the firm in all reports on a specific

project, and only in those reports, makes the data longitudinal in

nature, in practice, there are often inconsistencies (e.g.                ,
                                                                              with   respect

to reported start date) between different reports with the same project

number, possibly because firms "recycle" used project numbers.                     Neverthe-

less, because a single report contains both retrospective data (start

date, cumulative investment) and prospective data (completion date,

investment next year), eveu single reports contain longitudinal informa-

tion.    This feature is exploited in Section III below.

II.   Some "Stylized" Facts About R&D Investment Behavior

      We begin by presenting summary statistics about the duration,

cumulative investment, and average rate of investment (the ratio of

cumulative investment to duration) of completed projects.                     As one might

                                                                   -- we
expect, the distributions of all three variables are highly skewed

show below   that   the duration   distribution   is   close   to being                     --
                                                                               lognormal

so we will present moments of the logarithms rather than the levels of

the variables.      (The geometric mean is a more meaningful measure of

central tendency of a skewed distribution than the arithmetic mean.                        The

log transformation also reduces the influence of outliers.)

        Values of the mean, its antilog, and the standard deviation, of the

logarithm of duration, cumulative investment and average investment are

presented in Table 1.       The (geometric) mean duration across all projects

is 1.40 years, and mean intensity of investment is 1.05 full—time
                                     3




equivalent professionals, so mean cumulative investment is 1.47 manyears

of effort.

    Many analysts of the innovation process think of basic research,

applied research, and development as activities falling along a

continuum, with applied research located "in-between" basic research and

development.7 One might therefore expect statistics for applied cesearch

to lie between corcesponding statistics for basic research and for

development.    The (geometric) means of project duration satisfy this

ordering:    basic research projects last longer than applied research

projects, which in turn last longer than development projects.     The means

of average project investment do not satisfy this ordering:     mean employ-

ment is lowest for applied research projects, but the difference between

basic and applied mean employment is not significant.    These data there-

fore indicate that (basic and applied) research projects are longer and

less intense than development and concept formulation projects.

     In addition to providing evidence on the moments of the distribu-

tions of project duration and intensity, the data on completed projects

enable us to make inferences regarding the nature of the underlying

stochastic process generating the project durations.    In particular, we

can discriminate between alternative functional forms of the probability

density function (p.d.f.) of completed durations.

     These alternative functional forms have different implications

regarding the properties of the "hazard function"
                                                  --   the   relationship

between the probability that a project will be completed in a given

period (conditional on not having been completed by the beginning of that

period) and the time elapsed at the beginning of the period.     One hypoth-

esis about the hazard function is that it is monotonic, i.e., that the
                                            6




conditional probability of project completion is either strictly Lncreas-

ing, constant, or strictly decreasing with respect to time.8             A monotonic

hazard function is implied by a Weibull p.d.f. of duration times.             An

alternative hypothesis is that the hazard function is non-monotonic, and,

in particular, that it initially increases to a maximum and subsequently

declines continuously.       Such a hazard function is implied by a lognormal

p.d.f. of duration times.       The Weibull and lognormal p.d.f.s, both of

which are two—parameter densities, are both nested in (special cases of)

a more general (three-parameter) p.d.f.           :   the generalized gamma

distribution.   The p.d.f. of a variate t distributed with a generalized

gamma density may be written:



                —
                —   Xp(Xt)1exp[-(Xt)]
                               1(k)

where


                1(k) =   j
                         0
                              x'edx

is the gamma function.       When k = 1, the gamma distribution reduces to the

Weibull distribution, and the limiting case of the gamma distribution as

k-* is the logmormal.    Alternatively, one can reparameterize the distri-

bution in terms of a "shape" parameter (denoted SHAPE), defined as the

reciprocal of k, i.e., SHAPE =        k1.       Values of zero and unity of SHAPE

correspond, respectively, to the lognormal and Weibull distributions.

One can fit the generalized gamma density function to the empirical

distribution of durations, and determine whether the estimated SHAPE

parameter is "close" to either zero or unity, and thereby discriminate
                                      7




between the two hypotheses regarding the properties of the hazard

function.

     Naximum likelihood estimates by project category, of the three

parameters of the generalized gamma density function are reported in

Table 2-    In the case of all four project categories, the estimated

SHAPE parameter is much closer to zero than it is to one.9    This implies

that the p.d.f. of project durations is much closer to the lognormal than

it is to the Weibull, and therefore that the conditional probability of

project completion is an increasing function of t for small t, and a

decreasing function of t for large t.

     As Lee (1980, p. 168) observes, the hazard function implied by the

iognormal p.d.f. increases initially to a maximum and then decreases

(almost as soon as the median is passed) to zero as time approaches

infinity.    We may therefore infer that the probability that a develop-

ment project, for example, will be completed increases until about 1—½

years has passed, after which the probability of completion declines.

     So far we have described properties of the marginal distributions of

duration, cumulative and average investment.   Now we consider a statistic

that characterizes the joint distribution of cost and time:    the elastic-

ity of cumulative investment with respect to duration.    (This regression

coefficient is more interesting than the correlation coefficient between

log duration and log cumulative investment.)    Estimated elasticities, by

project category, are shown in Table 3.    The elasticities for basic and

applied research are (at least marginally) significantly greater than

one, indicating that within these categories, projects that are longer

also tend to be more intense.    In basic research, for example, a 1%

increase in project duration is associated with a 0.27% increase in
                                                 B




average investment and a 1.27% increase in cumulative investment.                           In

the case of development and concept formulation projects, the elaatici-

ties are significantly less than one:                the longer the project, the lower

the average rate of investment.

     We conclude this section by presenting some statistics which indi-

cate the degree of project sponsors'              uncertainty about the duration of
IR&D projects, and how this differs across categoreia.                      For a subset of

projects, we observe both the expected date of completion (hence complet-

ed duration) of the project and the actual date of completion.                        We

defined the logarithmic deviation between expected and actual completed

duration as   11EV    =   log   (expected completion date -         start   date) —   log
(actual completion date -          start   date).    We then computed the sample

variance of   11EV,   by project category; these variances may be interpreted

as indicating the relative degree of uncertainty about the difficulty of

completing the project.           The computed variances and associated degrees of

freedom are shown in Table 4.           The variance of      11EV   is highest for basic

research, intermediate for applied research, and lowest for development;

the value for concept formulation projects is close to that for basic

research.   The differences in variance between the first two and between

the last two categories are small and insignificant, but if we pool the

first two and last two categories to test the null hypothesis of equality

of variances, we are able to reject this hypothesis at the one percent

level of significance:                       =   1.33,   compared to a .01 critical
                                 F26314114
value of 1.28 for                             to this procedure,                      the
                          F2001000. According                                 then,

extent of uncertainty about the difficulty of completing a project

(measured by the amount of time required for completion) differs across

project categories in roughly the way one would expect.
III.   Consistency of the IR&D Data with the Grossman-Shapiro Nodel

       In a recent paper, Grossman and Shapiro (1986) studied the optimal

pattern of outlays for a single firm pursuing an R&D program over time.

Treating dynamic R&D investment as an optimal control problem facing a

single firm, they characterized the profile of R&D expenditures as a

single R&D project progresses.    In this section we briefly review the

assumptions and implications of their model, aod analyze the IR&D project

data to determine whether they are broadly consistent with the theory.

       Grossman and Shspiro assume that a firm seeks s prize of size W, and

that to obtain this prize it must "travel" a distance L.    The instantane-

ous rate of advance is determined by the rate of R&D expenditure.     There

are decreasing returns to effort at any point in time, given that some

progress is being made, but there may be a fixed stsrt-up cost st any

moment.    The firm's problem is to choose expenditures at every point in

time up to some terminal date to maximize the present discounted value of

net profits, subject to the constraint that total progress attained at

the termination date be sufficient to complete the project.

       The major implication of the model is that

       when the discount rate is positive, it generally is not optimal for
       s firm to devote a constant level of resources to its research
       program, even if the relationship between effort and progress is
       unchanging. Rather, the firm should vary its R&D expenditure
       directly with the current expected value of the project. In many
                      this value will increase as the firm achieves
       circumsts5es,
       progress.

"Circumstances" refers to whether or not there is uncertainty about the

"difficulty" of the project (i.e., the distance to be travelled) or about

the relationship between effort (expenditure) and progress.    They show

that if neither type of uncertainty is present (the deterministic case),

it is optimal to increase effort over time as the project nears

completion, in part because discounted R&D costs can be decreased for any
                                       10




given duration of the project by shifting expenditures from early to

later stages.   If there is only uncertainty concerning the
                                                            relationship
between effort and progress, a monotonically increasing effort profile

remains optimal.     If there is uncertainty about the difficulty of the

project, the optimal pattern of investment depends on the hazard rate

function.   If this function ia everywhere nondecreasing --    i.e.,   if

whenever success is not realized, researchers become more optiniatic that

a breakthrough is imminent --   the   optimal program again involves rising

R&D outlays over time.    If, alternatively, the firm learns that the

project is more difcicult than was originally believed, it may be optimal

to reduce the scale of the R&D program, or even to abandon it entirely.

Grosaman and Shapiro argue that the deterministic case applies more

closely to development projects than to pure research programs.        Hence,

their model implies that development projects should exhibit increasing

effort profiles, whereas projects subject to greater uncertainty as to

their difficulty (such as basic research projects) would not necessarily

do so, and might be expected to exhibit flatter (or even negatively

sloped) profiles.

     Some of the assumptiona of this model are highly unrealistic, and

one might therefore not expect actual data to be consistent with the

theory.   First, the model omits all R&D rivalry, i.e., strategic interac-

tions among firms.    Also, the assumption that the progress function is

stationary over time may be more reasonable in some contexts than in

others.   It may be easier to make progress once some initial groundwork

has been laid, though the groundwork itself cannot be rushed due to

diminishing returns to more effort on this "sub-project."     This case

would tend to reinforce the Grossman-Shapiro results.     But it may also be
                                     11




easy to make progress early on, due to a long list of "easy ideas to

try."    Then progress may slow once the difficult stage of the program is

reached.

     Despite the possible lack of realism of the assumptions, we believe

it is of interest to assess the degree of consistency of the theory with

the data.    To test the hypothesis that the rate of investment in a

project tends to increase as the project approaches completion, we

computed for each "continuing" project the ratio (denoted R) of expected

investment in the next year to average annual investment to date (cumula-

tive investment to date divided by (report date -    start   date)).   The

finding that this ratio tends to exceed unity would be evidence consis-

tent with the model.    An advantage of this procedure is that the values

of numerator and denominator come from the same project report,        eliminat-

ing the possibility of data mismatch.     We analyze the ratio itself rather

than its logarithm so that we may include values of zero (due to zero

expected investment) in the analysis (the ratio is zero in about 3

percent of the cases).    But without the log transformation a relatively

small number of observations with very large values of R (some of which

may be outliers) become very influential.     To guard against the influence

of such potentially spurious observations, we eliminated from the sample

observations with values of R greater than 4.     This (arbitrary) criterion

eliminated about 10 percent of the observations.     The mean and median of

this truncated distribution are presumably downwardly biased estimate of

the true population values.

        The mean, its standard error, and the median value of the truncated

distribution of R are shown in Table 5.     The mean for all projects is

1.30 and is highly significantly greater than one; the median is also
                                        12




greater than one, albeit smaller than the mean.       (The mean, standard

error, and median for the untruncated distribution are 2.58,      .148, and

1.21, respectively.)      These findings are consistent with the general

implication that the rate of investment increases as the project ap-

proaches completion.      In addition to this general implication, the theory

suggesta that    R   should be lower in the case of projects involving greater

uncertainty about the difficulty of completion.      The data are not consis-

tent with this implication.      Mean and median values of R are essentially

the same for basic research projects as they are for applied research and

development; we saw above that the latter two categories are subject to

less uncertaimty than the former.      Only the R-values for concept formula-

tion projects differ significantly from those of the other categories,

and the difference is in the direction opposite to what one would expect

given the ranking in Table 4.

     Two caveats about these results should be noted.      First, the numera-

tor of   R   is expected investment, and additional data analysis (not

described here) suggests that expected investment exceeds actual (ex

post) investment by about 14 percent, on average.      Still, this accounts

for only about half of the estimated mean excess of expected investment

over aversge investment to date.      Second, as noted earlier the investment

data include only labor costs.      It is plausible that projects become less

labor intensive (more capital and materials intensive) as they approach

completion.      If this is the case, our estimates of R would understate the

true extent to which the rate of investment increases as projects contin-

ue, and our procedure provides a "strong test" of their model.
                                      13




IV.   Summary   and   Conclusions

      This paper has analyzed data on a large sample of R&D projects

documented in DOD's IR&D Data Bank, both to provide some stylized facts

about R&D investment at the project level and to test the implication of

a specific control-theoretic model.        The following tentative conclusions

may be drawn from the analysis.     (1) Research projects (both basic and

applied) are longer and less intenae than development projects.        (2) The


elasticity of cumulative investment with respect to project duration is

greater than one for research projects and less than one for development

projects.   (3) The distributions of duration, average investment, and

cumulative investment are highly skewed.        The shape of the duration

distribution is close to lognormal, indicating that the conditional

probability of project completion initially rises and then declines.

(4) The degree of uncertainty about the project completion date is

greater for basic research and concept formulation projects than it is

for applied research and development projects.        (5) Consistent with the

major implication of the Grossman-Shapiro model, the rate of investment

in a project tends to increase as the project approaches completion.

But the investment profile does not appear to be flatter in the case of

projects involving greater technical uncertainty.
                                  FOOTNOTES

     This paper is based on work supported by the National Science

     Foundation under grant SES 84-01460, conducted at the U.S. Bureau of

     the Census while the author was a participant in the American

     Statistical Association/National Science Foundation/Census Bureau

     research program.   I am grateful to the Defense Technical Information

     Center for providing me with the data, and to two anonymous referees

     for helpful comments on a previous draft.        I am responsible for any

     errors.

1.   National Science Foundation (1985), Tables B-i,

     B-13.

2.   See Lichtenberg (1988) for an econometric analysis of the extent of


     private R&D investmemt undertaken in response to federal design and

     technical competitions.

3.   DOD defines a "project" as "the smallest segment into which research

     and development efforts are normally divided for the purpose of

     company administration.    A project is usually technically distin-

     guishable in scope and objective from other efforts with which it

     may be aggregated for financial and administrative purposes" (De-

     fense Technical Information Center,      1981,   p. 1.)   Projects are

     conceived and initiated by firms rather than by DOD; firms do not

     bid against one another to perform projects.         Presumably almost all

     IR&D projects are pursued by single firms rather than by a number of

     firms.

4.   These project categories are defined as follows:

     Basic Research is that research which is directed toward increase of

     knowledge in science.     The primary aim is a fuller knowledge or
      understanding of the subject under study, rather than any practical

      application thereof.    Applied Research is that effort which (a)

      normally follows basic research, but may not be severable from the

      related basic research, (b) attempts to determine and
                                                            exploit the
      potential of scientific discoveries or improvement in technology,

      materials, processes, methods, devices or techniques, and (c) at-

      tempts to advance the state-of-the-art.   Applied research does not
      include efforts whose principal aim is design,
                                                     development, or test
     of specific items or services to be considered for sale; these

     efforts are within the definition of the term
                                                   "development.'

     Development is the systematic use, under whatever name,    or

     scientific and technical knowledge in the design, development,
                                                                    test,
     or evaluation of a potential new product or service
                                                         (or of an

     improvement in an existing product or service) for the purpose of

     meeting specific performance requirements or objectives.

     Development shall include the functions of design engineering,

     prototyping, and engineering testing.    §yjems and Other Concept
     Formulation Studies are analyses and study efforts either related to

     specific IR&D efforts or directed toward the identification of

     desirable new systems, equipments or components, or desirable

     modifications and improvements to existing systems, equipments, or

     components.

5.   National Science Foundation (1985), Table B-52.

6.   Cumulative investment is not reported for new
                                                   projects, and estimat-
     ed investment is not reported for completed
                                                 projects.
7.   The notion of "concept formulation studies" is not common in the R&D

     literature   and may be unique to DOD.
8.    If the hypothesis of a nonotonic hazard function could not be

                                                                   of the
      rejected, one would then want to determine whether the slope

      function was everywhere positive, zero, or negative.

9.    In fact, in three of the four cases, the parameter estimate is

      negative.   This may perhaps be interpreted as signifying that the

      empirical hazard function is even more peaked than the hazard func-

      tion implied by the lognormal distribution.   Gamma denaity func-

      tions were also fitted to data on cumulative manyesrs.   These esti-

      nated SHAPE parameters were even more negative and significantly

      different from zero than those estimated from the durations.

10.   Grossnan and Shapiro (1986, p. 592).
                                       TABLE 1

                                 SUMMARY STATISTICS:
           LOGS OF DURATION, CUMULATIVE, AND AVERAGE INVESTMENT,
                     COMPLETED PROJECTS, BY CATEGORY



category                            mean            std. dev.   exp (mean)

                                    LOG (DURATION1)

All projects (N = 4294)             .338                .864       1.40
Basic research   (N =   66)         .600                .927       1.82
Applied research (N = 1070)         .457                .907       1.58
Development (N = 2598)              .339               1.287       1.40
Concept formulation (N = 560) .076                      .817       1.08
                            LOG (CUMULATIVE   INVESTMENT2)

All projects                        .384               1.485       1.47

Basic research                      .425               1.616       1.53
Applied research                    .224               1.514       1.25
Development                         .482               1.480       1.62
Concept formulation                 .230               1.399       1.26
                              LOG (AVERAGE INVESTMENT3)

All projects                        .045               1.244       1.05
Basic research                     -.175               1.133        .84
Applied research                    -.233              1.159        .79
Development                         .142               1.271       1.15
Concept formulation                 .154               1.209       1.17



NOTES:     1.    Durstion is messured in years.
           2.    Cumulative investment is measured in professional manyears.
           3.    Average investment = (cumulative investment)/duration is
                 measured in full-time equivalent professionals employed.
                                     TABLE   2
              MAXIMUM LIKELIHOOD ESTIMATES OF THE GENERALIZED
                 GAMMA DENSITY FUNCTION, BY PROJECT CATEGORY
                 (ASYMPTOTIC STANDARD ERRORS IN PARENTHESES)


                                        Parameter               Prob. value
                                                                for testing
                         Intercept           Scale   §pe        110:SHAPEO

Basic research            0.776              0.884   0.354         .3005
                          (0.185)        (0.079)     (0.343)

Applied research          0.438              0.906   -0.132        .0547
                          (0.041)        (0.018)     (0.069)

Oevelopment               0.381              0.820   -0.123        .0050
                          (0.024)        (0.011)     (0.044)

Concept formnlstion        0.155             0.797   -0.133        .1051
                          (0.045)        (0.022)     (0.082)
                                     TABLE 3

                 ESTIHATED ELASTICITY OF CUMULATIVE INVESTHENT
                           WITH RESPECT TO DURATION,
                              BY PROJECT CATEGORY


                                                             Prob.-value
                                                               to test
Project Categpry           ]icit           Stcl.   Error   H: elasticityl

Basic research                1.27             .15               .07

Applied research              1.08             .04               .05

Development                    .91             .03               .00

Concept formulation            .87             .06               .04
                            TABLE 4

              VARIANCE OF LOG DEVIATION OF EXPECTED
                FROM ACTUAL DURATION, BY CATEGORY


                              var(DEV)                d.f.

Basic research                   .323                  40

Concept formulation              .319                 223

Applied research                 .252                 446

Development                      .235                 958
                                  TABLE S


                 PROPERTIES OF TRUNCATED DISTRIBUTION OF R,
                   RATIO OF EXPECTED INVESTMENT NEXT YEAR
                       TO AVERAGE INVESTMENT TO DATE,
                             CONTINUING PROJECTS


                          mean              std. error(mean)   median

Basic research             1.30                  .030           1.14

Applied research           1.28                  .008           1.13


Development                1.30                  .008           1.13

Concept formulation        1.39                  .017           1.18
                              REFERENCES


Defense TechnicalInformation Center, 1981, Independent Research and
    Development Data Bank Input Manual. January.
                                                           Presentation
Department of Defense, 1984, DOD Guidelines for Contractor
     of Independent Research snd Development Information. September.

Grossman, Gene, and Carl Shapiro, 1986, "Optimal Dynamic R&D Programs,"
     Rand Journal of Economics 17, 581-593.

                                                                   R
Kamien, N., and N. Schwartz, 1971, "Expenditure Patterns for Risky
     and D Projects," Journal of Applied Probability 8, 60—73.

Lee, Elisa T., 1980, Statistical Methods for Survival Data Analysis,
     Belmont, CA: Lifetime Learning Publications.
                                                               to
Lichtenberg, Frank, 1988, 'The Private R&D Investment Response
     Federal Design and Technical Competitions," American Economic
     Review 78, 550-559.

Lucas, R., 1971, "Optimal Management of a Research and Development
     Project,'? Msnagenent Science 17, 679-697.

National Science Foundation, 1985, Research and Development in Industry,
     1983 (NSF 85-325).

Roberts, K., and N. Weitzman, 1981, "Funding Criteria for Research,
     Development and Exploration Projects," Econometrica 49,
     1261—1288.
