NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAN THE COVID BAILOUTS SAVE THE ECONOMY?
Vadim Elenev
Tim Landvoigt
Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Working Paper 27207
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27207

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020

The authors thank Ralph Koijen, Hanno Lustig, Thomas Philippon, and seminar participants at
Wharton's finance seminar. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Vadim Elenev, Tim Landvoigt, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Can the Covid Bailouts Save the Economy?
Vadim Elenev, Tim Landvoigt, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
NBER Working Paper No. 27207
May 2020
JEL No. E3,E4,E44,E6,G1
ABSTRACT
The covid-19 crisis has led to a sharp deterioration in firm and bank balance sheets. The
government has responded with a massive intervention in corporate credit markets. We study
equilibrium dynamics of macroeconomic quantities and prices, and how they are affected by
government policy. The interventions prevent a much deeper crisis by reducing corporate
bankruptcies by about half and short-circuiting the doom loop between corporate and financial
sector fragility. The additional fiscal cost is zero since program spending replaces what would
otherwise have been spent on intermediary bailouts. The model predicts rising interest rates on
government debt and slow debt pay-down. We analyze an alternative intervention that targets aid
to firms at risk of bankruptcy. While this policy prevents more bankruptcies and has lower fiscal
cost, it only enjoys marginally higher welfare. Finally, we study longer-run consequences for firm
leverage and intermediary health when pandemics become the new normal.
Vadim Elenev
Johns Hopkins University
100 International Drive
Suite 1329
Baltimore, MD 21202
velenev@jhu.edu
Tim Landvoigt
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
timland@wharton.upenn.edu

Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh
Columbia University
Graduate school of Business
Uris Hall, office 809
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
svnieuwe@gsb.columbia.edu

1

Introduction

The global covid-19 pandemic has resulted in unprecedented contraction in aggregate consumption, investment, and output in nearly every developed economy. Mandatory closures
of non-essential businesses have cut off revenue streams and have brought many firms to the
brink of insolvency. Firms pulled credit lines, raided cash reserves, and laid off or furloughed
workers. In the wake of this economic collapse, the U.S. Congress authorized four rounds of
bailouts worth $3.8 trillion. The Federal Reserve has also launched a slew of programs, worth
$2.3 trillion, several of which are aimed at keeping credit to businesses flowing. In this paper,
we ask how effective the government’s corporate loan programs are likely to be, once fully
deployed, and whether they will be able to prevent an unraveling of the economy in which
corporate defaults bring down the financial intermediary sector. To this end, we compare an
economy with and without the corporate sector bailout programs. Second, we ask what fiscal
ramifications these programs have in the short and in the long run. Third, we propose an alternative corporate loan policy design that increases welfare and has lower fiscal cost. Finally,
we study the long-run impact on non-financial and financial sector health from the realization
that pandemics may be recurring events in the future.
We set up and solve a general equilibrium model, closely following Elenev, Landvoigt, and
Van Nieuwerburgh (2020), henceforth ELVN. The model features a goods-producing corporate
sector financed with debt and equity and an intermediary sector financed by deposits and
equity. The household sector consists of shareholders and savers. Savers invest in safe assets,
both bank deposits and government debt, and in risky corporate debt. Financial intermediaries
make long-term risky loans to non-financial firms funded by short-term safe liabilities obtained
from savers. The model can produce severe financial crises whereby corporate defaults generate
a wave of bank insolvencies, which in turn feed back on the real economy. The calibrated model
matches many features of macro-economic quantity and price data.
We conceptualize the covid shock as the joint effect of three changes. First, there is a large
decline in average firm revenue in the non-financial corporate sector, engineered through a
decline in average productivity. Second, the covid shock also increases the dispersion in firmlevel productivity (Barrero, Bloom, and Davis, 2020), capturing that different firms are hit very

1

differently by the pandemic. We label the increase in cross-sectional dispersion an uncertainty
shock. The uncertainty shock is persistent; a high-uncertainty regime is likely to last for at least
another year. Third, the covid shock is accompanied by a decline in labor supply, capturing
illness, child care duties, or worries about getting infected on the job. Taken together, many
firms face revenue shortfalls that are so severe that they cannot pay their employees and make
other fixed payments such as rent while also servicing their debt.
Absent policy, the covid shock triggers a wave of corporate defaults. The corporate defaults
in turn inflict losses on their lenders, principally the financial intermediaries (e.g. banks and
insurance companies) but also the households who directly hold corporate debt (including bond
mutual funds). The financial sector distress manifests itself in higher credit spreads. The higher
cost of debt for firms and the uncertain economic outlook generate a large decline in corporate
investment. A substantial share of intermediaries fail and are bailed out by the government. The
cost of these rescue operations adds to the already higher government spending and lower tax
revenues that accompany any severe recession (e.g., higher spending on unemployment insurance
and food stamps). The massive amount of new government debt that must be issued to finance
the primary deficit increases safe interest rates, all else equal. Higher safe interest rates in turn
make servicing the debt more expensive for the government going forward. Higher safe rates
also increase the cost of funding for intermediaries, hampering their recapitalization efforts. The
mutually reinforcing spirals of firm distress, financial sector distress, and government bailouts
create a macro-economic disaster. The non-linearity of the model solution is crucial to generate
this behavior.
We then evaluate three government policies aimed at short-circuiting this doom loop and
limiting the economic damage. The first one is a policy that buys risky corporate debt on the
primary or secondary debt market, funded by issuing safe government debt. It is calibrated
to the size of the primary and secondary market corporate credit facilities and the term asset lending facility (PMCCF+SMCCF+TALF). We call this intervention the corporate credit
facility or CCF for short. At the time of this writing, the CCF plans to buy $850 billion in
corporate debt, or 8.9% of the outstanding stock (3.9% of GDP). The second one is a program
in which banks make short-term bridge loans to non-financial firms at a very low interest rate
of 1%. The loan principal is forgiven when loans are used to pay employees. The government

2

provides a full credit guarantee to the banks. This policy captures the institutional reality of
the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). The PPP program has a size of $671 billion or 3.1%
of GDP. The third program also provides bank-originated bridge loans to non-financial firms.
However, these loans are not forgivable, and they carry a modest interest rate of 3%. Moreover,
banks must retain a 5% fraction of the risk so that the government guarantee is partial (95%).
This program reflects the details of the Main Street Lending Program (MSLP), which has a
size of $600 billion or 2.8% of GDP. We consider the combination of all three programs to be
the counterpart to the real world intervention.
The main take-away is that the bridge loan programs (PPP and MSLP) are successful at
preventing many corporate bankruptcies. This prevents the pandemic from spilling over into
a financial crisis. Stronger intermediaries are able to continue making loans, suffering merely
a severe decline in assets and net worth rather than a major meltdown. Credit spreads still
rise but not as much as they would absent policy. Facing a modestly higher cost of debt,
firms borrow and invest less. However, investment shrinks by much less than it would absent
policy. Preventing intermediary defaults avoids the fiscal outlay associated with intermediary
bailouts. This cost reduction is offset by the direct costs of the programs. The PPP provides
debt forgiveness and therefore has a much higher direct cost than the MSLP, which contains
no forgiveness. In contrast to the PPP and MSLP, the CCF is much less effective. It lowers
credit spreads, as intended, thereby boosting investment compared to the do-nothing situation.
However, the program has only minor effects on firm defaults. And the program still has fiscal
implications since the government must issue Treasury debt to buy the corporate debt. This
increases safe rates, which increases the cost of debt funding for intermediaries and contributes
to their fragility. A program that combines all three of the PPP, MSLF, and CCF increases
societal welfare by 6.5% in consumption equivalent units compared to a do-nothing scenario.
Relative to the no-pandemic situation, the primary deficit balloons, but not more than it would
have absent policy. The government must issue 17.5% of GDP in additional debt. Savers who
absorb the extra debt require a higher interest rate. Government debt takes twenty years to
come back down to pre-pandemic levels.
Since the loans are given to all firms without conditionality, the PPP wastes resources on firms
that do not need the aid. We contrast the actual government programs with a hypothetical

3

policy that conditions on need. Both which firms receive credit and how much credit they obtain
depends on firm-level productivity. Obviously, the information requirements imposed on the
government to implement this conditional bridge loan program (CBL) are more stringent. We
find that a much smaller-sized program is needed to prevent a lot more bankruptcies. The CBL
program increases welfare by 7.0% compared to a do-nothing scenario. This also suggests that
the real-life policy combination is not far off that of a perfectly targeted program, at least in
terms of aggregate welfare. There are important distributional differences.
Finally, we turn to the longer-term implications. We solve a model where the pandemic not
only creates a massive unanticipated shock, as described above, but also creates an “awakening”
to the possibility that pandemics may be recurring events forever after. This is in the spirit
of Kozlowski, Veldkamp, and Venkateswaran (2020), who emphasize the long-run impact on
beliefs (“scarring”). We model a new pandemic state of the world which happens with small
probability from now onwards. Once in the pandemic, it may last more than one year. While
this “awakening” has only minor implications during the pandemic shock, it leads to a transition
to a different long-run economy with less corporate debt and a smaller but more robust financial
sector. The economy is permanently smaller.

Related Literature Our paper contributes to two strands of the literature. The first one
is a new literature that has sprung up in response to the covid pandemic. The focus of this
literature has been on understanding the interaction of the spread of the disease and the macroeconomy.1 This literature has not yet studied the role of firms and financial intermediaries
and government intervention in this market. Faria-e-Castro (2020) provides a DSGE model
to analyse different types of fiscal policies to help stabilize household income. It finds that
UI benefits are the most effective stabilization tool for borrowing households, while saving
households favour unconditional transfers. Liquidity assistance programs are effective if the
policy objective is to stabilize employment in the affected sector. Fahlenbrach, Rageth, and
1

An incomplete list of references to this fast-growing literature is Atkeson (2020), Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and
Trabandt (2020), von Thadden (2020), Krueger, Uhlig, and Xie (2020a,b), Kaplan, Moll, and Violante (2020),
Hagedorn and Mitman (2020), Rampini (2020), Brotherhood, Kircher, Santos, and Tertilt (2020), Bethune and
Korinek (2020), Guerrieri, Lorenzoni, Straub, and Werning (2020), Ludvigson, Ng, and Ma (2020), Alvarez,
Argente, and Lippi (2020), Jones, Philippon, and Venkateswaran (2020), Glover, Heathcote, Krueger, and
Rios-Rull (2020), Greenstone and Nigam (2020), Kozlowski, Veldkamp, and Venkateswaran (2020), Farboodi,
Jarosch, and Shimer (2020), and Xiao (2020).

4

Stulz (2020) show that firms that had better liquidity buffers before the covid shock hit showed
smaller stock market declines.
A second branch of the literature studies government interventions in the wake of the Great
Financial Crisis. In contrast with the current crisis, most of these interventions were aimed at
stabilizing the financial sector. TARP provided equity injections, the GSEs were bailed out,
FDIC guarantees on bank debt, and a myriad of Federal Reserve commitments worth $6.7 trillion (TALF, TSL, CPFF, etc.) provided liquidity to the banking and mortgage sectors. Blinder
and Zandi (2015) provide a retrospective. The only direct interventions in the non-financial
sector were the auto sector bailouts. Of the $84 billion of TARP money committed, the cost of
the auto bailouts was ultimately $17 billion. A large literature studies the micro- and macroprudential policy response to the financial crisis. Elenev, Landvoigt, and Van Nieuwerburgh
(2020) provides references and studies the effect of tighter bank capital requirements.
While some are sanguine about the government’s ability to spend trillions more (Blanchard,
2019), for example on covid bailouts, Jiang, Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Xiaolan (2020)
warn of higher yields on government debt. Our model predicts that the covid bailouts will
lead to higher interest rates in the short run and require higher future tax rates to bring the
debt back down. To keep government debt finite, we assume that tax rates increase in the
level of government debt. This debt-dependence lowers the riskiness of a claim to tax revenues
at medium-run frequencies. At business-cycle frequencies, tax revenues are pro-cyclical. The
model also captures the increase in transfer spending, such as unemployment insurance and
food stamps, that accompanies a deep recession.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the evolution of credit
spreads and the institutional detail of the corporate lending programs introduced during the
covid pandemic up until April 30. Section 3 provides a summary of the ELVN model. Section
3.2 discusses how we adapt the model and calibration to both model the covid shock and the
policies aimed to fight it. Section 4 discusses the main results. Section 5 studies the new normal
economy with recurrent pandemics. Section 6 concludes.

5

2

Institutional Background

2.1

Credit Market Disruption

Credit Spreads A first sign of trouble in the corporate sector showed up in the prices of
corporate bonds. Figure 1 shows the ICE BofA US AAA, BBB, and High Yield index optionadjusted spreads between January 1, 2020 and April 27, 2020. The time series measures the
spread for corporate debt over a duration-adjusted safe yield (swap rate). Naturally, credit
spread are lower for the safest firms (AAA), intermediate for the lowest-rated investment-grade
firms (BBB), and highest for the firms rated below investment grade (High Yield). The AAA
spread went from 0.56% on February 18, before the covid crisis began in the U.S., to a peak
value of 2.35% on Friday March 20 and remained very high on Monday March 23 at 2.18%. The
BBB spread increased from 1.31% on February 18 to 4.88% on March 23. The HY spread went
from 3.61% on February 18 to 10.87% on March 23. For comparison, the only other two peaks
of comparable magnitude in the HY index were October 2011 (European debt crisis, 8.98%)
and February 2016 (Chinese equity market crash, 8.87%). On both occasions, the BBB spread
remained below 3.25% and the AAA spread below 1%. To find a widespread spike like the one
in the covid pandemic, we have to go back to the Great Financial Crisis. On December 15,
2008, the HY index peaked at 21.8%, the BBB index was at 8.02%, and the AAA spread was
3.85%.
The policy interventions of March 23 and April 9, 2020, discussed in detail below, have
partially closed credit spreads. The high yield spread tapered back off to 7.35% by April 14.
The BBB spread was at 3.11%, and the AAA spread at 1.00%. Since then, spreads have been
stable, with the HY spread drifting up slightly to 8.01% on April 27. In sum, the HY spread
has stabilized at nearly twice the pre-pandemic level of two months earlier. BBB and AAA
spreads have also doubled.

CLO Prices Over the past five years, many corporate loans have been sold to special purpose
vehicles who issue collateralized loan obligations to bond market investors. CLO tranches have
various credit ratings. The CLO market, which was already subject to credit deterioration
issues in 2019 and early 2020, has been particularly hard hit by the pandemic. Table 1 shows
6

Figure 1: High Yield Bond Spread

The left panel plots the ICE BofA AAA U.S. corporate index option-adjusted spread. The middle panel plots
the ICE BofA BBB U.S. corporate index option-adjusted spread. The right panel plots the ICE BofA High
Yield U.S. corporate index option-adjusted spread. The data are daily for January 1, 2020 until April 27, 2020.
Source: FRED.

price changes in CLO tranches between January 31 and April 6, 2020. The average CLO bond
lost around 15% in value, with much larger losses in lower-rated tranches and in industries that
were affected more strongly by the pandemic.

Treasury Yields and Sovereign CDS Spreads Figure 2 shows U.S. Treasury yields of
maturities 1, 5, and 10-years in the left panel and U.S. sovereign CDS spreads of maturities 1-,
5-, and 10-years in the right panel. Ten-year Treasury yields decline from 1.55% on February
18 to 0.54% on March 9. This corresponds to a 10.5% increase in bond prices in 14 business
days. We interpret this sharp decline in interest rates as a combination of (i) lower growth
expectations (Gormsen and Koijen, 2020), (ii) precautionary savings/flight-to-safety as the
market woke up to the possibility of a severe crisis.
In the following seven trading days, there is a sharp reversal and 10-year interest rates doubles
from 0.54% to 1.18% on March 18, a 6.1% drop in the bond price. We believe this sharp decline
7

Table 1: CLO Bond Prices
Rating

Transport

Hotel, Gaming, Leis.

Bev., Food, Tobacco

Retail, Cons. Serv.

Overall

-16.77%

-21.98%

-14.64%

-17.94%

BBBBB+
BB
BBB+
B
BCCC+
CCC
CCCCC
C
D

-9.30%
-6.73%
-8.06%
-11.91%
-18.94%
-12.85%
-17.85%
-17.74%
-18.14%
-6.98%
–
-11.11%
-90.62%

-10.53%
-8.58%
-11.36%
-12.83%
-18.76%
-20.24%
-25.39%
-29.43%
-42.00%
–
–
–
-91.57%

-5.05%
-4.70%
-8.37%
-9.09%
-12.95%
-15.94%
-14.89%
-19.43%
-23.87%
-2.37%
–
-30.00%

-5.70%
-5.48%
-8.70%
-13.03%
-17.84%
-16.88%
-22.53%
-26.14%
-22.95%
-20.41%
–
-28.44%

Source: Trepp. Price changes between January 31, 2020 and April 6, 2020.

in interest rates is due to a combination of (i) expectations of large bailouts which need to be
absorbed by savers, (ii) increased credit risk of the U.S. government, and (iii) distressed selling
of safe assets to meet margin calls in other parts of investors’ portfolios. Indeed, we see a 5-7bps
jump in CDS spreads between March 9 and 18. Just prior to the peak in interest rates, in an
emergency meeting on Sunday March 15, the Fed lowered the policy rate from 1.25% to 0.25%
and announced a $700bn Treasury and Agency purchase program. This followed an earlier rate
cut by 50 bps on March 3. On March 23, the Fed announced that the QE program would be
unlimited in size. The intervention was successful in propping up government bond prices and
10-year yields fell back down to around 65 bps by April 27, a 5.2% increase in bond prices from
March 18. U.S. sovereign CDS spreads also normalized to pre-crisis levels. Investors –so far–
seem quite sanguine about the massive expansion in government debt, projected to be 21% of
GDP in 2020, fueled by a 19% of GDP primary deficit. This debt expansion would push the
U.S. federal debt held by the public above 100% in 2020 and above 107% of GDP in 2021,
exceeding the previous 1947 record.
It is quite likely that the U.S. benefited from its privileged status as global safe haven asset
during the covid crisis. A standard measure of the convenience yield advocated by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012)), the spread between the AAA-rated corporate bond
yield and the 10-year Treasury, increased substantially in March, peaking on March 20, before
settling back down to a level 50 bps above its pre-crisis level. The AAA-corporate spread re-

8

flects of course all interventions by the Fed in both the Treasury and corporate bond markets,
and disentangling them is a difficult task. Suffice to say that the underlying safe rate, without
convenience, is higher than the Treasury bond yield and has not fallen as much as the Treasury
yield during the first two months of the covid crisis.
Figure 2: High Yield Bond Spread

The left panel plots the U.S. Treasury Bond constant-maturity yields on bonds of maturities 1, 5, and 10 years.
The middle panel plots the U.S. sovereign CDS spread of maturities 1, 5, and 10 years. The right panel plots
the Moody’s AAA-rated corporate bond yield minus the 10-year constant maturity Treasury yield. The data
are daily for January 1, 2020 until April 27, 2020. Source: FRED and Datastream.

2.2
2.2.1

Policy Response
Institutional Details

Chronology Both Central Banks and Treasury departments around the world have mounted
massive responses to the crisis. We focus on the United States. Most relevant for our purposes
are several new government programs that provide bridge loans to the corporate sector as
part of the $2.2 trillion CARES Act passed on March 27, 2020. The Fed is using its balance
sheet to lever up the equity commitments made by the Treasury. The Fed first announced
9

the establishment of these programs on March 23. On April 9, the Fed clarified how much
leverage it would provide to each of the facilities to scale up the aid to corporations. The Fed
announcement amounted to a $2.3 trillion relief package. On April 23, Congress approved a new
$484 billion rescue package, which included $321 billion in additional money for the paycheck
protection program defined below. On April 30, the modalities of the MSLP were announced.

Program Details
1. Credit facilities for large firms
– The Primary Market Corporate Credit Facility (PMCCF) is for new bonds and
loans with maturities up to four years, issued by non-financial companies that are
investment-grade (or were as of March 22). Interest rates are issuer-specific and
informed by market conditions, plus a 100 bps facility fee. Loans may be syndicated,
in which case the PMCCF participates under the same terms as the other syndicate
partners.
– The Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facility (SMCCF) provides liquidity for
outstanding corporate bonds with (mostly) investment grade ratings. The Facility
also may purchase U.S.-listed ETFs whose investment objective is to provide broad
exposure to the market for U.S. corporate bonds. Bonds are bought at fair market
value. The ETF purchases allow for non-IG bond purchases, for example, through
a HY credit index.
– The Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) enables the issuance of
asset-backed securities backed by student loans, auto loans, credit card loans, loans
guaranteed by the Small Business Administration (SBA), existing commercial mortgagebacked securities (CMBS) and collateralized loan obligations (CLO). TALF only
purchases AAA-rated tranches.
– These three programs support up to $850 billion in credit backed by $85 billion
in credit protection provided by the Treasury. The PMCCF, SMCCF, and TALF
receive $50bn, $25bn, and $10bn in equity from the Treasury, respectively. Loans
from the Fed to these facilities provide leverage of 10-to-1 to the Treasury funds. In
10

the case of the SMCCF, the leverage from Treasury depends on the instrument: 10x
for IG corp bonds, 7x for IG ETF and FA, and 3x for HY ETF.
2. The Main Street Lending Program targets small and mid-sized businesses (below 15,000
employees or with 2019 revenues of $5 billion or less). Banks originate these loans, retain
a portion and sell the remainder to the facility. Principal and interest on these four-year
loans are deferred for 1 year. The facility’s size is $600 billion in loans, backed by $75
billion in equity from the Treasury. As announced on April 30, there are three facilities
that differ in the details of the loan features and banks’ risk retention requirements.
Firms may only participate in one of the three programs and only if they have not also
participated in the PMCCF and have not received other direct support under the CARES
Act. all loans carry an interest rate of LIBOR + 300bps.
– The Main Street New Loan Facility (MSNLF): loan made on or after 4/24/2020;
banks retain 5% share; minimum loan size $0.5 mi; maximum loan size $25 mi as
long as the total debt after the loan remains below 4 times 2019 EBITDA; amortizes
1/3 in years 2, 3, and 4; is not junior to any existing firm debt.
– The Main Street Priority Loan Facility (MSPLF): loan made after 4/24/2020; banks
retain 15% share; minimum loan size $0.5 mi; maximum loan size $25 mi as long as
the total debt after the loan remains below 6 times 2019 EBITDA; amortizes 15%
in years 2 and 3, and 70% in year 4; is senior to all other corporate debt except
mortgage debt.
– The Main Street Expanded Loan Facility (MSELF): upsized tranche upsized after
4/24/2020 on a loan made before 4/24/2020 with at least 18 months remaining
maturity; banks retain 5% share; minimum loan size $10 mi; maximum loan size
$200 mi as long as the total debt after the loan remains below 6 times 2019 EBITDA
and the loan amount is less than 35% of existing corporate debt that is pari passu
with the loan; amortizes 15% in years 2 and 3, and 70% in year 4; is senior or pari
passu to all other corporate debt except mortgage debt.
3. The Small Business Administration’s Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) targets small
companies with fewer than 500 employees. Initially, up to $350 billion in loans made
11

by banks are guaranteed by the Small Business Administration. The money ran out
within days. The April 23 top-up increased the size of the program to $671 billion.
The loan principal is up to 2.5 months of payroll, with a maximum of $10 million. The
loan maturity is two years and the interest rate is 1%. The CARES Act provides for
forgiveness of up to the full principal amount of qualifying PPP loans. The amount of
loan forgiveness depends on the total amount of payroll costs, payments of interest on
mortgage obligations, rent payments on leases, and utility payments over the eight-week
period following the date of the loan. However, not more than 25 percent of the loan
forgiveness amount may be attributable to non-payroll costs. The Fed provides term
financing to banks, collateralized by PPP loans up to their face value.

2.2.2

Mapping to the Model

To map this intricate set of interventions into our model, we consider three programs: bond
purchases, forgivable bridge loans, regular bridge loans.

CCF = Corporate Bond Purchases First, we model a government purchase program of
corporate bonds. It is calibrated to the combined size of the PMCCF, SMCCF, and TALF,
which is $850 billion. According to S&P Global, the size of the U.S. corporate bond market
is $9,300 billion as of January 2019. Of this, $7,144 billion is bonds issued by non-financial
corporations, of which $4717.6 is rated investment grade. The size of the corporate loan market,
the C&I loans held by all U.S. commercial banks, is $2,360 billion at the end of 2019. Since the
model has only one type of debt, we scale the $850 billion purchases by the size of the overall
non-financial corporate debt market of $9504 ($7144+$2360). This generates a purchase share
of 8.9% of the overall corporate debt market. This program is $850/$21,729=3.9% of 2019
GDP. The model roughly matches the share of GDP since it roughly matches the ratio of the
corporate bond market to GDP.

PPP = Forgivable Bridge Loans The second type of program is modeled after the PPP.
Banks make loans to non-financial firms that are 100% guaranteed by the government and that
are 100% forgiven. There is no risk retention requirement for the banks. We abstract from the

12

fact that the PPP loans target small firms. In reality, several larger firms ended up receiving
these loans as well. The SBA PPP loans feature debt forgiveness to the extent that firms use
them to keep employees on the payroll. For example, the part of the loan that is used to pay
rent is not forgiven. We suspect that the vast majority of firms who obtained PPP loans will
enjoy full debt forgiveness since money is fungible and firms can always “use the proceeds to
make payroll.” The forgiveness is modeled as a -100% interest rate earned by the government.
We abstract from the 1% interest rate banks earn on the loans. The size of the PPP program
is $671 billion, which is 3.1% of 2019 GDP. For simplicity, these are one-period loans. In the
model, firms can refinance these loans after a year in the regular long-term corporate debt
market.

MSLP = Regular Bridge Loans The third policy is modeled after the MSLP. Firms receive
bridge loans from banks. Banks have a 5% risk retention; the government bears 95% of the
default risk. Banks earn an interest rate of 3% on the bridge loans. For simplicity, these are
one-period loans, which can be refinanced in the regular debt market. The size of this program
is $600 billion or 2.8% of 2019 GDP.

Combo We also study the combination of these three programs. Combined, they represent
an outlay of 9.8% of GDP. This is the model counter-part to the real world intervention.

3

The Model

In the interest of space, we only summarize the model setup here, and refer the reader to ELVN
for a formal treatment.

3.1

Summary

Setup The model features two groups of households: borrowers and savers. Both have
Epstein-Zin preferences. Savers are more patient than borrowers. Borrowers are the shareholders of both goods-producing firms, called producers, and financial intermediaries, called
banks. Borrowers and savers inelastically supply their one unit of labor.
13

A continuum of producers combine capital and labor using a Cobb-Douglas production technology to make output. Production is subject to aggregate, persistent TFP shocks and to
idiosyncratic i.i.d. productivity shocks. The cross-sectional dispersion of the idiosyncratic productivity shock constitutes a second aggregate persistent shock. The latter can be thought of
as an uncertainty or capital misallocation shock. Producers are funded with long-term debt,
issued to both banks and savers, and equity, issued to borrowers. Interest expenses are tax
deductible. Each producers must pay its employees and service its debt after aggregate and idiosyncratic productivity shocks are realized but before new equity or debt can be raised. Firms
with negative profits default (liquidity default). Lenders seize the collateral of defaulted firms
and liquidate the firms, suffering a loss in the process (some of which is a deadweight loss).
Shareholders replace liquidated firms with new ones. The model leads to fractional default; the
default rate is higher in periods of high uncertainty. Firms are subject to a standard collateral
constraint.
Financial intermediaries are profit-maximizing firms that buy the debt of non-financial firms.
They fund these corporate loans with short-term liabilities that they issue to savers and with
equity capital that they raise from borrowers. We refer to these intermediaries as banks and their
liabilities as deposits, but aim to capture (and calibrate to) the entire levered financial sector
rather than only deposit-taking banks. Bank debt enjoys government guarantees (e.g., deposit
insurance or state insurance fund guarantees). Banks are subject to a standard regulatory
capital constraint to limit moral hazard associated with deposit insurance (capturing regulation
under Basel 2/3 or Solvency 2/3). Banks make optimal default decisions (strategic default),
trading off preserving franchise value versus shifting their debt onto the government. Banks are
hit with idiosyncratic profit shocks, resulting in fractional default. Defaulted banks are taken
over by the government and liquidated, subject to a loss (some of which is a deadweight loss).
Shareholders replace liquidated banks with new ones.
We make assumptions that imply aggregation into a representative producer and a representative bank, allowing us to focus on incomplete risk-sharing between savers, borrowers, firms,
and banks.
The government follows a set of mostly exogenous spending and tax rules. Discretionary and

14

transfer spending are countercyclical while tax rates are pro-cyclical.2 Only spending on bank
bailouts and on government debt service are endogenously determined. The government issues
one-period risk-free debt chosen to satisfy the government budget constraint.
Savers do not directly hold corporate equity to capture the reality of limited participation
in equity markets. However, they invest in risk-free assets (bank and government debt), and
risky corporate debt issued by firms. Unlike banks, savers incur holding costs when they buy
corporate debt. This cost creates a comparative disadvantage for saver ownership of corporate
debt, and provides a role for intermediaries in transforming long-term risky debt into short-term
safe debt.
Figure 3 illustrates the balance sheets of the model’s agents and their interactions.
Figure 3: Overview of Balance Sheets of Model Agents
Firms

Households

Producers
Production,
Investment

Producer
Equity
Capital
Stock
Corporate
Debt

Intermediaries
Corporate
Loans

I. Equity
Deposits

Government
NPV of
Tax
Revenues

Bailouts

Borrowers
Producer
Equity

Own Funds

I. Equity

Savers
C. Bonds
Deposits

Own Funds

Gov. Debt

Gov. Debt

2

The tax rate also depends on the level of government debt. This is necessary to keep government debt
stationary. Since this a model with transitory shocks, like most macro models, the stochastic discount factor
does not contain a large permanent component (Alvarez and Jermann, 2005). Adding TFP growth shocks,
combined with Epstein-Zin preferences would result in a mode realistic SDF. It would require larger adjustments
to tax rates to keep government debt stationary (Jiang, Lustig, Van Nieuwerburgh, and Xiaolan, 2020).

15

Equilibrium Given a sequence of aggregate productivity and uncertainty shocks, idiosyncratic productivity shocks, and idiosyncratic intermediary profit shocks, and given a government policy, a competitive equilibrium is a consumption and capital investment choice for
borrowers; a debt issuance, equity issuance, capital demand, and labor demand, for producers;
a debt issuance, equity issuance, and loan supply decision for financial intermediaries; a consumption and financial investment choice of short-term safe debt and long-term risky debt for
savers; and a price vector, such that given the prices, borrowers and savers maximize life-time
utility, producers and intermediaries maximize shareholder value, the government satisfies its
budget constraint, and markets clear. The markets the must clear are the markets for: riskfree bonds (deposits and government debt), risky corporate debt, physical capital, labor, and
goods. Goods market clearing states that total output (GDP) equals the sum of aggregate consumption, discretionary government spending, investment (including capital adjustment costs),
bank equity adjustment costs, and aggregate deadweight losses from corporate and intermediary
bankruptcies.

Welfare In order to compare economies that differ in their policy parameter vector Θ, we must
take a stance on how to weigh borrower and saver households. We compute an ex-ante measure
of welfare based on compensating variation similar to Alvarez and Jermann (2005). Consider
the equilibrium of two different economies k = 0, 1, characterized by policy vectors Θ0 and Θ1 ,
and denote expected lifetime utility at time 0 for agent j in economy k by V̄ j,k = E0 [V1j (·; Θk )].
Denote the time-0 price of the consumption stream of agent j in economy k by:
"
P̄ j,k = E0

∞
X

#
j,k
Mj,k
t,t+1 Ct+1 ,

t=0

where Mj,k
t,t+1 is the SDF of agent j in economy k. The percentage welfare gain for agent j from
living in economy Θ1 relative to economy Θ0 , in expectation, is:
∆V̄ j =

V̄ j,1
− 1.
V̄ j,0

16

Since the value functions are expressed in consumption units, we can multiply these welfare
gains with the time-0 prices of consumption streams in the Θ0 economy and add up:
W cev = ∆V̄ B P̄ B,0 + ∆V̄ S P̄ S,0 .
This measure is the minimum one-time wealth transfer in the Θ0 economy (the benchmark)
required to make agents at least as well off as in the Θ1 economy (the alternative). If this
number is positive, a transfer scheme can be implemented to make the alternative economy a
Pareto improvement. If this number is negative, such a scheme cannot be implemented because
it would require a bigger transfer to one agent than the other is willing to give up.

Solution Each agent’s problem depends on the wealth of others; the entire wealth distribution
is a state variable. Each agent must forecast how that state variable evolves, including the
bankruptcy decisions of borrowers and intermediaries. We solve the model using projectionbased numerical methods. A detailed description of the globally nonlinear algorithm can be
found in Appendix B of Elenev, Landvoigt, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2020).

3.2

Covid Crisis

This section discusses how we model the covid pandemic shock, covid-related government policies, and how we adjust the calibration relative to ELVN.

3.2.1

Covid Shock

Firms production function is given by
yti = ZtA ωti kti

1−α

(lti )α

The model features two aggregate shocks: aggregate TFP shocks ZtA and shocks to the
cross-sectional dispersion of firm-level productivity shocks which we call uncertainty shocks.
Firm-level productivity shocks are denoted by ωi ∼ Γω (µω , σω2 ), where Γω denotes the cdf,
parameterized by two parameters, a mean µω and a variance σω2 . The cross-sectional variance
17

σω2 follows a two-state Markov chain fluctuating between a low and a high-uncertainty regime.
Aggregate TFP shocks follow an independent 5-state Markov chain.
The covid shock is modeled as the combination of four ingredients. The first aspect of the
2
2
covid shock is a transition from the low- (σω,L
) to the high-uncertainty regime (σω,H
). Because of

persistence in σω2 , the economy is likely to remain in the high uncertainty state with probabilities
dictated by the Markov chain.
Second, we assume that the productivity dispersion is unexpectedly high for one period:
2
2
2
σω,covid
> σω,H
> σω,L
. This is modeled as a one-period MIT shock. The rise of VIX to an all-

time high serves as motivation for this assumption. More broadly, the notion of increased firm
productivity dispersion captures capital misallocation. During covid, some firms (like cruise
companies and airlines) saw much greater reductions in revenues than others, while some even
say significant increases in revenue (Amazon, Netflix, Zoom).
The third aspect of the covid shock is a decline in average firm productivity µω , leading to a
decline in average firm revenue. We model this as an unexpected change (MIT shock); agents
believe that µω = 1. A decline in average firm productivity has the same effect as a decline
in aggregate TFP, except that TFP is persistent and TFP fluctuations are anticipated. We
think the unexpected and pervasive nature of revenue drops in the cross-section of firms is well
captured by the unanticipated one-year drop in µω .
Fourth, we assume a reduction in labor supply. In the model, labor is supplied inelastically
B

S

by both borrower (L ) and savers (L ) households. We assume a symmetric drop in labor
supply. This captures government-mandated closure of non-essential businesses, forcing many
workers to stay at home. It also captures inability to work due to covid-related illness and child
R
care duties. The decline in labor supply further lowers production, since labor demand lti di
must equal labor supply in equilibrium.

3.2.2

How Corporate Bankruptcies Work

The decision problem of producers within each period has the following timing:
1. The aggregate productivity shock is realized. Given capital kt and outstanding debt aPt ,
producers choose labor inputs ltj , j ∈ {B, S}. Further, producers pay a fixed cost of
18

production to operate (rents, insurance, etc.) ς is the fixed cost that is proportional in
capital kt .
2. Idiosyncratic productivity shocks are realized. Production occurs. Producers that cannot
service their debt from current profits default and shut down.
3. Failed producers are replaced by new producers such that the total mass of producers
remains unchanged. All producers pay a dividend, issue new debt, and buy capital for
next period.
The flow profit at stage 2 before taxes is
πt = ωt Zt kt1−α ltα −

X

wtj ltj − aPt − ςkt ,

(1)

j

Producers with πt < 0 are in default and are seized and resolved by their creditors. This implies
a default threshold
ωt∗

=

aPt + ςkt +

P

j
1−α α
Zt kt lt

wtj ltj

,

(2)

such that producers with low idiosyncratic shocks ωt < ωt∗ default. Firms that do not have
enough revenue to service their debt and pay their employees default. The crucial friction that
generates defaults is a timing assumption that corporations must service their debt before they
can raise new equity or debt.
Lenders (banks and savers) seize the firms that default, pay the employees, and liquidate
the firm. Liquidation means that they earn a fraction (1 − ζ P ) of this period’s output plus
the non-depreciated value of the capital stock. A fraction ζ P is a bankruptcy cost, of which a
fraction η P is a deadweight loss to society and the remainder a transfer payment to households.
By inflicting losses on their lenders, corporate defaults cause financial intermediary fragility.
Banks’ net worth will go down because of the losses they suffer, as well as because of the lower
equilibrium valuation of corporate loans. Lower corporate bond prices (higher yields) reflects
both higher default risk and a higher default risk premium. For some banks, the losses will
be so severe that they (optimally choose to) default. Defaulting banks are bailed out by the
government; any equity is wiped out, depositors are made whole (deposit insurance), and the
government incurs bankruptcy costs ζ F (a fraction η F of which are deadweight losses to society).
19

The government in turn needs to raise new debt on the Treasury market to finance these bank
bailouts. The increase in safe asset supply increases equilibrium interest rates on safe assets,
ceteris paribus. Since deposits are also safe assets, the bailout-induced increase in the safe rate
increases the cost of deposit funding. The higher cost of funding hampers bank recapitalization
and aggravates the financial fragility. This negative feedback loop can lead to severe financial
crises in our non-linear model. When banks become fragile, credit to the real economy becomes
scarce and expensive. Corporate investment tanks. This lowers capital formation and output
in all future periods, adding persistence to the crisis.

3.2.3

Government Policies

Government policies’ aim will aim to stave off ar at least weaken corporate defaults and thereby
prevent the vicious cycle between corporate and banking fragility which chokes off investment
and economic activity. We consider four policies, motivated by the discussion in section 2.2.

CCF = Corporate Bond Purchases The corporate bond purchase policy has the government buying long-term risky corporate debt from both banks and savers in proportion to their
holdings and at market prices. The government issues short-term government debt to finance
these purchases. Treasury debt is held by the saver in equilibrium.

PPP= Forgivable Bridge Loans We consider a bridge loan program that closely reflects
the Payroll Protection Program. Each firm receives an equal-size bridge loan from private
lenders. The size of the loan is dictated by the total size of the program. The firm receives
the loan in stage 2 of its problem, after production but before defaults and trading in financial
markets. The loan must be repaid at the end of the period, in stage 3 of the firm’s intra-period
problem. At that point, firms can refinance the debt on the regular long-term corporate debt
market. Since the firm receives the bridge loan before defaulting and the size of the loan is a
multiple ĀbrU of the firm’s wage bill, the default threshold becomes:
ωt∗,brU

=

ςkt + (1 − ĀbrU )

P

j
Zt kt1−α ltα

20

wtj ltj + aPt

.

(3)

Producers with low idiosyncratic productivity ωt < ωt∗,brU default. This is a smaller fraction
since the policy lowers the default threshold compared to the no-policy case (ωt∗,brU < ωt∗ ).
Thus the bridge loans help a mass of firms prevent default and the concomitant losses. It
also avoids the deadweight losses to society associated with these defaults. Some firms with
low productivity still default, notwithstanding the bridge loan program. The remaining losses
are born by banks and the government depending on the extent of government guarantees. A
policy parameter Ibr measures the share of the losses born by the government, ranging from 0
(no guarantees for bridge loans) to 1 (full guarantees). In the PPP, Ibr = 1.
Firms pay an interest rate rbr = 1% to banks on the bridge loans. After this interest payment,
the loans are forgiven by the government. To capture the debt forgiveness aspect of the PPP,
the bridge loans carry a rgov = −100% interest rate relative to the government (i.e., the effective
interest rate faced by firms is rbr + rgov = −99%).

MSLP= Regular Bridge Loans The third policy modeled after the MSLP is similar to the
PPP, except for two features. First, there is partial risk retention by banks: Ibr < 1. Second,
the principal is not forgiven (rgov = 0) and the interest rate paid to banks is higher: rbr = 3%.

CBL=Conditional Bridge Loans As a fourth, hypothetical, policy we consider a conditional bridge loan program. The government can target firms that are most likely to default if
they do not receive a bridge loan. Specifically, a firm of productivity ωt receives a bank loan
P
of size ĀbrC (1 − ωt ) j wtj ltj in stage 2 of the firm problem. The conditionality operates both
on the extensive and intensive margins. First, only firms with ωt < ωt∗ receive bridge loans.
Second, the loan size is larger the lower the firm’s productivity.
This bridge loan program changes the default threshold from ωt∗ to ωt∗,brC :
ωt∗,brC

=

wtj ltj + aPt
.
P
Zt kt1−α ltα − ĀbrC j wtj ltj

ςkt + (1 − ĀbrC )

P

j

(4)

All other aspects of the program are the same as for the regular bridge loan program. In
particular, we consider a program configuration that is the average of PPP and MSLP: a debt
forgiveness of 50% of the principal (rgov = −50%), and interest payments to banks of rbr = 2%

21

of the principal. The conditional bridge loan will generally be more effective, on a per-dollarbasis, in preventing firms from defaulting than the PPP. Hence, we do not fix the size of the
CBL program, but rather compute what fraction of GDP the government must spend to achieve
the same reduction in the firm default rate as in the PPP.
The CBL policy imposes strong information requirements on the government: It must observe
each firm’s productivity. In reality, there is an issue of asymmetric information —firms know
more about their drop in revenue than the government— as well as moral hazard —firms have an
incentive to overstate their need. Imperfect verification on the part of the government, especially
in an episode of scarce time and resources, makes these frictions potentially important. We view
the cost difference between the PPP and the CBL programs as an estimate of the extra costs
of imperfect information or enforcement.

3.3

Calibration

The model is calibrated at annual frequency and matches a large number of moments related
to the macro economy, credit markets, non-financial and financial sector leverage ratios, default
rates, loss rates, as well as a number of fiscal policy targets. We refer the reader to ELVN. We
leave the calibration mostly unchanged, only changing the following aspects.
The first change we make is the nature of the covid shock, as discussed above. This introduces
the possibility of a drop in mean productivity µω . Government discretionary spending, transfer
spending, and income tax rates depend on Z A µω , so that declines in µω lead to symmetric
declines in tax revenue as declines in Z A . ELVN held µω = 1 so that this does not really
represent a change in calibration.
Second, we set the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution of the saver to a value of 2, higher
than the value of 1 we use in ELVN. The higher saver EIS dampens the response of the safe
interest rate to changes in the supply of safe assets by lowering the price elasticity of demand
of the saver.
Third, we change is the maximum bank leverage ratio. Prior to the covid crisis, banks
faced strict minimum bank equity capital requirements of 12% (maximum leverage of ξ = .88).
ELVN choose a 6% minimum bank equity capital (ξ = .94) since they calibrate to the pre-GFC

22

crisis data. This higher capital requirement reflects the changes made by the Dodd-Frank Act
and Basel agreements after the GFC. The stronger capitalization before the covid crisis helps
dampen the impact of the covid shock.
Fourth, we introduce a small default penalty for banks in the period of the covid shock,
ρ = 0.04. We simultaneously change the cross-sectional dispersion of bank idiosyncratic profit
shocks to σε = 0.05. A greater value of σε makes bank failures less sensitive to fluctuations
in the franchise value of banks, but also leads to more bank failures ceteris paribus. The
two parameters jointly control the mean of the bank default rate and its sensitivity to bank
value. This parameter change is modeled as a one-period MIT shock. We continue to match the
unconditional bank failure rate from historical FDIC data, as in ELVN. The default penalty can
be motivated by government-provided moral suasion that banks who take bailout money need
to stay afloat, or by a range of unmodeled government policies such as higher unemployment
insurance, checks mailed to households, or quantitative easing that help de-risk the banks’
balance sheets. The higher dispersion of bank idiosyncratic shocks can be motivated by the
increased dispersion of profitability/losses on the part of banks’ balance sheet unrelated to
corporate loans, e.g., household mortgages.

4

Results

Figures 4, 5, 6, and 7 summarize our main results. Each graph plots the impact of the covid
shock in the year in which it hits the economy. We focus on the first five bars labeled “Onetime pandemic” in this section. The first (dark blue) bar shows the effect on the economy
without any policy response. The other bars respond to the four actual government policies:
forgivable bridge loans (PPP, orange), regular bridge loans (MSLP, yellow), corporate bond
purchases (CCF, purple), and the combination of all three (Combo, green). The last bar is for
the hypothetical conditional bridge loan program (CBL, light blue).

23

Figure 4: Policy Responses to Covid Crisis: Non-financial Firms

12

Default Rate

Loss Rate

6

10

5

8

4

6

3

4

2

2

1

100

Frac Savers

80

60

40

0

0
One-time Pandemic

6

20

New Normal

Loan Rate

5

0
One-time Pandemic

10

New Normal

Loan Spread

One-time Pandemic

5

8

4

6

3

4

2

2

1

New Normal

Dur-Adj Loan Spread

4
3
2
1
0

0
One-time Pandemic

4.1

New Normal

0
One-time Pandemic

New Normal

One-time Pandemic

New Normal

Do Nothing

We first consider a (counter-factual) scenario in which the government does nothing new in
response to the covid crisis. It continues its usual counter-cyclical spending and pro-cyclical
tax policies, as well as its bank bailout policies. It issues short-term government debt to plug
any hole in the deficit.
In the absence of policy, corporate defaults and loan losses skyrocket in response to the covid
shock. The default rate in the non-financial sector goes from its normal level of 1.9% per year
to 11.5%, a sixfold increase. The loss rate also increases by a factor of six to 5.6%.
These loan losses trigger credit disintermediation: the fraction of corporate debt held by
savers (intermediaries) rises (falls) sharply from 16% (84%) before the crisis to 68% (32%).
The loan losses not only cause a smaller but also a weaker banking sector. Financial fragility
manifests itself in an increase in the bank failure rate— 39% of the banks become insolvent—
and a decline in aggregate intermediary net worth, as shown in Figure 5. Higher credit spreads

24

Figure 5: Policy Responses to Covid Crisis: Financial Intermediaries
60

Intermediary Failures

0

Intermediary Assets

0

-10

Intermediary Net Worth / GDP

-2

50

40

30

20

Pp Change from t=0

Pct Change from t=0

-20
-30
-40
-50
-60

-4
-6
-8
-10

-70
10

-12

-80
0

-90
One-time Pandemic

New Normal

-14
One-time Pandemic

New Normal

One-time Pandemic

New Normal

are a manifestation of the increased scarcity of banks’ resources; they reflect not only a higher
amount of credit risk but also a higher price of credit risk. The increase in the credit spread can
be seen most clearly in the last panel of Figure 4 which plots a duration-adjusted loan spreads,
as Figure 1 did for the data.
Faced with higher costs of debt, firms reduce investment. As shown in Figure 6, investment
falls by 70%. Both firm and bank defaults create a surge in deadweight losses, which reduces
resources available for investment or consumption. Aggregate consumption falls by 5.15%.
The economic downturn and the concomitant bank bailouts trigger a massive increase in the
primary deficit which swells to 16% of t = 0 pre-covid GDP (short: GDP0) in the period of the
shock. Government consumption (discretionary and transfer spending) is 3.5% points of GDP0
higher due to automatic stabilization programs (e.g., unemployment insurance, food stamps,
etc.) and tax revenue falls by 4.7% points as a share of GDP0. However, the main spending
increase comes from bailing out the banking sector to the tune of 11% of GDP0. Adding the
interest service on the debt leads to a total of 19.2% of new debt that must be raised relative
to current GDP, or equivalently 17.7% of GDP0. The one-year Treasury rate falls to 2.0% from
a level of 2.7% before the crisis.
In sum, absent policy, the economy suffers a large decline in macro-economic activity, a rise
in corporate defaults, a rise in bank defaults and loss in intermediary capacity, and a spike in
credit spreads which feeds back on the real economy and discourages investment. The decline
in economic activity depresses real interest rates, but the effect is offset by an increase in
government debt due to counter-cyclical deficits, higher debt service, and bank bailouts. Can
25

Figure 6: Policy Responses to Covid Crisis: Macroeconomy
Consumption

0

Investment

0

10
9

-10
-1

8

-3

-4

Pp Change from t=0

Pct Change from t=0

Pct Change from t=0

-20
-2

-30
-40
-50
-60
-70
-80

New Normal

6
5
4
3

1

-90
One-time Pandemic

7

2

-5

-6

DWL / GDP

0
One-time Pandemic

New Normal

One-time Pandemic

New Normal

covid policy improve on this disastrous outcome?

4.2

PPP

The PPP policy (orange bars) provides forgivable bridge loans to all firms. The loans make a
substantial dent in non-financial corporate defaults which fall by 2.7% points, a 23% reduction.
This is enough to eliminate 2/3 of all bank bankruptcies. The fall in intermediary assets and
net worth is also substantially smaller. The reduced financial distress mitigates the increase in
the corporate loan rate. The intervention helps “close credit spreads.” The forgivable loans put
cash in firms’ pockets which, combined with the lower loan rates, substantially reduce the fall
in investment. Instead of falling by 70%, investment falls by 50%. Deadweight losses are half
as large as in the do-nothing scenario.
Because PPP loans are forgivable, the direct effect of the policy is to add 11% of GDP0 to
the deficit. The policy also results in a 100 bps higher safe rate of interest which will cause
higher debt service costs in the future. However, the policy saves about 7.2% of GDP0 in bank
bailouts that do not occur. All told, the primary deficit is 11.4% of GDP0. The increase in debt
is 13.3% of GDP0 which is 4.4% points lower than in the do nothing scenario. The government
is saving money by spending money. The higher safe rate encourages saving over consumption.
This helps explain why the fall in consumption is still -5.0% despite the sharp reduction in lost
resources due to bankruptcies.

26

4.3

MSLP

Next we consider the MSLP (yellow bars), which gives regular bridge loans to firms with a
3% interest rate and 5% bank risk retention (95% government guarantee). The program has
approximately the same size (2.8% of GDP vs. 3.1%) as the PPP. Even though the loans are
not forgivable, the program is still successful at reducing firm defaults. Bank defaults are also
lower as in the no-policy case (15.8%), but not quite as low as in the PPP (13.3%) because
banks now share in some of the losses through the risk retention feature of the MSLP bridge
loans. Because there is more residual financial fragility, credit spreads and interest rates on
corporate loans remain somewhat more elevated than in the PPP. Corporate investment falls
by 54%, a bit more than in the PPP.
The MSLP program is not expensive to the government since there is no debt forgiveness
feature, and since most firms end up being able to pay back the loan. Yet, the program still
eliminates most bank bankruptcies, and saves much of the cost of bank bailouts. The primary
deficit is about 10% of GDP0. The government must issue less new debt, 11.6% of GDP0. Lower
new debt issuance helps keep the interest rate low, which in turn reduces the debt service going
forward and the additional debt that needs to be issued. The safe rate of 2.4% is below the
2.7% pre-pandemic level. The lower safe interest rate discourages saving and results in a smaller
drop in aggregate consumption of -4.6%.

4.4

CCF

A large bond purchasing program of 8.9% of the stock of corporate debt (purple bars) is not
very effective at mitigating the crisis. Loan losses are not reduced. More surprisingly, loan
rates are not lowered much, only 13 basis points compared to the do nothing scenario. While
the loan spread goes down 115 basis points, the effect is largely offset by an increase in the safe
rate. Therefore, it is no surprise that the fall in investment is not very different compared to
the no policy scenario. Similarly, the policy does not help much in terms of countering financial
fragility. Bank bailouts are reduced, but by much less than under the other policies.
In order to finance the corporate debt purchases, the government must issue 8.9% of GDP
worth of additional Treasuries. The primary deficit including the bond purchases is 19.9%
27

Figure 7: Policy Responses to Covid Crisis: Fiscal Policy

2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0

5

14
8
12
10
8
6

6

4

4
2
2
0

One-time Pandemic

New Normal

New Normal

25

20
Pct of t=0 GDP

Pct of t=0 GDP

0
-1

1

15

10

0.5
5

-2
-3

0
One-time Pandemic

New Normal

0
One-time Pandemic

New Normal

-2
-3
-4
-5

One-time Pandemic

Primary Deficit

1.5

1

-1

New Normal

4

2

Tax Revenue

-6
One-time Pandemic

Debt Service

2

3

0

0
One-time Pandemic

Safe Rate

Cost of Program
Change from t=0 As Pct of t=0 GDP

3

10

Pct of t=0 GDP

3.5

Bailouts

16

30
Change from t=0 As Pct of t=0 GDP

Govt Consump & Transfers
Change from t=0 As Pct of t=0 GDP

Change from t=0 As Pct of t=0 GDP

4

New Normal

Govt Debt

25
20
15
10
5
0

One-time Pandemic

New Normal

One-time Pandemic

New Normal

of GDP0. The corporate bond purchases substantially increase safe interest rates. The price
effects on the debt imply that the government debt increases by 21.7% of GDP0, 4% points
more than under no policy. The higher safe interest rates discourage consumption, which falls
by 5.5%. Higher safe rates also increase the cost of funding for banks. This hampers their
recapitalization and amplifies their financial fragility.

4.5

Combination Policy

The government is combining the three previous policies in reality. The results from the combo
policy are plotted in the green bars. They are the model’s closest prediction for what will
happen by the end of 2020 after all policies have been fully rolled out. The three policies are
a potent cocktail to fight the economic fallout from the pandemic. The policy combo lowers
corporate defaults and losses by 40% compared to no policy. Bank bankruptcies are reduced
by 80%, and bank net worth losses are only half as large as under no policy. Credit spreads

28

are greatly reduced, a place where the policy combination is more than the sum of the parts.
Safe rates go up, which offsets some but not all of the effect of lower spreads on the corporate
loan rate. Facing a lower cost of debt, investment falls by 41% compared to 70% under no
policy. Higher safe rates, which double compared to pre-pandemic levels, also mean a much
larger debt service going forward. The primary deficit of 15.9% of GDP0 is essentially the same
as under no policy. The government spends on policy measures what it would have spent on
higher bank bailouts instead. Aggregate consumption falls by 5.4%, which is a bit more than
under no policy and a reflection of the higher safe interest rates.
Figure 8 summarizes the welfare effects of the various policies. The bottom row shows the
change in value functions of borrowers and savers, relative to pre-pandemic period. The value
function summarizes the expected, risk-adjusted discounted value of the current and all future
consumption impacts. The bottom right panel shows a measure of how much permanent consumption the economy would be willing to give up to adopt each of the policies relative to
a no-policy alternative. The CEV welfare measure aggregates the value functions of the two
groups of households by their respective values of a dollar of consumption in the covid state;
recall the welfare discussion in Section 3.1. All three legs of the policy combo are valuable,
with the PPP being the most valuable, followed by the MSLP, and CCF as a distant third.
Combined, they increase aggregate welfare by 6.5% of permanent consumption. The top row
of Figure 8 shows the first-period consumption response to the covid shock for each of the
two agents. Borrowers, who are the shareholders of non-financial and financial firms, face a
large drop in consumption and are substantially worse off. Savers consume slightly more in the
first period but, as we know from their value functions, are still worse off due to the risk in
consumption. Borrowers most prefer the policies that provide the greatest relief to the firms
they own. Savers slightly prefer policies that inject more safe assets into the economy, since
these safe assets constitute the majority of their wealth. While the policy response is welfare
improving for all households, it helps savers more than borrowers.

4.6

Contingent Bridge Loans

The last policy we analyze assumes that banks make productivity-contingent loans (light blue
bars). The loans are forgivable and 100% guaranteed by the government, just like the PPP
29

Figure 8: Policy Responses to Covid Crisis: Welfare

Consumption, B

10

Pct Change from t=0

Pct Change from t=0

0

8

-5

-10

-15

-20

6
4
2

New Normal

0

-3
-4

-6
One-time Pandemic

Value Fcn, B

-2

-5

-2
One-time Pandemic

Aggr. Consumption

-1

0

-25

0

Consumption, S

Pct Change from t=0

0

New Normal

One-time Pandemic

Value Fcn, S

8

New Normal

CEV Welfare Rel. to Do Nothing

7
-0.2

-2

-3

6

Pct of t=0 GDP

Pct Change from t=0

Pct Change from t=0

-1

-0.4

-0.6

5
4
3
2

-4

-0.8

-5

-1

1

One-time Pandemic

New Normal

0
One-time Pandemic

New Normal

One-time Pandemic

New Normal

loans. It is an alternative to the policies enacted, albeit a somewhat idealistic one given the
informational requirements it imposes on the (banks who implement it on behalf of the) government. Nevertheless, the experiment is instructive. This policy eliminates nearly all corporate
default. It also eliminates all bank default and most of the credit disintermediation. Bank net
worth only falls by 2.8% of GDP rather than 12.4% under no policy. Since firms face a lower
cost of debt under this policy than under the combo policy, investment falls by only 30%, the
least among all experiments.
The size of this program is endogenous, and calibrated to eliminate all defaults. The cost
ends up being 1.5% of GDP0. The lower direct fiscal outlay helps stem the rise in the primary
deficit and the additional debt that needs to be raised. The primary deficit in the year of
the covid shock is 6.9% of GDP0. Only 8.7% of GDP0’s worth of new Treasury debt must
be issued, 9% points less than under the combo policy. Interest rates rise by 50 bps less than
in the combo policy. Hence, this program is not only more effective at eliminating corporate
30

defaults and improving the health of the banking sector, it also is cheaper for the government
and results in smaller declines in aggregate investment and consumption (-4.1%).
Welfare is 0.5% higher in the CBL scenario than in the combo policy. We conclude that the
real-life combo is not far off from a policy that seems much better targeted but (therefore) also
much harder to implement.

4.7

Long-run Consequences

So far, we have analyzed only the first period of the covid shock. Figure 9 shows the longrun response of the macro-economic aggregates over 25 years. The model generates a very
large cumulative loss in GDP, consumption, and investment of 19%, 22%, and 41% under the
combo policy. The long-run cumulative loss in aggregate consumption is four times as large
as the one-year loss, even though the covid shock is assumed to fully dissipate (even as a
future possibility) after one year. The fall in investment is mostly a one-year phenomenon
but it persistently depresses the stock of capital and hence the output-producing capacity of
the economy. There is persistence also through the high-uncertainty regime which is likely to
last for another year (in expectation). Intermediary recapitalization also takes time and lends
persistence to the crisis. The model produces a V-shaped recovery but with a long tail of
modestly depressed economy activity. The CBL program would mitigate nearly 5% points of
cumulative consumption losses.
The last panel of Figure 9 shows the evolution of government debt, and suggests it will take a
very long time to return the government debt back to pre-pandemic levels. Interestingly, even
though the combo policy leads to the same-size initial expansion of debt, the debt is paid back
faster than under no policy. This is due to the better health of the financial system along the
transition path under the combo policy.

4.8

Some Policy Variations

The model can be used to evaluate the various levers inherent in the government policies. We
consider three, summarized in Figure 10. In a first exercise, we envision that the government
runs only a PPP but uses the combined resources of all three programs (9.8% of GDP). This
31

Figure 9: Policy Responses to Covid Crisis: Long-run
GDP

0

-1

-2

Pct Change from t=0

Pct Change from t=0

-1

-3
-4
-5
-6

-2
-3
-4
-5

-7
-8

-6
0

5

10

15

20

25

0

Investment

0

5

10

15

Pct Change from t=0

-30
-40
-50
-60

25

Do nothing
Combo
CBL

25

-20

20

Gov. Debt

30

-10

Pct Change from t=0

Consumption

0

20
15
10
5

-70
-80

0
0

5

10

15

20

25

0

5

10

15

20

25

“combo-sized PPP” is very effective at reducing bankruptcies, more so than the real-world
combo policy. It promotes better financial stability and results in a smaller drop in investment.
The program costs more, but saves on more bank bailouts, so that the increase in government
debt is the same. It generates slightly higher welfare. Underlying the headline welfare result
lies a compositional effect: shareholders (borrowers) are better off while savers are worse off
compared to the combo policy.
Next, we explore the effect of debt forgiveness. We hold the size of the previous PPP fixed
but force firms to pay back the loans. The program becomes much cheaper to the government
but is equally effective in terms of reducing corporate bankruptcies.3 When firms need to repay
the loans, their net worth is lower, which leads to lower corporate bond prices in equilibrium.
This lowers intermediary net worth and increases intermediary bankruptcies. Eliminating the
forgiveness feature reduces welfare slightly.
3

There is a slight reduction in corporate bankruptcies through an equilibrium effect on wages which increases
firm survival.

32

Figure 10: Policy Levers: Some Variations
Default Rate

7

Investment

0

Intermediary Failures

8

Pct Change from t=0

6
5
4
3
2

-10

6

-20
4
-30
2

-40

1

rg

BL

s

o/

G

Fo

C

ee

s
iv

ua
ra

nt

en

PP

w

o/

C

w

om

es

P

bo
C

ze
si

bo
-

G
o/

Pct of t=0 GDP

4
3
2

BL

s
nt

ua

ra

C

s

ee

es
G

rg
Fo

o/

w
o/

iz
w

en
iv

ed

PP
P

bo
om
C

-s
C
om
bo

BL

s
ee
nt

ra
ua

Fo

G

rg
w
o/

o/

C

s
es

PP
P

en
iv

ed
w

ua
G

0

iz

BL
C

ee

s

0

ra

nt

en
iv

rg
Fo

o/

5

1

w
o/

iz
w

es

PP
P

ed

om
C

-s
C
om
bo

s

0

5

-s

2

10

bo

4

CEV Welfare Rel. to Do Nothing

6

om

6

7

15

C

8

Govt Debt

20

C
om
bo

Change from t=0 As Pct of t=0 GDP

10

d

om

s

BL

ee
nt

ua
ra

C

s

PP

en
iv

rg
Fo

C

w

w

o/

bo
om

es

P

bo
ze

C

d

om

BL

G

si

rg
Fo

o/
w

o/
w

C

Cost of Program

12

bo

Change from t=0 As Pct of t=0 GDP

0

C

P
iv

en

PP
d

om

ze

C

si
bo
om

es
s
ua
ra
nt
ee
s

-50

bo

0

Finally, we turn back on loan forgiveness but switch off government guarantees. Banks bear
all losses from corporate default, if any. Since the program is so effective at reducing defaults,
eliminating government guarantees has only minor effects.
In sum, a larger PPP effort with forgiveness and with government guarantees generates the
highest welfare, in fact even slightly higher than the CBL program. The latter occurs because
the CBL program increases the welfare of savers, who are valued more highly in the social
welfare function because of their higher degree of patience, by less and that of borrowers by
more compared to the combo-sized PPP.

5

New Normal

We now consider an extension of the model where the pandemic causes the realization that an
economic shock like the pandemic could reoccur in the future, an awakening to a new normal.
Formally, we include the pandemic state (low µω , high σω,covid , low labor supply) as an extra
33

state of the world that occurs with low but not zero probability, pcovid = 1%. Furthermore, once
the pandemic hits, it is likely to persist for an additional year with 50% probability. Pandemics
last an average of 2 years.4 The pandemic shock is now not only an MIT shock in the first
period, but also a change in beliefs from pcovid = 0% to pcovid = 1% going forward.
The second set of bars in Figures 4, 5, 6, and 7 report on the economy’s responses to the
covid shock in this “new normal” economy. The results are similar to the responses in the
economy that does not undergo the awakening, but even starker. The initial shock is so large
that it overpowers the effect of the change in beliefs. one large difference, however, is the effect
on the safe rate in Figure 7. When the pandemic is expected to last for another period with
50% probability, economic output is less likely to rebound, and the consumption smoothing
motive is drastically weaker compared to the one-time pandemic case. Observed longer-term
Treasury yields, which have been falling, suggest that markets believe the pandemic may last
longer than just the end of 2020.
It is also interesting to compare the longer-run implications of the pandemic. Table 2 compares the steady state of the benchmark economy to that of the new normal economy. Firm
leverage adjust downward endogenously due to the higher inherent risk. This makes the economy safer, but also shrinks the size of the intermediary sector by about 5% of GDP. With less
credit extended to the non-financial sector, the economy shrinks permanently. Further, investment and consumption growth are much more volatile. Both borrowers and savers are worse
off. While borrower consumption volatility increases by over 23.1%, mean borrower consumption only falls by 0.3%. For borrowers, the reduction in GDP is partly offset by the expansion
in equity financing of firms, which results in borrowers capturing a larger share of aggregate
income. Saver consumption declines by 0.7%, more than GDP. All told, households would be
willing to pay 8.7% of baseline GDP to avoid the transition to the economy with infrequently
occurring pandemics.
4

The covid pandemic is widely predicted to recur next season. The 1918-1920 Spanish flu also ran over more
than two full years.

34

Table 2: Long-Run Effects of a Pandemic State
Baseline
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Mkt value capital/ Y
Book val corp debt/ Y
Book corp leverage
% producer constr binds
Default rate
Loss-given-default rate
Loss Rate

8. Mkt val assets / Y
9. Mkt fin leverage
10. % intermed constr binds
11. Bankruptcies
12. Wealth I / Y
13. Franchise Value
14. Deposits/GDP
15. Government debt/GDP
16. Corp Debt Share S
17.
18.
19.
20.

Risk-free rate
Corporate bond rate
Credit spread
Excess return on corp. bonds

21. Value function, B
22. Value function, S
23. DWL/GDP
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

GDP
Capital stock
Aggr. Consumption
Consumption, B
Consumption, S

29.
30.
31.
32.
33.

Investment gr
Consumption gr
Consumption gr, B
Consumption gr, S
Aggr. welfare∗ W cev

∗:

Pandemic
Firms
214.8
213.3
75.4
71.0
35.1
33.3
0.1
0.0
1.90
2.02
48.7
46.2
0.91
0.91
Intermediaries
65.2
60.4
87.7
87.8
73.0
86.9
0.01
0.54
8.3
7.6
6.8
7.5
Savers
58.5
54.3
71.2
73.7
15.5
16.6
Prices
2.21
2.21
4.18
4.23
1.98
2.02
1.08
1.13
Welfare
% change to baseline
0.263
-0.26
0.373
-0.38
0.612
12.57
Size of the Economy
0.986
-0.55
2.118
-1.22
0.633
-0.53
0.262
-0.29
0.371
-0.69
Volatility
9.20
79.32
2.25
1.73
2.74
23.06
3.88
-6.81
-8.72

Aggregate welfare is percentage of baseline GDP; see text.

35

6

Conclusion

The covid pandemic poses severe challenges for the economy of most developed countries. We
focus on the health of the corporate sector and its ramifications for the health of the financial
sector and the macro-economy. Absent policy intervention, a negative feedback loop between
corporate default and financial intermediary weakness creates a macro-economic disaster. The
Payroll Protection Program and Main Street Lending Program are effective at breaking the
vicious cycle. They avoid most corporate bankruptcies and their financial sector and macroeconomic fallout. In contrast, the corporate credit facility that buys corporate bonds is much
less effective. Combined, the programs provide a potent cocktail that prevents 8.6% in cumulative output losses and creates huge welfare benefits compared to a do-nothing scenario. The
interventions do have long-run fiscal implications, as well as effects for the long-run size of the
non-financial and financial sectors.
Much work remains to be done. One could augment the model with a monetary sector
and study how conventional and non-conventional monetary interventions interact with the
corporate lending policies analyzed here. While we consider expansion of government transfer
policies, the demand side of teh model could be enriched as well. One could augment the
model with an epidemiological block that captures the spread of the disease, introduce firms
that produce different types of goods (social and private consumption) which are differentially
affected, and endogenize labor supply. As the government programs are fully rolled out, it will
be important to study their effectiveness using firm- and bank-level data. Our model can serve
as a useful framework for hypothesis testing.

36

References
Alvarez, F., and U. Jermann (2005): “Using Asset Prices to Measure the Persistence of the
Marginal Utility of Wealth,” Econometrica, 73(6), 1977 –2016.
Alvarez, F. E., D. Argente, and F. Lippi (2020): “A Simple Planning Problem for COVID-19
Lockdown,” Covid Economics.
Atkeson, A. (2020): “What Will Be the Economic Impact of COVID-19 in the US? Rough Estimates
of Disease Scenarios,” NBER Working Paper 26867.
Barrero, J. M., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2020): “Covid-19,” .
Bethune, Z. A., and A. Korinek (2020): “Covid-19 Infection Externalities: Trading Off Lives vs.
Livelihoods,” Covid Economics.
Blanchard, O. (2019): “Public Debt and Low Interest Rates,” American Economic Review, 109(4),
1197–1229.
Blinder, A. S., and M. Zandi (2015): “The Financial Crisis: Lessons for the Next One,” Center
on Budget and Policy Priorities: Policy Futures.
Brotherhood, L., P. Kircher, C. Santos, and M. Tertilt (2020): “An economic model of
the Covid-19 epidemic: The importance of testing and age-specific policies,” CEPR Working Paper
DP14695.
Eichenbaum, M. S., S. Rebelo, and M. Trabandt (2020): “The Macroeconomics of Epidemics,”
NBER Working Paper 26882.
Elenev, V., T. Landvoigt, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2020): “A Macroeconomic Model with
Financially Constrained Producers and Intermediaries,” SSRN Working Paper No. 2748230.
Fahlenbrach, R., K. Rageth, and R. M. Stulz (2020): “How Valuable Is Financial Flexibility
When Revenue Stops? Evidence from the Covid-19 Crisis,” NBER Working Paper 27106.
Farboodi, M., G. Jarosch, and R. Shimer (2020): “Externalities of Social Distancing,” Covid
Economics: Vetted and Real-Time Papers.
Faria-e-Castro, M. (2020): “Fiscal Policy Instruments,” Covid Economics: Vetted and Real-Time
Papers.
Glover, A., J. Heathcote, D. Krueger, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2020): “Health vs. Wealth,”
Covid Economics: Vetted and Real-Time Papers.
Gormsen, N. J., and R. S. Koijen (2020): “Coronavirus: Impact on Stock Prices and Growth
Expectations,” Working Paper Chicago Booth.
Greenstone, M., and V. Nigam (2020): “Does Social Distancing Matter?,” Covid Economics:
Vetted and Real-Time Papers.
Guerrieri, V., G. Lorenzoni, L. Straub, and I. Werning (2020): “Macroeconomic Implications
of COVID-19: Can Negative Supply Shocks Cause Demand Shortages?,” NBER Working Paper
26918.

37

Hagedorn, M., and K. Mitman (2020): “Corona Policy According to HANK,” CEPR Working
Paper DP14694.
Jiang, Z., H. Lustig, S. Van Nieuwerburgh, and M. Z. Xiaolan (2020): “The U.S. Public
Debt Valuation Puzzle,” Working Paper.
Jones, C., T. Philippon, and V. Venkateswaran (2020): “Mitigation Policies,” Covid Economics: Vetted and Real-Time Papers.
Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. Violante (2020): “Pandemics According to HANK,” Working
Paper.
Kozlowski, J., L. Veldkamp, and V. Venkateswaran (2020): “When Beliefs Change,” Covid
Economics: Vetted and Real-Time Papers.
Krishnamurthy, A., and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2012): “The Aggregate Demand for Treasury
Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, 120(2), 233–267.
Krueger, D., H. Uhlig, and T. Xie (2020a): “Macroeconomic Dynamics and Reallocation in an
Epidemic,” NBER Working Paper No 27047.
(2020b): “A Theory of the “Swedish Solution”,” Covid Economics: Vetted and Real-Time
Papers.
Ludvigson, S. C., S. Ng, and S. Ma (2020): “Covid19 and the Macroeconomic Effects of Costly
Disasters,” NBER Working Paper 26987.
Rampini, A. A. (2020): “Sequential Lifting of COVID-19 Interventions with Population Heterogeneit,” NBER Working Paper 27063.
von Thadden, E.-L. (2020): “A Simple Model of Economic Spread,” Covid Economics: Vetted and
Real-Time Papers.
Xiao, K. (2020): “The Value of Big Data,” Covid Economics: Vetted and Real-Time Papers.

38

A

Targeted and Untargeted Bridge Loans

At the liquidity stage before defaults, firms receive a bridge loan ĀbrP
where P ∈ {T, U } denotes the type of program, such that their profit is
X jj
wt lt − aPt − ςkt .
πt = ωt Zt kt1−α ltα − (1 − ĀbrP )

P

j

wtj ltj from banks,

(5)

j

This equation reflects that firms use the bridge loans for payroll expenses. Producers with
πt < 0 are in default and shut down. This implies a default threshold in the presence of bridge
loans ωt∗,brP , given in equation (3) in the main text.
Non-defaulting firms immediately repay the bridge loan after the liquidity stage of the problem. Their net worth is only reduced by the interest payments associated with bridge loans,
relative to the baseline model without such loans. The interest expense on the bridge loans,
taking into account tax deductibility of interest, is:
X jj
(rbr + rgov )(1 − τ Π )ĀbrP
wt lt .
j

Individual producer net worth at the beginning of next period becomes:
X j
Π(ω 0 , k̃t , ãPt , St ) = (1 − τ Π )ω 0 ZtA k̃t1−α ˜l(k̃t , ãPt , St )α − (1 − τ Π )
wt ˜lj (k̃t , ãPt , St )
j


+ (1 − (1 − τ )δK )pt − (1 − τ )ς k̃t − 1 − τ Π + δqtm ãPt
X j
− (rbr + rgov )(1 − τ Π )ĀbrP
wt ˜l(k̃t , ãPt , St ).
Π

Π



(6)

j

This implies that bridge loans without interest and debt forgiveness, rbr = rgov = 0, leave
the net worth of surviving firms and their dividends unchanged. Aggregate firm net worth
needs to be reduced by the collective interest expense on the bridge loans by integrating across
producers. We denote the ω of the highest-productivity firm that receives a bridge loan as
ω̄tP . For untargeted loans we have ω̄tU = ∞, implying that all firms receive loans, and for the
targeted program ω̄tT = ωt∗ , implying that only firms that would default without a bridge loan
receive a loan. Thus aggregate interest is
br

Π

r (1 − τ )Ā

brP

Z
Wt

ω̄tP

ωt∗,brP



dFt (ω) = Ft (ω̄tP ) − Ft (ωt∗,br ) (rbr + rgov )(1 − τ Π )ĀbrP Wt ,

where we denote the aggregate wagebill of all firms as Wt =

P

j

wtj L̄j .

Banks
Bridge loans are junior to regular loans/bonds. Thus, defaulting firms do not pay back bridge
loans. Lenders (banks and savers) apply bridge loan cash of defaulting firms towards the
recovery value of regular loans/bonds. They can recover a fraction 1 − ζtbr of each dollar of
39

bridge loan. The total recovery per outstanding face value is:
Mt =



i
Fω,t (ωt∗,br ) h
−,brP
P
br
brP
(1
−
ζ
)
ω
Y
+
((1
−
δ
)p
−
ς)
K
−
(1
−
(1
−
ζ
)
Ā
)W
t
K t
t
t ,
t
APt

where we have defined

(7)

h
i
ωt−,brP = Eω,t ω | ω < ωt∗,brP .

How bank wealth is affected by bridge loans depends on whether the government takes on
losses incurred on these loans, i.e. whether it guarantees those loans. Aggregate bridge loan
losses are:
Z ∗,brP
ωt

dFt (ω) ĀbrP Wt = Fω,t (ωt∗,brP )ĀbrP Wt .

0

The variable Ibr measures the fraction of losses that the government absorbs; it is between 0
(no guarantees) and 1 (full guarantee). We assume that banks receive the interest income from
bridge loans, regardless of the government guarantees that are in place, as long as the interest
rate on these loans is positive. Then bank net worth is:
h
i
NtI,brP = NtI + ĀbrP Wt (Fω,t (ω̄tP ) − Fω,t (ωt∗,brP ))rbr − (1 − Ibr )Fω,t (ωt∗,brP ) ,
where NtI is bank net worth in the baseline model without bridge loans.

Government
Government expenditure is
h
i
∗,br
∗,brP
brP
P
gov
I
F
(ω
Gbr
=
G
+
Ā
W
)
−
(F
(ω̄
)
−
F
(ω
))r
,
br ω,t
t
t
ω,t
ω,t
t
t
t
t
where Gt is government expenditure in the baseline model without bridge loans. For the baseline
case of full government guarantees Ibr = 1 and debt forgiveness rgov = −1, government spending
goes up by Fω,t (ω̄tP )ĀbrP Wt , i.e. the wage bill multiple ĀbrP for all firms that participate.
Taxes are
Ttbr = Tt − τ Π (Fω,t (ω̄tP ) − Fω,t (ωt∗,brP ))(rbr + rgov )ĀbrP Wt .
Tax revenue is lower by the tax benefit to firms on bridge loan interest.

Deadweight Losses
DWL from bridge loans are
ζ br η P Fω,t (ωt∗,brP )ĀbrP Wt .
These need to be added to aggregate deadweight losses from the baseline model. Similarly,
ζ br (1 − η P )Fω,t (ωt∗,brP )ĀbrP Wt
needs to refunded to households as a transfer.
40

B

Conditional Bridge Loans

Firms
At the liquidity stage before defaults, firms with productivity below ω̄tC receive a bridge loan
ĀbrC (1 − ωt )aPt from banks such that their profit is
X jj
πt = ωt Zt kt1−α ltα −
wt lt − (1 − ĀbrC + ĀbrC ωt )aPt − ςkt .
(8)
j

Firms now need to repay ωt aPt in total, where aPt are the principal and interest payments due
this period. Producers with πt < 0 are in default and shut down. This implies a default
threshold in the presence of bridge loans ωt∗,brC given in equation (4) in the main text.
Non-defaulting firms immediately repay the bridge loan after the liquidity stage of the problem. Their net worth is only reduced by the interest payments associated with bridge loans,
relative to the baseline model without such loans. The interest expense on the bridge loans,
taking into account tax deductibility of interest, is:
(rbr + rgov )(1 − τ Π )ĀbrC (1 − ωt )aPt .
Individual producer net worth at the beginning of next period becomes:
X j
Π(ω 0 , k̃t , ãPt , St ) = (1 − τ Π )ω 0 ZtA k̃t1−α ˜l(k̃t , ãPt , St )α − (1 − τ Π )
wt ˜lj (k̃t , ãPt , St )
j
Π

Π


+ (1 − (1 − τ )δK )pt − (1 − τ )ς k̃t − 1 − τ Π + δqtm ãPt


− (rbr + rgov )(1 − τ Π )ĀbrC (1 − ω 0 )aPt .

(9)

This implies that bridge loans without interest, rbr = rgov = 0, leave the net worth of surviving
firms and their dividends unchanged. Aggregate firm net worth needs to be reduced by the
collective interest expense on the bridge loans by integrating across producers. To do this, we
denote the aggregate bridge loan amount going to no-defaulting producers as


∗,br
+,brC
C
+,C
AbrC
=
(1
−
F
(ω
))(1
−
ω
)
−
(1
−
F
(ω̄
))(1
−
ω
)
ĀbrC APt ,
(10)
t
t
t
t
t
where we have defined

h
i
ωt+,brC = Eω,t ω | ω ≥ ωt∗,br

and


ωt+,C = Eω,t ω | ω ≥ ω̄tC .
Total interest expenses for producers are
(1 − τ Π )(rbr + rgov )AbrC
t .

41

Banks
Bridge loans are junior to regular loans/bonds. Thus, defaulting firms do not pay back bridge
loans. Lenders (banks and savers) apply bridge loan cash of defaulting firms towards the
recovery value of regular loans/bonds. They can recover a fraction 1 − ζtbr of each dollar of
bridge loan. The total recovery per outstanding face value is:
"
#

 X
Fω,t (ωt∗,brC )
(1 − ζ P ) ωt−,br Yt + ((1 − δK )pt − ς) Kt −
Mt =
wtj L̄j + ĀbrC (1 − ζ br )(1 − ωt−,brC ) ,
APt
j
(11)
where we have defined

h
i
ωt−,brC = Eω,t ω | ω < ωt∗,brC .

How bank wealth is affected by bridge loans depends on whether the government takes on
losses incurred on these loans, i.e. whether it guarantees those loans. Aggregate bridge loan
losses are:
Z ωt∗,br
brC
Ot =
(1 − ω) dFt (ω) ĀbrC APt = Fω,t (ωt∗,br )(1 − ωt−,br )ĀbrC APt .
0

The variable Ibr measures the fraction of losses that the government absorbs; it is between 0
(no guarantees) and 1 (full guarantee). We assume that banks receive the interest income from
bridge loans, regardless of the government guarantees that are in place. Then bank net worth
is:
NtI,br = NtI + rbr AbrC
− (1 − Ibr )OtbrC ,
t
where NtI is bank net worth in the baseline model without bridge loans.

Government
Government expenditure is
brC
Gbr
− rgov AbrC
t = Gt + Ibr Ot
t ,

where Gt is government expenditure in the baseline model without bridge loans. As for the
unconditional loans, the baseline case of full government guarantees with Ibr = 1 and rgov = −1
implies that government spending rises by the full amount of the loan program
Ft (ω̄tC ))(1 − ω −,C )ĀbrC APt ,


with ω −,C = Eω,t ω | ω < ω̄tC .
Taxes are
Ttbr = Tt − τ Π (rbr + rgov )AbrC
t .
Tax revenue is lower by the tax benefit to firms on bridge loan interest.

42

Deadweight Losses
DWL from bridge loans are
ζ br η P OtbrC .
These need to be added to aggregate deadweight losses from the baseline model. Similarly,
ζ br (1 − η P )OtbrC
needs to refunded to households as a transfer.

43

