                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       REAL AND MONETARY DETERMINANTS OF REAL EXCHANGE RATE BEHAVIOR:
               THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES




                              Sebastian Edwards




                           Working Paper No. 2721




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                               September 1988




This is a revised version of a paper presented at the first InterAxnerican
Seminar on Economics (IASE), Mexico City, March 17-19, 1988. Parts of this
paper were written while the author was a visiting scholar in the Research
Department of the IMF. Conversations with Peter Montiel and Mohsin Khan have
been very helpful. I am grateful to Ignacio Trigueros, Nisso Bucay, Herminio
Blanco and Albert Fishlow for very helpful comments.   I have also benefitted
from comments by the participants of the National Bureau of Economic Research
Mini-Conference "International Trade and Finance with Limited Global
Integration," held in Cambridge, MA: February 20, 1988. I thank Miguel
Savastano and David Gould for efficient research assistance. Financial
support from the National Science Foundation and from UCLA's Academic Senate
is gratefully acknowledged. This research is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NBER Working Paper #2721
                                          September 1988


       REAL AND MONETARY DETERMINANTS OF REAL EXCHANGE RATE BEHAVIOR:
               THEORY AND EVIDENCE FROM DEVELOPING COUNTRIES


                                     ABSTRACT


     This paper develops a dynamic model of real exchange rate behavior in

developing countries. A three goods economy (exportables, importables and

nontradables) is considered. Residents of this country hold domestic and

foreign assets, and there is a dual exchange rate regime. There is a

government that consumes importables and nontradables. A distinction is

made between equilibrium and disequilibrium movements of the RER. The

determinants of real exchange rate misalignment are studied with emphasis

placed on the role of devaluations and balance of payments crisis. The

implications of the model are tested using data for 12 developing countries.

The results obtained are generally favorable for the model. The issue of

RER stationarity is also analyzed.


                                          Sebastian Edwards
                                          Department of Economics
                                          University of California
                                                LosAngeles
                                          Los    Angeles, CA 90024
                                       1




1.   Introduction
     Recent discussions on macroeconomic policy in the developing and

developed countries have emphasized the crucial role played by the real

exchange rate (RER) in the adjustment process. There is a growing agreement

that sustained real exchange rate misalignment will usually generate severe

macroeconomic disequilibria, and that the correction of external imbalances

(i.e., current account deficits) will generally require both demand manage-

ment policies       a real exchange rate devaluation. Also, in recent policy

evaluations of the performance of the less developed countries it has been

argued that more "successful" developing countries owe much of their success

to having been able to maintain the real exchange rate at its "appropriate"

level.1 It is not an overstatement to say that real exchange rate behavior

occupies now a central role in policy evaluation and design.

     In spite of the importance that real exchange rates have attained in

recent policy discussions there have basically been no attempts to

empirically analyze the forces behind real exchange rate behavior in the

developing countries.2 In many ways the issue of real exchange rate deter-

mination in the developing countries has remained in a murky state, with

most of the discussion being carried on at an informal level. Moreover, in

reviewing the literature on the subject it is surprising to find virtually

no studies that formally attempt to explain the distinction between equilib-

riwn and disequilibrium (i.e., misaligned) real exchange rates. The purpose

of this paper is to develop a theory of real exchange rate behavior, and

empirically test its main implications using data for a group of developing

countries. In particular this research seeks to analyze the relative

importance of monetary and real variables in the process of real exchange

rate determination in both the short and long runs.
                                          2




      The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 a dynamic model of

real exchange rate determination for a small open economy with a dual

nominal exchange rate system is developed. Section 3 provides a preliminary

data analysis on real exchange rate behavior for a group of 12 developing

countries. In Section 4 the main implications of the model developed in

Section 2 are empirically tested using data for these 12 developing

countries. Finally, Section 5 includes the conclusions,


2.   The Model

      In this section we develop a model of real exchange rate determination

that allows for both real and nominal factors to play a role in the short

run. In the long run, however, only real factors -      - the   "fundamentals" - -

influence   the equilibrium real exchange rate. The model attempts to capture

in a simple way some of the most salient macroeconomic features of the

developing economies, including the existence of exchange controls, trade

barriers and a freely determined parallel market for foreign exchange for

financial transactions.

     The model considers a three goods --     exportables,   importables, and
nontradables - -   small   open economy. There is a dual nominal exchange rate

system and a government sector. It is assumed that this country produces

the exportable (X) and nontradable (N) goods and consumes the importable

(M) and the nontradable, Nationals of this country hold both domestic

money (M) and foreign money (F). Initially it is assumed that there are

effective capital controls, so that there is no international capital mobil-

ity. However, it is assumed that the private sector has inherited a given

stock of foreign money '.       The government consumes importables and

nontradables, and uses both nondistortionary taxes and domestic credit
                                                3




creation to finance its expenditures. It is assumed that the government, as

the private sector, cannot borrow from abroad. Also, it is assumed that

there is no domestic public debt. Later, the assumption of no capital mob-

ility is relaxed; it is assumed that the government is not subject to

capital controls, and that there are some capital flows in and out of the

country.

     The dual nominal exchange rate system is characterized by a fixed

nominal exchange rate for commercial transactions (E) and a freely

floating nominal exchange rate (5) for financial transactions. This

latter rate takes whatever level is required to achieve asset market equi-

librium. This assumption of a dual exchange rate system is made as a way of

capturing the fact that in most developing countries there is a parallel

market (many times a "grey" or "black" market) for financial transactions.

It is assumed that there is a tariff on imports (r) and that, in the

tradition of international trade theory, its proceeds are handed back to the

public in a nondistortionary way. It is assumed that the price of export-

ables in terms of foreign currency is fixed and equal to unity l(P—l).

Finally, it is assumed that there is perfect foresight.

     The model is given by equations (1) through (16) below:

Portfolio Decisions

               A—M+6F                                                       (1)


               a — m + pF,        where                                     (2)


               a —    A/E; m — M/E;       p —   6/E

               m —    c(6/6)pF;      a' < 0                                 (3)


                                                                            (4)
                                                          4




 Demand Side

                  —
                      EP +      r; e        —
                                                E/PN;             eM —   MN'   e — (PE)/PN     (5)




                  cM_CM(eM,a);                  --<o,               M>0                        (6)




                  CN — CN(eM,a);                    -
                                                          > 0,           > 0                   (7)



Suø1y Side


                                                —>0
                                                e
                                                a                                             (8)




                  QN_QN(eX);                    —<0                                           (9)



Government Sector

                  C —            +
                         PNCN        EPGM                                                    (10)

                  EP*G
                      MMA                                                                    (11)



                                                                                             (12)

External Sector

                  CA —
                         Q(e)        -
                                         P4CM(eM,a)
                                                              -
                                                                  PGM                        (13)

               R—CA                                                                          (14)


                                                                                             (15)

                                                        E[aP+(l-a)P]
               e —
                        ae   +
                                 (la)e —                                                     (16)


    Equation (1) defines total assets (A) in domestic currency as the sum

of domestic money (M) plus foreign money (F) times the free market
                                       5




nominal exchange rate. Equation (2) defines J. assets in terms of the

exportable good, where E is the (fixed) commercial rate and p — 8/E         is

the spread between the free (8) and the commercial (E) nominal exchange

rates. Equation (3) is the portfolio composition equation and establishes

that the desired ratio of real domestic money to real foreign money is a

negative function of the expected rate of depreciation of the free rate .

Since perfect foresight is assumed, in (3) expected depreciation has been
replaced by the actual rate of depreciation. Equation (4) establishes that

there is no capital mobility and that no commercial transactions are subject

to the financial rate 6. It is assumed, however, that this economy has

inherited a positive stock of foreign money, so that F0 > 0.

     Equations (5) through (9) summarize the demand and supply sides, eM

and e are the (domestic) relative prices of importables and exportables

with respect to nontradables. Notice that eM includes the tariff on

imports. e, on the other hand, is defined as the relative price of

importables to nontradables that excludes the tariff. Naturally, eM is

the relevant price for consumption and production decisions. Demand for

nontradable and importable goods depend on the relative price of importables

and on the level of real assets; supply functions, on the other hand, depend

on the price of exportables relative to nontradables. Equations (10) and

(11) summarize the government sector, where GM and GN are consumption of

M and N respectively. It is convenient to express J government

consumption in terms of exportables as:

                                                                            (10')


where g — G/E,   and     —             Equation (11) defines the ratio of
                             GNPN/E.
government consumption on importable goods as A. Equation (12) is the
                                      6




government budget constraint and says that government consumption has to be

financed via nondistortionary taxes (t) and domestic credit creation (D)

Notice, however, that under fixed nominal commercial rates a positive rate

of growth of domestic credit (D > 0) is not sustainable. Stationary

equilibrium, then, is achieved when C —   t   and D — 0.   If, however, a

crawling peg is assumed for the commercial rate (i.e.,     (E/E) > 0)), it is

possible to have a positive D consistent with the rate of the crawl.

     Equations (13) through (16) summarize the external sector. Equation

(13) defines the current account in foreign currency as the difference

between output of exportables       and total (private plus public sector)

consumption of importables. Equation (14) establishes that in this model,

with no capital mobility and a freely determined financial rate, the balance

of payments ()    is   identical to the current account, where R is the

stock of international reserves held by the central bank expressed in

foreign currency. It is assumed that initially there is a positive stock of

international reserves (R0). Equation (15) provides the link between

changes in international reserves, changes in domestic credit and changes in

the domestic stock of money. Finally, the model is closed with equation

(16) which is the definition of the real exchange rate as the relative price

of tradables to nontradab].es. Notice that this definition of the RER exclu-

des the tariff on imports. This is done because most empirical measures of

RER exclude import tariff or taxes. Naturally, for the theoretical discus-

sion it would be trivial to compute all the results for an alternative

definition of RER that included

     Long run sustainable equilibrium is attained when the nontradable goods

market and the external sector (current account and balance of payments) are

simultaneously in equilibrium. Due to the assumption of tight exchange
                                              7




controls, the external sector long run sustainable equilibrium implies that

the current account is in equilibrium in every period. In the short and

even medium run, however, there can be departures from CA — 0.                       This, of

course, will result in the accumulation or decumulation of international

reserves. A steady state is attained when the following four conditions

hold simultaneously:      (1)     the nontradables market clears;               (2) the

external sector is in equilibrir.            — 0 —       CA   — m;     (3) fiscal policy is

sustainable C —    t;   and      (4) portfolio equilibrium holds. The real

exchange rate prevailing under these steady state conditions is the 1on run

equilibrium real exchanze race

     The nontradables good market clears when:


               CN(eM.a) + CN — QN(eX).                                                           (17)

Notice that 0N —                where        is           government consumption of N in
terms of exportable goods. From (17) it is possible to express the

equilibrium price of nontradables as a function of a,                               and     i.



             — v(a.gP.r)            where         > 0,          > 0,       > 0,      > 0.        (18)



Notice that since the real value of total assets (a) is an endogertous

variable we have to investigate how changes in                            and     r affect real

wealth (a) before solving for PM.

     Since the nominal exchange rate for commercial transactions is fixed,

(/6) in the portfolio equilibrium condition (3) can be substituted by the

rate of change of the spread (/p). Thus, we can write m/pF —                         c(/p).
Inverting this equation and solving for                   we obtain:


                  —
                        pL();           L'(.) < 0                                                (19)
                                           8




     In Figure 1, the p — 0     schedule has been drawn; it is positively

sloped because in order for the public to hold larger amounts of m we need

a higher p. The higher the spread the lower the expectations of further

increases of the free rate, and thus, the higher the amount of (real)

domestic money the public is willing to hold.

     From equations (10), (12), (13), (14), and (15), the following

expression for m can be derived:

                 —         - CM(e,a)   +       - t/E                                  (20)


Equilibrium of the external sector requires that rn — 0 (see Figure 1).

Under the steady sta     requirement that government expenditures are fully

financed with taxes, the      — 0   schedule will coincide with the             — 0

schedule. The intuition for the negative slope of ii — 0              is related to the

effects of wealth changes on the current account and on relative prices. An

increase in m results in a higher (a) and in a current account deficit;

in order to regain equilibrium real asset (a) should go down via a decline

in p.

     In Figure 1 the intersection of the           — 0    and the     —    —0

schedules determines the steady state level of real balances m0 and the

steady state parallel market premium p. It is easy to show that this

system is characterized by saddle path equilibrium. ss is the saddle path,

and the arrows denote the dynamic forces at work in this system.4

     After the steady state values of p and in are determined, equation

(18) can be used to find, for the corresponding (exogenous) values of g1,,

    and r, the long run equilibrium price of nontradables. Equation (16)

can then be used to find the long run equilibrium real exchange rate:

                     —                                                                (21)
'5

i=p                      p= 0


              4J

                           S


     p0
          S




                           m=o

              m0                 m

              Figure 1
                                                     9




        As can be seen from equation (21) the long run equilibrium real.

exchange rate is a function of real variables only                    -   the so-called
mentals. Whenever there are changes in these variables, there will be

changes in the equilibrium RER. In the short run, however, changes in

monetary variables, such as D, D and E,                        will also affect the RER. In

the rest of this section we analyze:                     (a) how changes in fundamentals

affect the long run equilibrium RER, and (b) how monetary disturbances

affect the short run RER.


2.1 Real Disturbances and the Eouilibrium Real Exchanze Rate

A Tariff Increase

        Consider an (unanticipated) increase in import tariffs. In this case

the       — 0   schedule will not be affected; the ii — 0                  schedule, however,

will shift. The parallel movement of this schedule is given by:


                                       8v   M
                                                  P* 3CM
                                     (B(—)
                                        T + —         (i;—))   cir

                                 -
                                                         M
                                                                                                  (22)
                     dm
                                             öa     M8a
where


                     B     iixi      E   -        IÔCM1 'M
                                                                0.
                           'flôeJ
                                     P       N    löeMj   N

        The sign of equation (22) is undetermined because (ôv/âr) > 0                       and

(3CM/8eM) <     0.       This implies that as a consequence of the (unanticipated)

tariff increase the equilibrium real exchange rate can either appreciate or

depreciate. This result is consistent with previous static analysis of

Edwards and van Wijnbergen (1987). The most plausible outcome, however,

corresponds to the situation where the direct effect of eM on demand is
                                        10



stronger    than the effect of the tariff on       In what follows it will be

assumed that the numerator in equation (22) is positive. In this case the

  — 0     schedule will shift to the right, and the new steady state equilibrium

will be characterized by higher p and m (Figure 2), and a higher equilib-

rium price of nontradables. This is both because in this case a higher r

results    itt substitution in demand away from importables and into nontrad-

ables, and because the increase in m and p generate a higher value of

real assets (a) and thus art additional increase in the demand for N. The

dynamics of the adjustment process are also depicted in Figure 2; on impact

the system jumps to R, and then proceeds on the new saddle path to the new

steady state T. During the adjustment there is a current account surplus

and international reserves are accumulated.

        The effect of a hike in import tariffs on the long run equilibrium real

exchange rate eLR is given by:

                  d& —   (—) {() [3 +          +     dr < 0                  (23)



Under the assumption that schedule ii — 0      shifts to the right (3m/8r) > 0

and (r3p/ör) > 0, and higher import tariffs will result in a long run equi-

librium real appreciation. The dynamic path followed by e can be easily

traced from Figure 2.

A Terms of Trade Disturbance

        Consider now the effect of a worsening in the international terms of

trade generated by an increase in the international price of importables

P. As before the         — 0   schedule is not affected; the ii — 0   schedule,

however, will shift. Its parallel movement will be given by:
p



                           SI



    SF

                            ri' = 0


                     m=o



         m0                           m

          Figure 2
                                            11




                     din    —
                                  (B+7+l)           *
                                                                                   (24)
                                            ac     dPM
                                  B    +
                                           P()
               (e 8C
where    ,j   — i— —J
                   M
                      is        the price elasticity of the demand tor importables,
                 M

and B is the same as in (22). Again it is not possible to know a Driori

whether in — 0        shifts upward or downward. If the demand for iruportables is

sufficiently elastic, and the numerator in equation (24) is positive, the

  — 0     schedule will shift up and the effects of this disturbance on the

system - -    including    on the equilibrium real exchange rate -   - will   be

qualitatively the same as in the tariffs case discussed above.

        The effects of changes in government consumption on the long run

equilibrium real exchange rate can be analyzed in a similar way. It is easy

to show, for example, that an increase in the ratio of government consump-

tion of nontradables will result in an equilibrium long run real exchange

rate appreciation.

Capital Flows

        The model presented above assumes that capital controls fully isolate

the country from capital movements. Although most developing countries have

some kind of capital controls, the assumption of a complete absence of

capital flows is not totally satisfactory. In fact, after the debt crisis a

number of poor countries have had to transfer important amounts of capital

to the international banks. These payments, of course, represent a reversal

from the situation in the 1970s, when most developing nations experienced

large capital inflows.

        The simplest way to incorporate capital flows into the model is by

assuming that they are restricted to the government, and by treating them as
                                       12




exogenous.     This means that equations (12)   and   (14) have to be modified. In

the   government budget constraint (12) the domestic currency value of these

(exogenous) capital flows has to be added to the sources of funds; the

foreign currency value of these capital flows should also be added to the

right hand side of equation (14). Now, the current account is not equal to

the balance of payments any longer. The model is closed by adding an

intertemporal budget constraint that establishes that the present value of

net capital flows had to be equal to zero, or the initial stock of foreign

debt. Denoting the exogenous capital flows by H and the discount factor

(world interest rate) by r*, this intertemporal budget constraint is

written as follows:


                  5   He   dt —



       In   this case anges in the interteinporal distribution of H will have

important effects on the dynamics of the real exchange rate. For instance,

an (unanticipated) decrease in H, generated by the payment of foreign

debt, will result in an equilibrium real depreciation on impact. This real

depreciation will last for as long as the country makes the transfer to the

rest of the world. Once this is completed a real appreciation will ensue.


2.3 Macroeconomic Policies. Real Exchange Rate MisaliEnment and Devaluations

       We have seen how changes in fundamentals affect the long run

equilibrium RER. We now turn to the effect of nominal disturbances on the

actual RER and, thus, on the differential between actual and equilibrium

real exchange rates. This will allow us to discuss misalignment issues.

       Consider first a once-and-for-all unpnticthated increase in the stock of

domestic credit (D). On impact, this means that there will be a jump in the
                                          13




real stock of money, since m — M/E — R + D/E.        This is illustrated in Figure

3 by the new real stock of domestic money m1. Assuming that the initial

stock of international reserves is "sufficiently" large, the system moves

from S to Q on the stationary saddle path, with a higher stock of money

    and spread p1 (see below for the case with low reserves). From equation

(18) it is easy to see that at Q the actual real exchange rate has

appreciated relative to its long run equilibrium value:


               de —   - — ((p)a thu
                        N
                                      +
                                          ()   Fdp) < 0                      (25)



     The reason for this lower short run real exchange rate is that the

demand for nontradables is a function of real assets and of e. At Q, the

higher m and the higher p. imply a higher a(— m + pF) and, consequent-

ly, an incipient excess demand for N, which requires a lower e to

reestablish rtontradable equilibrium.

     Notice that at Q there is also a higher 6. In order to induce the

public to (temporarily) hold the higher m relative to F, it is required

for them to expect an appreciation of &         (i.e., (/&) < 0). This is

exactly what will happen during the transition period.

     The difference between the actual short run real exchange rate e and

its long run equilibrium level is defined as real exchange rate

       In this case, however, the overvaluation will be short lived, since

there will be forces moving the system back towards equilibrium. After the

initial once-and-for-all increase in D the economy will adjust along the

saddle path ss moving from Q to S, with reductions of m and p.

Throughout the transition two things will happen: (1) the stock of inter-

national reserves will decline as the public gets rid of the excess domestic

money; and (2) the real exchange rate will continuously depreciate -        - via
p




                         S




    S




                        m=O


        m0         m1         m

        Figure 3
                                        1.4




reductions   in    - - moving back towards its long run sustainable level.

However, throughout the adjustment the actual real exchange rate will still

be overvalued. (i.e., throughout the transition the actual e will be below

       Only once S is achieved has real exchange rate equilibrium been

reestablished.

     In the final equilibrium in, p     and e are the same as before the

increase in D: Monetary disturbances do not affect the long run equilib-

rium real exchange rate. There is, however, a new composition of domestic

money with a higher level of D and a lower level of R.

     The time taken to move back from Q to S in Figure 3 will depend on

a number of variables including the magnitude of the original shock and the

different elasticities involved. One possible way to accelerate the adjust-

ment is by implementing an unanticipated discrete nominal devaluation of the

commercial rate (E). As a result of the higher E the real stock of money

(M/E) will jump down. Notice, however, that an important characteristic of

discrete nominal devaluations is that if undertaken from a situation of

equilibrium they will only have short run effects. If, on the other hand,

they are engineered when the economy is out of equilibrium - -   such   as in

point QS     in Figure 3 --   they can help speed up the adjustment process.
For example, in our case, an unanticipated nominal devaluation of the

commercial rate of the "right amount" implemented when the economy is at Q'

in Figure 3, viii result in a jump from Q' to S. The adjustment having

been much faster than if the system was left to work its way back to S on

its own. Moreover, with the discrete devaluation the total loss of reserves

would have been reduced.

     For the move from Q to S in Figure 3 to be a feasible adjustment

path we have to assume that the initial stock of reserves is sufficiently
                                     15




high as to cover the loss of reserves that takes place during the

transition.   If, however, initial reserves are not high enough, the public

will anticipate a balance of payments crisis that will include a discrete

devaluation of the commercial rate.5 In this case the adjustment is

depicted in Figure 4. Now, at the time of the actual increase in 0 the

public anticipates a future devaluation of E, and as a result there is a

further jump in the free rate 5 and thus in the spread p. On impact

then, the system moves to point C in Figure 4. As before, at this point

the real exchange rate suffers an appreciation relative to its long run

equilibrium level (i.e., it becomes overvalued). The system then moves

along the divergent path CC.

     Throughout this adjustment path reserves are being lost, and the actual

real exchange rate is still overvalued --   that   is, it is below its long run

sustainable level. The actual depreciation of the fixed rate E takes place

when the Central Bank "runs out" of reserves -     - or   more precisely when re-

serves reach a predetermined lower threshold. In Figure 4 it is assumed that

this happens when the system reaches point C. Exactly at this time E is

devalued and the system jumps to point H; from there onwards the adjustment

continues on the saddle path ss. At the time of the devaluation the real

stock of money is abruptly reduced, since m — M/E.          The nominal free rate

6,   however, does not jump.6 The spread p — 6/E,          on the other hand, does

jump down. In terms of the diagram, the fact that 5 does not jump when the

anticipated devaluation of E actually takes place is captured by point H

on the saddle path being along a ray from the origin that goes through C.

In Figure 4 the magnitude of the devaluation of E is such that the new

after-devaluation real stock of money m2 is below the steady state level.

This means that the final part of the adjustment will take place along the
                                            16




saddle path from H to S with some of the reserves previously lost being

replenished. Notice that on H the real exchange rate has depreciated by

more than what is required to achieve RER equilibrium.7

       The initial level of international reserves plays an important role in

determining the exact dynamic path followed by this economy. In terms of

Figure 4, the initial level of reserves will determine the location of point

C.

       Up to now we have considered once-and-for-all increases in domestic

credit D. It is easy, however, to analyze the case of a temporary increase

in D. Again, in this case, we find out that expansive domestic credit

policies result in a real exchange rate appreciation (i.e., overvaluation)

and, if the central bank doesn't hold "sufficient" reserves, in a specu-

lative attack and devaluation crisis (see Edwards, forthcoming).

       To summarize, the model developed in this section provides a unified

dynamic framework for analyzing the behavior of the real exchange rate and

the parallel market spread. Monetary and real factors will affect the real

exchange rate in the short run. In the long run, however, real factors only

-   - the   so-called fundamentals -   - will   affect the sustainable equilibrium

real exchange rate. Under the most plausible conditions higher import

tariffs will result in an equilibrium real appreciation. This will also be

the case for increases in the consumption of nontradables by the government.

An improvement in the terms of trade can result in either an equilibrium

real depreciation or real appreciation. An increase in (exogenous) capital

inflows will result in an equilibrium real appreciation. The model predicts

that expansive (i.e., nonsustainable) macroeconomic policies will generally

be associated with:       (1) a loss in international reserves;        (2) a current

account deficit;       (3) an increase in the spread between the free and the
                                    17




fixed nominal rates during the initial period; and (4) a real exchange

rate overvaluation. The form in which the disequilibria is resolved will

depend on the nature of the disturbances, the nominal exchange rate policy

pursued, and the existing initial stock of international reserves. Although

the assumption of perfect foresight introduces some limitations, the model

is still able to capture some of the more important stylized facts related

to macroeconomic policies in small open economies.


3. Real Exchange Rate Behavior tn Selected Developing Countries: The Data

     The construction of empirical measures of real exchange rates has, for

some time, posed a nontrivial problem to applied researchers. In particular

it is not easy to find exact empirical counterparts to      or P. The
numerous discussions on how to appropriately measure the real exchange rate

have, in fact, generated little agreement among practitioners. In this

paper we follow a number of researchers and use the following proxy for the

(bilateral) real exchange rate.8


               RER — e —   E WPI
                                                                           (26)

where E is the nominal exchange rate between the domestic country and the

U.S. dollar, WPI is the wholesale price index in the U.S. and is a proxy

for the foreign price of tradables P, and where CPI is the domestic

consumer price index and is considered as a proxy of the domestic price of

nontradables.9 As in the previous section an increase (decrease) in RER

reflects a real depreciation (appreciation).

     Table 1 contains summary statistics of RER for 12 developing countries

used in the regression analysis reported in Section 4. The period included

covers, for most cases, 1960-85. The index of RER was set equal to 100 for
p

           44
          G




                         Q
    H




                             S
                             m=O


    m2   m0         m1             m

         Figure 4
                                      18




                                    TABLE 1

                     Real Exchange Rates, 1965-1985:

                            Summary Statistics

                                1980 — 100




Country                      In Standard Deviation       Minimum Maximum

Brazil                       84.0             17.5          67.4     132.8

Colombia                    102.2             12.2          76.0     126.4

El Salvador                 107.8             11.6          77,6     129.3

Greece                      108.4              6.7          95.0     128.6

India                        87.1             12.6          63.2     109.8

Israel                       93.4             12.2          71.8     112.5

Malaysia                     96.2              5.2          85.7     105.3

Philippines                  98.6             14.4          55.7     121.6

South Africa                107.5              5.5          99.2     119.7

Sri Lanka                    54.4             31.7          28.8     107.7

Thailand                    103.4              2.5          99.2     108.8

Yugoslavia                  105.1             26.9          52.9     164.3



Source: These are bilateral real exchange rate indexes constructed from
         data obtained from the IFS.
                                         19




1980. Figure 5 depicts the behavior of the real exchange rate index for

these countries. As before, an increase in this index reflects a real

depreciation while a reduction refers to a real appreciation. These figures

portray a number of interesting properties of real exchange rate in these

countries. First, in every country the RER has experienced significant

movements in the 25 year period. Second, in some of these countries -         - Sri
Lanka being the best example -     - there   is an apparent structural break that,

one can hypothesize, may have been generated by a structural change in one

of the RER fundamentals. Third, it is difficult to establish a real

exchange rate appreciation trend, as some observers have suggested (Wood,

1987). Fourth, with a few exceptions --        El   Salvador being the most notable

one -   - in   the last two years of the sample the majority of these countries

have experienced a significant RER depreciation. This has basically been

the consequence of deliberate nominal exchange rate policies pursued after

the unleashing of the debt crisis in 1982.10 Notice, however, that although

the REP. index has been fairly variable in all countries, the extent of

variability has differed quite significantly across them.

        An important and difficult issue refers is whether these series are

stationary.11 If the series are nonstationary, standard regressions that

try to explain the log of the REP. would be meaningless; the standard errors

of the parameters would be incorrect. Moreover, if the log of the RER is a

random walk, the variance of forecasts into the future would be infinite; in

a way, the system would not be anchored. In this paper the statiortarity

question was analyzed using two procedures. First the quarterly detrended

time series were analyzed using the Eox-Jenkins technique. In most cases

the pattern of autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation functions

suggested for most countries an ARMA(l,l). Second, the augmented Dickey-
                                             REAL EXCHANGE RATE
                                                                (l9ao== 100)
                                   COUNTRYOLO IA
                                                                                                                 COUNTR€[ SAL VD



        140




    A




R

60
[50
        40


            1964    1967    1970     1913         1976    1979    1982    1985            1964    1967    1970     1973    1976     1979    1982    1985

                                           YLAJ




                                   0UNtRYAZl1                                                                    01,iTRYEECE




R
                                                                                 R
                                                                                 E
                                                                                 A
I                                                                                I

[   100
                                                                                 E
80                                                                               x

R60                                                                              R

40                                                                               A
                                                                                 I
[20
                                                                                 E
        0


        1964       1967    1910     1913     1976        1979    1982
                                                                                     90
                                                                                                                  ji                       'I
                                                                         1985         1964       1967    1970     1913    1976     1979    1982    1985
                                    IEAL EXCHANGE RATE
                                                  (1980= 100)
                                RI: ISRAEl.                                                  CJNIRYMS IA


     130


     120
                                                                    E
A                                                                   A

I                                                                   I
E                                                                  E
x

R                                                                  R
                                                                   A
                                                                   I
E                                                                  E



       1964   1967   1970    1973    1976     1979   1982   1985        1964   1967   1970     1913    1976   1979   1982   1985

                                 ILk8




                            OUMTRY:llJlA                                                 0LIflR1H1L IPPIN




R                                                                  8
£                                                                  E
A                                                                  A
I.                                                                 I.


                                                                   £
x

R                                                                  8
A                                                                  A
I                                                                  I
                                                                   E

     69


       1964   1967   1970    1973    1976     1979   1982   1985        1964   1967   1970    1913    1976    1979   1982   1985


                                1W                                                                YE
                                   REAL EXCHANGE RATE
                                              (1980= 100)
                        W1RY:SRI LMI(A



                                                                      130

R                                                                R
(                                                                E
A                                                                A 120
I
E
                                                                      hO
x

R                                                                R
                                                                      lOG
A
I

                                                                       90
                                                                             1rrrr1,,
      1964    1961   1970   1913     1975   1979   1982   1985              1964   1967   1970   1913    1916   1979   1982   1985




                        C1R1S. AFRICA                                                            fl141JGUYI


    170
                                                                 R
    160
                                                                 E
A 150                                                            A




                                                                 E
    130


    120
R                                                                R
A                                                                A
                                                                 •1
    100
                                                                 E

     90


                                            1979   1982   1985              1964   1967   1970    1913   1916   1919   1982   1985
       1964   1961   1970   1973     1916


                                   1EA
                                     20




Fuller test for the presence of unit roots was also computed.

     Table 2 contains the estimated coefficient of the ARMA(l,l) processes

for the (detrended) log of the RER index. These computations were performed

on quarterly data, and exclude Brazil due to the lack of long enough time

series. As can be seen, in all cases the AR term was quite high and always

significant. For most countries the MA term was negative and also signifi-

cant. However, what is more important is that in 9 of the 11 cases --       the
exceptions being El Salvador and Malaysia -   - it   is not possible to reject

the hypothesis that these series indeed follow a stationary and invertible

ARMA(l,l) process. Table 3, on the other hand, presents two computations

for the augmented Dickey-Fuller r-statistic. The first computations were

performed using three lags for the differences of the log of the RER, while

the second used 13 lags. These figures provide a somewhat different picture

from that in Table 2. In fact, according to the augmented Dickey-Fuller

test, with the exception of India and Sri Lanka, it is not possible to

reject the null hypothesis of a unit root. The evidence, then, is inconclu-

sive regarding the stationarity of these series. This is, of course,

usually the case when the AR term is very near the unit circle. What is

clear, however, is that the first differences of log RER are stationary.


4. Real and Monetary Determinants of Real Exchange Rates: The Empirical
    Evidence

     In this section we use data for our 12 developing countries to test the

most important implications of the model derived in Section 2. These

implications were: First, in the short run real exchange rate movements

will respond to both real and monetary disturbances. Second, in long run

equilibrium real exchange rate movements will depend on real variables only.

Third, inconsistently expansive macroeconomic policies will generate, in
                                           21.




                                      TABLE 2

                   Estimates   of ARNA(11) for log RER:

                           Quarterly Data 1965-1983



                                      AR             MA    0(15)

                Brazil            -              -

                Colombia          0.980          -0.476    21.6
                                 (0.021)         (0.100)

                El Salvador       0.997          -0.428    38.7
                                 (0.104)         (0.104)

                Greece            0.871           0.338    21.7
                                 (0.075)         (0.142)

                India             0.737          -0.458    10.8
                                  (0.090)        (0.114)

                Israel            0.834          -0.115    11.3
                                  (0.073)        (0.131)

                Malaysia          0.946          -0.387    29.2
                                  (0.112)        (0.112)

                Philippines        0.874         -0.202    16.2
                                  (0.122)        (0.122)

                South Africa       0.894         -0.287    17.2
                                  (0.116)        (0.116)

                Sri Lanka          0.958         -0.557     8.7
                                  (0.040)        (0.096)

                Thailand           0.904         -0.238    17.0
                                  (0.054)        (0.134)

                Yugoslavia         0.332         -0.096     4.2
                                  (0.130) (-0.099)


Notes: The numbers in parentheses are approximate standard errors. Q(l5)
        is the Box-Pierce statistic for autocorrelation check of the
       residuals. It is distributed x2 with 15 degrees of freedom. The
       critical value of the x2 distribution at 95% level of significance
       and 15 degrees of freedom is 25. Brazil was excluded due to the
       lack of long enough quarterly time series.
                                         22




                                     TABLE 3

              Augmented Dickey-Fuller Tests for Stationarity:

                 log RER Levels, Quarterly Data 1965-1984


             X a +    time +   pX1   +    E    jE(X.X.1) +

                                          r(p)      r(p)

                                              K-3   K-13
                    Colombia              -2.910    -2.034

                    El Salvador           -2.699    -1.710

                    Greece                -1.087    -1.068

                    India                 -6.006    -4.458

                    Israel                -2.928    -2.207

                    Malaysia              -1.041    -1.148

                    Philippines           -2.833    -2.689

                    South Africa          -1.835    -0.320

                    Sri Lanka             -2.238    -3.627

                    Thailand              -1.220    -0.987

                    Yugoslavia            -1.167    -1.271




Notes:      denotes the log of the bilateral real exchange rate. The
         critical value at the 90% level is -3.15 for 100 observations.
         Brazil was excluded due to lack of long enough quarterly time
         series.
                                          23




the short run, a situation of real exchange rate misaligrunent (i.e., an

overvaluation). Fourth, nominal devaluations will only have a lasting

effect on the equilibrium real exchange rate if they are undertaken from a

situation of real exchange rate misalignment and if they are accompanied by

"appropriate" macroeconomic policies. The model also predicts that there

will be a negative relation between the parallel market spread and the act-

ual (as opposed to equilibrium) real exchange rate. These two variables, of

course, are endogenous. In addition, the model provides a list of (some of)

the relevant real "fundamentals" that determine the behavior of the equilib-

rium RER (i.e., import tariffs, terms of trade, composition of government

consumption, capital flows).

An Eouatjpn for the Dynamics of RERs

     The following equation for the dynamics of RER behavior captures the

basic points made by our theoretical analysis:


               slog et —      9(log e-log ei} -   A(ZZ}                    (27)

                          +   (log Elog    Ei} - [PMPRPMPRi)
where e is the actual real exchange rate; e* is the equilibrium real

exchange rate, in turn a function of the fundamentals; Z is an index of

macroeconomic policies (i.e., the rate of growth of domestic credit); Z1

is the sustainable level of macroeconomic policies (i.e., rate of increase

of demand for domestic money); Et is the nominal exchange rate; PMPR is

the spread in the parallel market for foreign exchange; 0, A,      and 4
are positive parameters that capture the most important dynamic aspects of

the adjustment process.

     Equation (27) establishes that the actual dynamics of real exchange

rates respond to the four forces identified in Section 2.   First, there will
                                    24




be an autonomous tendency for the actual real exchange rate to correct

existing misalignments, given by the partial adjustment term 9(log e -

log ei). With all other things given this self-correcting process tends
to take place, under pegged nominal rates, through reductiocs in prices of

nontradable goods or increases in "the" world price of tradables P. The

speed at which this self-adjustment takes place is captured in equation (27)

by parameter e. The smaller is 8     (i.e., the closer it is to zero), the

slower will be the speed at which real exchange rate misalignments will be

corrected. Theoretically, the value of 9 will depend on the value of the

different parameters in our model. In addition, a number of institutional

factors, including the existence of wage indexation rules will influence its

level.

     The second determinant of real exchange rate movements is related to

macropolicies and is given by -A[Z-ZJ. This term states that if the

macroeconomic policies are unsustainable in the medium to longer run and are

inconsistent with a pegged rate (i.e.,     >   Z)   there will be pressures

towards a real appreciation: that is if (Z -Zr) >     0,   with other things

given, slog e < 0.   Notice that if macroeconomic disequilibrium and/or A

are large enough, these forces can easily dominate the self-correcting term,

generating an increasing degree of overvaluation through time.

     The third determinant of RER movements is related to changes in the

nominal exchange rate (i.e., to nominal devaluations) and is given by term

(log Elog Ei). This term closely captures the implications from our
model. A nominal devaluation will have a positive effect on the real ex-

change rate on impact, generating a short-run real depreciation; the actual

magnitude of this real depreciation will depend on parameter .
                                     25




     The fourth element refers to the effect of changes in the parallel

market premium on the real exchange rate. As shown in Section 2, increases

in the parallel market spread will be related to a real exchange rate appre-

ciation. Naturally, both e and PMPR are endogenous variables.

     An important property of equation (27) is that, as in the model in

Section 2, although nominal devaluations will have an effect on the real

exchange rate in the short run, this effect will not necessarily last

through time. In fact, as in the model, whether the nominal devaluation

will have any impact over the medium to longer run will depend on the other

two terms of equation (27), or, more precisely, on the initial conditions

captured by (log e*log e) and on the accompanying macropolicies, captured

by

The Equilibrium Real Exchange Rate

     According to the model of Section 2, the most important "fundamentals"

in determining the behavior of equilibrium RERs are:   (1) external terms of

trade;     (2) level and composition of government consumption; (3) import

tariffs;    (4) and capital flows. However, given the relative simplicity of

that model some other possible real determinants of the equilibrium RER that

were not explicitly derived from the model were also included in some of the

equations estimated. For example, the variable technological progress was

included in order to capture the possible role of the so-called Ricardo-

Balassa effect on the equilibrium real exchange rate. According to this

hypothesis countries experiencing a faster rate of technological progress

will experience an equilibrium RER appreciation (Balassa (1964)).

     For the purpose of estimating equation (27) the equilibrium real

exchange rate was written in the following form:
                                       26




                log e —     + j9. log(TOT) +   2   log(NGCGDP) +    3   log(TARIFFS)

            +
                4   log(TECHPRO) +    (KAPFLO)
                                                   +
                                                       6   log(OTHER) +   u     (28)


where the following notation has been used:

e*:        equilibrium real exchange rate

TOT:       external terms of trade, defined as (P/P)

NGCGDP:    ratio of government consumption on nontradables to GOP.

TARIFFS: proxy for the level of import tariffs.

TECHPRO: measure of technological progress

KAPFLO:     capital inflows; if negative it denotes capital outflows.

OTHER:      other fundamentals, such as the investment/GOP ratio.

u:          error term.

       A problem faced in the implementation of this analysis refers to the

unavailability of time series for some of the real exchange rate fundamentals

in equation (28). In fact, the only fundamentals for which we have reliable

data are the external terms of trade (TOT) and capital flows (KAPFLO). This

means that in the estimation of the RER equation the other fundamentals

either have to be excluded or, alternatively, proxies for them have to be

found. In this investigation we followed the two approaches, estimating real

exchange rate equations under alternative specifications that either omitted

variables or used proxies for those which did not have data. The following

proxies were used: technological progress was proxied by the rate of growth

of real GDP. This type of proxy has been used in a number of empirical in-

vestigations dealing with the Ricardo-Balassa effect. With respect to import

tariffs we computed implicit tariffs as the ratio of tariff revenues to

imports. This proxy, however, has some limitations, since it is only avail-

able for a few years for each country, and it ignores the role of nontariff
                                      27




barriers. The ratio of government consumption on nontradables to GDP was

replaced by the ratio of the government consumption to GDP (GCGDP). This is

an admittedly limited proxy, since it is possible for GCCDP to increase with

the share of nontradables on government expenditure actually going down.

This means that the actual sign of CCGDP can be either positive or negative.


Macroeconomic Policies

      In the RER dynamics equation (28) the term                measures the

role of macroeconomic policies in real exchange rate behavior. According to

our model, with other things given, if macroeconomic policies are "inconsis-

tent" the RER will become overvalued. In the estimation the following

components of (ZZ} were used:
(1) Excess supply for domestic credit (EXCRE) measured as the rate of

      growth of domestic credit minus the lagged rate of growth of real GDP:

                EXCRE — (dlog Domestic Creditdlog GDP1};
      this assumes that the demand for domestic credit has a unitary

      elasticity with respect to real income.

(2) Also, we incorporated the ratio of fiscal deficit to lagged high

      powered money (DEll) as a measure of fiscal policies.

(3) Also, instead of our measure for the excess supply of domestic credit

      in a number of equations we included the rate of growth of domestic

      credit (DPDC).

Estimation

      After replacing the equation for log e* and the expressions for {Z -

Z1)     into (27) we obtain an equation that could, in principle, be estimated

using conventional methods. For example, when EXCRE is the only element of

the macroeconomic policies vector               the equation to be estimated is:
                                          28



          Slog e — y1 log(TOT) + 2 log(GCGDP)

                       1'3 log(TARIFFS) + y5 (KAPFLO) + 6 log(TECHPRO)

                   -
                       0 log etl -   AEXCRE
                                               +
                                                   NQMDEV
                   -           -            + U
                       (PMPR       PMPRi)                                         (29)

where NOMDEV stands for nominal devaluation, and where the y's are

combinations of the 's and 0.

     In   our case the estimation of (29), or of its variants, is a task not

completely free of problems. First, there are measurement errors. Starting

with the dependent variable many of the variables involved are only proxies

of the ideal correctly-measured variables. Second, for any particular

country, the time series available for some of these variables are extremely

short, making the country-by-country estimation of equation (29) all but

impossible. For this reason pooled data procedures were used. Third a

number of these variables -    - most   notably the parallel market premium -   - are
endogenous, making results obtained from OLS         estimates suspicious. This
last problem is compounded by the fact that since log ei appears on the

right hand side, the use of lagged endogenous variables as instruments is

not completely appropriate. In evaluating the results reported above these

problems should be kept in mind.

Results

     Several versions of equation (29) were estimated using pooled data for

the group of 12 countries of Section 3. These countries were chosen because

of data availability. They were the only ones with long enough time series

for all the relevant variables (except the proxies for import tariffs).

Also throughout the period all of these countries had predetermined nominal

exchange rate regimes - -   either   pegged or crawling. Moreover all of them,
                                       29




except El Salvador, experienced substantial nominal devaluations during the

period under analysis. In some of the regressions the change in the

parallel market spread (PMPR) was omitted since it is highly co-linear

with the other R.HS variables.12

     The estimation was performed using instrumental variables on a fixed-

effect procedure, with country specific dummy variables included in each

regression.13 Table 4 contains a summary of the results obtained from the

estimation of a number of variants of equation (29).        The results are quite

satisfactory and provide support to the view that short-run movements in

real exchange rates respond both to real and nominal variables.

     In most of the regressions the measures of macroeconomic policy - -       the
excess supply of domestic credit (EXCRE), the fiscal deficit ratio (DER) and

the rate of growth of domestic credit (DPDC) - -    are   significantly negative.

This indicates that, in accordance to the implications obtained from the

model, as these policies become increasingly expansive -      - higher   deficits or

increased excess supply for credit -   - the   real exchange rate will

      Naturally,   if we start from RER equilibrium and other things including

the fundamentals remain constant, this appreciation will reflect a mounting

disequilibrium. For the excess supply for credit (EXCRE) the estimated

coefficients ranged from -0.147 to -0.075. Although these coefficients ap-

pear somewhat small, they do imply that inconsistent domestic credit polic-

ies maintained for periods of 3 to 4 years can generate very substantial

disequilibria. Consider, for example, the case of equation (29.2) with a

coefficient for EXCRE of -0.147; if domestic credit grows at a rate of 25%

per year and real income at 5%, after three years there will be an

accumulated real appreciation of 9.1%. In this sense, the estimates for the

macro variables coefficients strongly support the view that inconsistent
                                     30




policies will result in growing pressures that will generate real exchange

rate overvaluations.

     The results in Table 4 show that real variables (the "fundamentals")

have also influenced RER behavior in these countries. In all regressions the

coefficients of the (log of the) terms of trade is negative, and significant

at conventional levels in a number of them. Remember that according to our

model the sign of the TOT coefficient was theoretically ambiguous. The

results, however, give support to the popular view that suggests that

improvements in the terms of trade - -   an   increase in log(TOT) -   - will   result

in an equilibrium real appreciation (Edwards and van Wijnbergen 1987). The

value of the coefficient is rather small; the reason is that this is the

short run coefficient. The long run coefficient, of course, is much larger.

     Due to the lack of data on the composition of government consumption.

the ratio of government expenditures to GDP (log GCGDP) is the only real

variable related to government behavior incorporated in the analysis. In

most cases this coefficient was not significant, and in a number of equa-

tions it was positive. Notice that the coefficient of real growth turned

out to be positive in all regressions and significant in a number of them.

To the extent that growth is considered to be a measure of technological

progress this result seems to contradict the Ricardo-Ealassa hypothesis.

The estimated coefficient of the proxy for tariffs was negative as suggested

by the theory, although not significantly different from zero.

     In all equations where it was included, the coefficient of the change

in the parallel market spread was negative as suggested by the theory. It

should be noticed that this variable may be capturing the effect of broadly

defined exchange (i.e., trade and capital) controls. It is well known that

as countries impose additional external restrictions the parallel market
                                                               TABLE 4

                                                 Real Exchange Rate Equations

                                                       (Instruniental Variables)

                                                                           Equations No.
                           29.1       29.2       29,3         29,4           29.5       29.6       29,7       29.8             29.9
EXCRE                        -                     -                                                 -          -
               t
                                     -0.147                  -0.075         -0.075     -0.099                                -0.134
                                    (-4.075)                (-1.439)       (-3.404)   (-1.985)                              (-3.680)

DPDC                      -0.132        -       -0.052          -              -           -                                     -
           t                                                                                      -0.116     -0.175
                         (-3.462)              (-0.898)                                          (-2.987)   (-5.660)

DElI                         -          -          -            -           -0.019         •                    -            -0.015
       t                                                                                          -0.016
                                                                           (-2.016)              (-2.148)                   (-1.759)

L\NOM                      0.665      0.689     0.431         0.467          0.634      0.516     0.678       0.561           0.702
           t
                         (13.213)   (13.340)    (4.226)     (10.451)       (11.130)    (7.443)   (13.400)   (14.973)        (13.604)

IPMPR                        -          -                                      -                     -          -
               t                                -0.525       -0.486                    -0.392
                                               (-3.056)     (02.940)                  (-3.074)

LTOT                      -0.052     -0.056     -0.042       -0.044         -0.003     -0.018     -0.057     -0.019          -0.062
        t
                         (-2.100)   (-2.234)   (-1.247)     (-1.378)       (-0.840)   (-0.503)   (-2.276)   (-0.873)        (-2.310)

Tariff                                  -          -                                                 -          -                -
                   t                                         -0.345         -0.396     -0.335
                                                            (-0.750)       (-0.682)   (-0.749)
                                                                       .
KAFFLO                                  -          -            -                          -         -       -0.163          -0.040
                   t-1
                                                                                                            (-1.376)        (-0.820)

LGCCDP                    0.021      0.027      0.006         0.009         -0.016     -0.015     0.025      -0.04]           0.029
                   t
                         (0.774)     (0.995)   (0.153)       (0.263)       (-0.589)   (-0.497)   (0.908)    (-2.422)         (1.086)




                                                                                                                       (   coriti nued)
Table 4 (continued)


                       29.1        29.2       29.3       29.4      29.5       29.6       29.7             29.8      29.9

                        0.146      0.150     0.633      0.702      0.090      0.085      0.146              -      0.148
GR0WT11
                       (4.762)    (4.968)    (1.282)    (1.483)    (3.220)   (0.219)     (4.796)                   (4.844)

log       -
                       -0.072     -0.072     -0.088     -0.084     -0.123     -0.203     -0.059       -0.041       -0.058
      e                          (-2.387)
                      (-2.390)              (-2.147)   (-2.147)   (-2.184)   (-2.899)   (-4.568)     (-1.970)     (-1.750)
N                       225         225       225         120       120        120         225             225       225

R2                     0.524      0.529      0.396      0.422      0.678      0.663      0.532           0.591     0.540

                      50.9       58.9       61.6       65.3       29.8       38.5       55.2             49.8      51.3




Notes:        The numbers in parentheses are t-statistics. N is nunther of observations;           )(2     is the test for
              testing that all nonmonetary variables are jointly zero.
                                     33




coverage and rate rapidly increase. Also, the coefficient of the capital

flows variable had the negative sign predicted by the theoretical model when

they were included as an explanatory variable, It turned out, however, that

those coefficients were not significant at the conventional levels.

     The estimated coefficients of nominal devaluation (NOMDEV) and lagged

RERs provide the last two elements of analysis for the dynamics of RERs. The

coefficient of NOMDEV is always significantly positive, ranging from 0.467 to

0.689. This indicates that even with all other things given, a nominal

devaluation will be transferred in a less than one-to-one real devaluation in

the first year. The size of this coefficient is, however, quite large, and

provides evidence supporting the view that nominal devaluations can indeed be

a quite powerful device to reestablish real exchange rate eouilibriuni. If,

for instance, as in our prior example, the real exchange rate becomes

overvalued by 9%, a nominal devaluation of approximately 15% will help regain

equilibrium. Naturally for the nominal devaluation to have a lasting effect,

it is necessary that the sources of the original disequilibrium -   - the
positive EXCRE and DEH -- are eliminated. If this is not the case, soon

after the devaluation the RER will again become overvalued.

     The coefficients of lagged RER are quite low in all regressions, but

significantly different from zero. This is not surprising in light of the

analysis of the time series properties of RERs discussed in Section 3.      From

an economic perspective these low values for the coefficients imply that in

the absence of other intervention, actual real exchange rates converge very

slowly towards their long run equilibrium level. This, indeed, supports the

view that when there is a real exchange rate misalignment nominal devalua-

tions, if properly implemented, can be a very powerful tool to help

reestablish equilibrium.
                                     34




     The     tests reported at the bottom of Table 4 test the null

hypothesis that all non-monetary variables are jointly zero. The critical

value of the x2 distribution at the 95% level of significance is 7.38 for

2 degrees of freedom, 9.35 for 3 degrees of freedom and 11.1 for 4 degrees

of freedom. As can be seen, all the x2 statistics are well above these

critical values, indicating that the real factors as a group have indeed

played an important role in determining RER behavior in these countries.


5 Summary. Conclusions and Extensions

     The purpose of this paper has been to analyze RER behavior in

developing countries. For this purpose the paper started with the presenta-

tion of a dynamic model of a small open economy with a dual exchange rate

system. The model, although highly stylized, provided a number of important

testable implications. The aim of the empirical part of the paper was to

analyze whether, as the theoretical model suggests, real exchange rate move-

ments have historically responded to both real and nominal disturbances. In

order to carry out the analysis an equation for real exchange rate dynamics

was postulated. This equation captures in a simple and yet powerful way the

most important features of our theoretical analysis: (1) discrepancies

between actual and equilibrium real exchange rates will tend to disappear

slowly if left on their own;   (2) nominal devaluations are neutral in the

long run, but can be potentially helpful to speed up the restoration of real

exchange rate equilibrium; (3) macroeconomic disequilibria affect the real

exchange rate in the short run; (4) the long run equilibrium real exchange

rate responds to changes in fundamentals. In addition the model provided us

with a list of such fundamentals and the way in which they affect the

equilibrium real exchange rate.
                                      35




    This dynamic equation was estimated using pooled data for a group of 12

countries.   The estimation was done using a fixed effect procedure with

country specific fixed terms. The results obtained provide broad support

for the model of Section 2. In these countries real short run exchange rate

movements have responded to both nominal and real disturbances. In particu-

1.ar expansive and inconsistent macroeconomic policies have inevitably

generated forces towards real overvaluation.

     The estimation also indicates that the autonomous forces that move the

RER back to equilibrium operate fairly slowly, maintaining the country out

of equilibrium for a long period of time. These results, in fact, indicate

that if a country is indeed in disequilibrium, nominal devaluations can

greatly help to speed up the real exchange rate realignment.

     This analysis can be extended in several ways. One of the most

interesting directions is related to estimating indexes of real exchange

rate misalignment and, in turn, to use those indexes to investigate whether

real exchange rate disequilibrium has indeed een associated to poorer

economic performance. A possible --   and rather simple -- way of doing this

is the following. First, from the estimation of equation (29) the

coefficients of the long run equilibrium real exchange rate equation can be

obtained. Second, using estimated equilibrium "sustainable" values of the

fundamentals, estimated equilibrium RERs can be generated for each country.

Third, RER exchange rate misalignment can then be defined as the difference

between these estimated equilibrium RERs and actual RERs. Fourth, average

indexes of RER misalignment can then be calculated for each country.

Finally, these average indexes of misalignment can be used to estimate

whether it has been the case that countries exhibiting larger misalignments

have performed worse, with other things given, than those countries with the
                                    36




smaller degree of RER misalignment. This last step can be performed using

cross country regression analysis. (For a preliminary analysis along these

lines see Edwards 1988a.)
                                            37




                                         Footnotes


          the role of real exchange rate misalignment see, for example,

Dornbusch (1982) and Williamson (1985). On real exchange rates and economic

performance see Harberger (1986), and Dervis and Petri (1987).

       2The situation is not really better when it comes to the developed

countries case. Here most recent empirical work has dealt with whether real

exchange rates have a unit root, without significant efforts being devoted

to analyzing the way in which RERs have responded to fundamentals. In the

case of the developing nations the study by Khan (1986) is an exception.

       31n Edwards (forthcoming) I discuss in detail the issues related to

alternative definitions of the real exchange rate -           - see   also Edwards

(1988a)

       4The relevant expressions for determining the saddle path stability

are:


                          -
                              { II [—)     [NJ   [.5)   [)]       +
                                                                        [!) }
                                                                                <   ,
and       —   (L(.)   -
                          L'o)   > 0.


       50n balance of payments crises and speculative attacks see, for example

Krugman (1979), Obstfeld (1984), Flood and Garber (1984) and Calvo (1987).

These papers, however, do not consider the case of a dual nominal exchange

rate system.

       61f the free rate were to jump there would be an "infinite" return to

speculation. This is ruled out by the perfect foresight assumption.

Economies with dual exchange rates are investigated by Dornbusch (1986a,b),

Lizondo (1987a), Kiguel and Lizondo (1987) and Aizenman (1985).
                                     38




     7lnstead of assuming an unanticipated increase in D, an alternative

exercise would consist of a fully expected increase in D. In this case p

will jump when the public anticipates the future increase of D. Then the

system will move towards the northwest on a divergent path; the spread will

continue to increase, and reserves will begin to go down even before the

shock. At the time when D actually goes up we will observe the jump in

m. The free rate 5,    and the spread, however, will not jump at that time.

The system will at that time move to the saddle path, and the more conven-

tional adjustment will take place.

     8See, for example, Harberger (1986), Diaz Alejandro (1986).

     9An important limitation of this index is that it refers to a bilateral

real exchange rate. On the attributes of this and other empirical measures

of real exchange rates see Edwards (forthcoming).

     10See, for example, Cline (1983), Edwards (1988b).

     11Some recent papers on the more advanced economies have been concerned

with whether the time series of RER indexes have a unit root. In many ways

these discussions have been inserted in a new statistically oriented litera-

ture that inquires (once again) on whether Purchasing Power Parity holds

(Kaminsky 1987; Huizinga 1986). In the case of our data set it is clear

from a simple inspection of the diagrams that the simple version of PPP is a

grossly inadequate representation of RER behavior. In fact, formal tests on

the time series properties of these indexes -   - Box-Pierce   Q tests - -   strong-
ly reject the null hypothesis that the strong (or absolute) version of PPP

holds.

     '2Moreover, as discussed below, the black market premium may very well

be picking up the effects of exchange controls and capital market

impediments.
                                    39




     13All the data except the black market premiums and the tariff proxies

were obtained from the International Financial Statistics. Parallel market

data come from Pick's Currency Yearbook and tariff proceeds from the IMF

Government Finance Statistics. The following instruments were used: fiscal

deficit; contemporaneous, lagged and twice lagged GDCDPP; NOMDEV; lagged

NOMDEV; contemporaneous, lagged, twice and three times lagged log of nominal

exchange rate; lagged e; terms of trade and lagged terms of trade; EXCRE.

lagged EXCRE; contemporary and up to three lags unexpected money;

contemporary and up to three lags unexpected credit growth; DPDC, lagged and

twice lagged DPDC, and country specific dummies.
                                     40



                                 REFERENCES



Aizenman, J .,"Adjustrnent to Monetary Policy and Devaluation Under Two-Tier
   and Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes" Journal of Development Economics
   (1985).

Balassa, B      Reappraisal of PPP," Journal of Political Economy (Dec.
   1964).

Calvo, C., "Balance of Payments Crises in a Cash in Advance Economy,"
   Journal of Money. Credit and Banking, 19 (Feb. 1987): 19-32.

Cline, W., The International. Debt Problem, MIT Press, 1983.

Dervis, K. and P. Petri, "The Macroeconomics of Successful Development,"
   NBER Macroeconomics, 1987.

Diaz-Alejandro, C., "Comment on Harberger," in S. Edwards and L. Ahamed
   (eds.), Economic Adjustment and Exchange Rates in Developing Countries,
   University of Chicago Press, 1986.

Dornbusch, R., "Equilibrium and Disequilibrium Exchange Rates," Zettschrift
   fur Wirtschafts und Sozialwissenshaften, 102 (Dec. 1982).

            "Special Exchange Rates for Capital Account Transactions," World
   Bank Economic Review, 1 (Sept. l986a): 3-33.

            "Special Exchange Rates for Commercial Transactions," in S.
   Edwards and L. Ahamed (eds.), Economic Adlustment and ExchanEe Rates in
   Development Countries, University of Chicago Press, 1986b.

Edwards, S., Exchange Rate Misalignment in Develooing Countries, Baltimore
   MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1988a.

_________   "Structural Adjustment in Highly Indebted Countries," in J.
   Sachs (ed.), The Deve1orin Countries Debt Crisis, University of Chicago
   Press, 1988b.

_________ Real Exchanze Rates. Devaluation and Adjustment (forthcoming, MIT
   Press).

_________ and S. van Wijnbergen, "Tariffs, the Real Exchange Rate and the
   Terms of Trade," Oxford Economic Papers (1987).

Flood, R., and P. Garber, "Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: Some Linear
   Examples," Journal of International Economics, 17 (Aug. 1984): 1-16.

Harberger, A., "Economic Adjustment and the Real Exchange Rate," in S.
   Edwards and L. Ahamed (eds.), Economic Adjustment and Exchange Rates in
   Developing Countries, University of Chicago Press, 1986.
                                       41.




Huizinga, J       Empirical Investigation of the Long Run Behavior of Real
   Exchange Rates" paper prepared for the Carnegie-Rochester Conference on
   Public Policy, Nov. 1986.

Kaminsky, G .," The Real Exchange Rate in the Short Run and in the Long Run,
   unpublished ms. , University of California, San Diego, 1987.

Khan, M .," Developing Country Exchange Rate Policy Responses to Exogenous
   Shocks," American Economic Review, 76 (May 1986): 84-87.

_________ and J.S. Lizondo, "Devaluation, Fiscal Deficits and the Real
   Exchange Rate," World Bank Economic Review (Jan. 1987).

Kiguel, M. and J.S. Lizondo, "Theoretical and Policy Aspects of Dual
   Exchange Rate Systems," World Bank Discussion Paper No. DRD2O1, 1987.

Krugman, P., "A Model of Balance of Payments Crisis," Journal of Money.
   Credit and Banking, 11 (Aug. 1979): 311-325.

Lizondo, J.S .,"Exchange Rate Differential and Balance of Payments Under Dual
      Exchange Markets," Journal of Development Economics, 26 (June 1987a).

_________    "Unification   of Dual Exchange Markets," Journal of International
   Economics, 17 (1987b).

Obstfeld, M. ,"Balance-of-Payments Crises and Devaluation," Journal of Money.
   Credit and Banking, 16 (May 1984): 208-217.

Van Wijnbergen, S., "Taxation of International Capital Flows," Oxford
   Economic Papers, 37 (Sept. 1985): 382-390.

Williamson, J., The Exchange Rate System, Cambridge and London: MIT Press
   for the Institute of International Economics, 1985.

Wood, A., "Global Trends in Real Exchange Rates: 1960-1984," unpublished
   ms., University of Sussex, 1987.
</ref_section>
