NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COST OF PRIVACY:
WELFARE EFFECTS OF THE DISCLOSURE OF COVID-19 CASES
David O. Argente
Chang-Tai Hsieh
Munseob Lee
Working Paper 27220
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27220

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020

We thank Fernando Alvarez, Jingting Fan, David Lagakos, Marc-Andreas Muendler, Valerie A.
Ramey, and Nick Tsivanidis for helpful comments. We use proprietary data from SK Telecom
and thank Geovision at SK Telecom and Brian Kim for their assistance with the data. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2020 by David O. Argente, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Munseob Lee. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Cost of Privacy: Welfare Effects of the Disclosure of COVID-19 Cases
David O. Argente, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Munseob Lee
NBER Working Paper No. 27220
May 2020, Revised July 2020
JEL No. E0,I0
ABSTRACT
South Korea publicly disclosed detailed location information of individuals that tested positive
for COVID-19. We quantify the effect of public disclosure on the transmission of the virus and
economic losses in Seoul. The change in commuting patterns due to public disclosure lowers the
number of cases by 200 thousand and the number of deaths by 7.7 thousand in Seoul over two
years. Compared to a city-wide lock-down that results in the same number of cases over two
years as the disclosure scenario, the economic cost of such a lockdown is almost four times
higher.
David O. Argente
Pennsylvania State University
Department of Economics
403 Kern Building
University Park
State College, PA 16801
dargente@psu.edu

Munseob Lee
University of California at San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, #0519
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
munseoblee@ucsd.edu

Chang-Tai Hsieh
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S Woodlawn Ave
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
chsieh@chicagoBooth.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w27220

1

Introduction

On January 30, 2020, residents of Jungnang district in northeast Seoul received the following
message on their cellphone about the second person in South Korea that tested positive for
COVID: “Korean male, born 1987, living in Jungnang district. Confirmed on January 30,
Hospitalized in Seoul Medical Center.” The text went on to disclose the whereabouts of the
individual in the past few days:
• January 24: Return trip from Wuhan without symptoms.
• January 26: Merchandise store∗ at Seongdong by subway at 12 pm; massage spa∗ by
subway in afternoon; two convenience stores∗ and two supermarkets∗ .1
• January 27: Restaurant∗ and two supermarkets∗ in afternoon.
• January 28: Hair salon∗ in Seongbuk; supermarket∗ and restaurant∗ in Jungnang by
bus; wedding shop in Gangnam by subway; home by subway.
• January 29: Tested at hospital in Jungnang.
Over the following weeks, as more people were tested for COVID, South Koreans received
similar texts for every relevant patient that tested positive. This information was widely
disseminated on websites and incorporated into mobile phone applications.
This paper uses South Korea’s experience to show that public disclosure can be an important tool to combat the spread of a virus. Since a testing regime is likely to only catch
a fraction of infected individuals, disclosure of locations of people that have tested positive
can help non-infected people avoid places where they are more likely to be in contact with
infected people that have not yet been detected. For example, on March 30, local authorities
in Seoul disclosed that a patient visited a coffee shop in Mapo district on March 28. Nobody
visited the coffee shop on May 30.2 If the person who visited the coffee shop on March 28
infected others in the vicinity, this behavior by the public can help reduce the probability
that an infected person spreads the virus.
Figure 1 shows that the response of the public to the disclosure of the visit by the infected
person to the coffee shop in Mapo district may hold more generally. The figure uses daily
data on commuting flows between neighborhoods in Seoul from South Korea’s largest mobile
phone company.3 It shows the mean and the 95 percent confidence interval of the change
in the number of commuters from other districts of Seoul, relative to the first week for
February, in each of the 25 districts in Seoul during the weekdays. We highlight two facts.
First, commuter inflows in the average district in Seoul decreased by about 10% in March
An asterisk ∗ indicates that the establishment’s name was disclosed.
“Seoul’s Radical Experiment in Digital Contact Tracing,” The New Yorker, April 17, 2020.
3
We describe the mobile phone data in Section 3.

1

2

1

and April and recovered by the end of May. Second, there is substantial heterogeneity across
districts in the change in commuting inflows. At the peak of the pandemic in early March,
inflows fell by more than 20% in some districts but by only 5% in other districts. In late
May when inflows in the average district were back to “normal”, inflows into some districts
appear to be permanently lower while in other districts, the reverse is true. We show that
commuting inflows fell by more in districts with a large number of COVID patients lived or
visited compared to districts with few COVID patients.

Figure 1: Change in Weekday Inflows into Districts in Seoul

Note: The figure shows the mean and the 95 percent confidence interval of the percent change in the inflow
of people into each district of the city of Seoul, relative to the first week of February, calculated from SK
Telecom’s mobile phone data.

We then quantify the effect of the change in commuting flows in Seoul shown in Figure 1
on the transmission of the virus. We use a SIR model where the virus spreads as susceptible
people in a neighborhood commute and come into contact with infected people from other
neighborhoods. We show that the change in commuting flows observed in mobile phone
location data predicts the heterogeneous spread of the virus across neighborhoods in Seoul.
We also project the effect of public disclosure on the transmission of the virus over the next
2

two years. Relative to a scenario where there are no changes in commuting patterns, public
disclosure of information lowers the number of COVID patients by 200 thousand over two
years.
We also endogenize the commuting flows in the SIR model. In the model, the flow of
people across neighborhoods generates economic gains from the optimal match of people
with the place of work and leisure. We use the economic commuting model to estimate the
economic losses from the disruption of commuting flows shown in Figure 1. Over the next two
years, the predicted disruption in commuting patterns under South Korea’s current strategy
will lower economic welfare an average 0.15 percent per day compared to a scenario with no
changes in commuting flows.
We then compare South Korea’s current strategy to a hypothetical lockdown that results
in the same number of infections over the next two years. There are two advantages of a
disclosure strategy relative to a lockdown. First, a lockdown does not discriminate between
locations. All coffee shops are shut down, not only the ones visited by people who later tested
positive for COVID. Second, a lockdown forces everybody into social isolation, irrespective
of the cost the lockdown imposes on them. In contrast, in our model, people self-select into
social distancing based on their perceived risks from COVID and costs of social distancing.
As a consequence, under a lockdown, “optimal” commuting patterns are severely disrupted
for a large number of people and the cost of the disruption is about four times as large as in
the disclosure scenario.
Our approach combines the SIR meta-population model, where movements of the population transmit the virus across space, with a quantitative model of internal city structure as
in Ahlfeldt et al. (2015), where the flows of people across the city are endogenous. Recent
papers that develop a similar model are Antràs et al. (2020), Fajgelbaum et al. (2020) and
Cuñat and Zymek (2020). Our work differs in that, in our model, commuting costs depend
on the local information and we use detailed mobile phone data to discipline the sensitivity
of commuting flows to information about COVID cases. We do not study the optimal control problem as do recent papers on the COVID-19 pandemic by Alvarez et al. (2020) and
Farboodi et al. (2020). Instead, we focus on comparing the policy of disclosing information
to both a policy without information disclosure and to a lockdown policy.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the SIR model with commuting choices.
Section 3 discusses the data and how we calibrate the parameters of the model. In section
4 we compare our benchmark model with one with no disclosure and one with a lockdown.
Section 5 concludes.

3

2

SIR Model with Endogenous Population Flows

In this section, we develop a model where the virus spreads across neighborhoods due to
commuting flows, and where the commuting flows are the endogenous outcome of individuals
maximizing their utility by choosing where to work and to enjoy their leisure. Specifically, we
adopt the canonical meta-population SIR (Susceptible-Infected-Recovered) model to analyze
how the release of public information of COVID-19 cases affects the spread of the virus in
Seoul.4 Individuals live in different neighborhoods in Seoul and the virus spreads when they
commute to other neighborhoods. They can also choose to stay at home. In that case, they
do not interact with other people and, as a result, the virus does not spread.
Specifically, there is an exogenous number of individuals in each neighborhood. Individuals are classified as susceptible (S; at risk of contracting the disease), infectious (I; capable of
transmitting the disease), quarantined (Q; infected but quarantined and not transmitting the
disease), and recovered (R; those who recover or die from the disease). We further differentiate individuals by age a and residential neighborhood i. Time t is defined as a day. We will
show later that commuting flows are different in the weekday vs. the weekend. Because of
this, we distinguish between the days that fall on weekdays vs. weekends. The total number of
non-quarantined residents of neighborhood i at time t of age a is Nia (t) ≡ Iia (t)+Sia (t)+Ria (t).
The change in the number of infected residents of neighborhood i of age a at time t is:
∆Iia (t)

P P a

X  s a πsj
(t)Isa (t)
a
a
P P a
=β
× πij (t)Si (t) − γIia (t) − dI Iia (t)
a (t)
π
(t)N
s
s
a sj
j6=home

(1)

The first term in equation 1 is the number of susceptible residents of i that get infected during
the day, where the key endogenous variables are the commuting flows πij , which denote the
share of residents of neighborhood i that commute to neighborhood j. In the absence of
these flows, a susceptible person does not come into contact with an infected person. When
a susceptible person comes into physical contact with an infected person, the “matching
parameter” β denotes the probability the susceptible person gets infected.5 The second and
third terms in equation 1 are the infected that recover (or die) and the infected that are
detected and quarantined, respectively, and the exogenous parameters are the recovery rate
of infected people γ and the detection rate dI .6
4

See Keeling et al. (2010), Keeling and Rohani (2011)
The home sector is one of the destinations. Once a susceptible person chooses to stay at home, she
doesn’t get infected. The summation over the destination neighborhoods in equation 1 excludes the home
sector.
hP P a
i
P
π (t)I a (t)
a
6
The change of the other state variables are ∆Sia (t) = −β j6=home P s P a πasj(t)Nsa (t) × πij
(t)Sia (t) ,
5

s

a

sj

s

∆Qai (t) = dI Iia (t) − ρa Qai (t), ∆Ria (t) = γIia (t) + ρa Qai (t) and ∆Nia (t) = Nia (t − 1) − ∆Qai (t). 1/ρa is the
amount of time a quarantined person is isolated.

4

Next, we follow Ahlfeldt et al. (2015) to endogenize the commuting flows πij as the result
of utility maximizing commuting choices.7 We assume individuals make commuting choices
every day and we distinguish between weekdays and weekends. Specifically, utility of a worker
of age a that lives in i and works in j during the weekdays is Uija (t) = zja,wd /daij (t) where
zja,wd is idiosyncratic productivity from working in j during the weekday and daij (t) is the
cost of commuting from i to j. During the weekends, the utility of the same person from
commuting to j is Uija (t) = zja,wn /daij (t) where zja,wn denotes idiosyncratic preferences from
leisure in neighborhood j during the weekends.
In the absence of a pandemic, we assume that commuting costs only depends on the travel
distance between i and j. We incorporate the effect of disclosure of COVID cases on commuting flows during the pandemic by assuming that the cost of commuting to neighborhood j
also depends on information about the number of infected individuals in that neighborhood.
Specifically,
ln daij (t) = κτij + δ a ln Cj (t) + ξ a ln Vj (t)
(2)
Here τij denotes travel distance between i and j, Cj (t) is the number of residents of j
confirmed as COVID patients in the two weeks prior to time t, and Vj (t) is the number of
visits by confirmed COVID patients to neighborhood j in the two weeks prior to t. The
sensitivity of the commuting cost to travel distance τij , confirmed cases Cj , and visits Vj are
governed by κ, δ a , and ξ a , respectively. When δ a and ξ a are positive, disclosure of COVID
cases and visits in neighborhood j increases the cost of commuting to that neighborhood.
An individual’s commuting choice then boils down to a discrete choice problem. Given
her idiosyncratic productivity, she chooses to work during the weekday in the neighborhood
that maximizes her income net of the commuting cost. Similarly, given her idiosyncratic
preferences, she chooses the neighborhood that maximizes her leisure net of the commuting
cost during the weekend. We further assume that a person’s idiosyncratic productivity zja,wd is
drawn from an iid Fréchet distribution with mean parameter Eja,wd and dispersion parameter
wd . Similarly, her idiosyncratic preferences during the weekend are drawn from an iid Fréchet
distribution with mean parameter Eja,wn and dispersion parameter wn . Note that Eja,wd and
Eja,wn vary across neighborhoods, capturing mean differences in the quality of jobs and leisure
activities across neighborhoods.
The probability that a resident of neighborhood i chooses to work in j during the weekday
is:
wd
Eja,wd daij (t)−
a
πij (t = weekday) = P a,wd a
(3)
dis (t)−wd
s Es
7

See also Monte et al. (2018) and Tsivanidis (2019).

5

Similarly, the probability she travels to neighborhood j during the weekend is:
wn

πija (t

Eja,wn daij (t)−
= weekend) = P a,wn a −wn
dis (t)
s Es

(4)

Equations 3 and 4 say that commuting flows to j from residents of i are increasing in Eja,wd
(during the weekday) and Eja,wn (during the weekends) and decreasing in daij relative to other
neighborhoods. More COVID cases in j relative to the other neighborhoods thus lowers
commuting flows to j. These commuting flows are, in turn, the critical endogenous variables
in the SIR model in equation 1 where a decline in π lowers the transmission of the virus
throughout the city.
Finally, when individuals choose commutes that maximize their utility, expected utility
of an individual living in neighborhood i is
!1/wd
 X a,wd a −wd
E[Uia (t = weekday)] = Γ 1 − 1/wd
Es dis (t)

(5)

s

during the weekday and
!1/wn
E[Uia (t = weekend)] = Γ (1 − 1/wn )

X

wn

Esa,wn dais (t)−

(6)

s

during the weekend where Γ(·) is a gamma function. Expected utility of residents of neighborhood i is a harmonic mean of the mean parameter of the Frechet distribution in all
neighborhoods and decreasing in the cost of all accessing neighborhoods from location i. Expected welfare differs between residents of different neighborhoods depending on commuting
costs from that neighborhood to all the other neighborhoods of the city. We refer to the
weighted average of equations 5 and 6 across the residents in all the neighborhoods of Seoul
as economic welfare.8
In summary, the total number of detected cases and visits that are publicly disclosed
affect the commuting costs to each neighborhood, as specified in equation 2. The changes
in commuting costs are reflected in the commuting flows (equations 3 and 4) and affect
not only the spread of the virus through their feedback into the SIR dynamics (equation
1), but also individuals’ economic welfare (equations 5 and 6). The model highlights the
important trade-offs of the public disclosure policy. The availability of information increases
the commuting costs and lowers economic welfare, since it disrupts the optimal match of
people with the place of work and leisure, but it also reduces the transmission of the virus
8

See Appendix A for a derivation of equations 3-6.

6

across neighborhoods.

3

Model Calibration and Simulation

In this section, we describe the data we use and how we calibrate the parameters of the model
in the previous section. We then simulate the effect of the disclosure of information on the
transmission of the virus and economic losses in Seoul over the next two years.

3.1

Calibration

We infer the economic parameters from data on commuting flows. We measure commuting
flows from proprietary data provided by the SK Telecom mobile phone company.9 Based
on the location of mobile phones, SK Telecom calculates daily bilateral flows of people by
age group and gender between the 25 districts of Seoul.10 We have data on daily bilateral
commuting flows across Seoul’s districts from January 2020 to May 2020. We also have
the data on the monthly average of daily bilateral commuting flows from January 2019 to
December 2019, which we will use to calibrate parameters related to the pre-pandemic period.
The elasticity of commuting flows to commuting costs is wd (weekdays) or wn (weekends).
And, before the pandemic, the commuting cost only depends on distance τij and the cost of
distance κ. Specifically, the commuting flow equations 3 and 4 prior to the pandemic can be
written as:
ln πij (t = weekday) = −κwd τij + θi + θj
(7)
ln πij (t = weekend) = −κwn τij + θi + θj

(8)

where θi and θj are residence and commuting destination fixed effects and the elasticity
of commuting flows with respect to distance is the product of  and κ. Table 1 estimates
equations 7 and 8 from data on bilateral commuting flows from SK Telecom in November
2019 (before the pandemic) and the distance (in kilometers) between 25 districts in Seoul.
Table 1 reports κwd = 0.1413 for the weekday commutes (column 1) and κwn = 0.1666
during the weekends (column 2). Commuting flows during the weekend are more sensitive
to distance compared to commutes during the weekdays.
We next estimate wd from the coefficient of variation in wages within each of the 25
9

SK Telecom has the largest share (42% in January 2020) of South Korea’s mobile phone market.
A person’s movement is included when she stays in the origin district for more than two hours, commutes
to another district and stays in that district for more than two hours. If a person moves multiple times during
the day, the data records the main movement. The data excludes daily flows between Seoul and locations
outside of Seoul.
10

7

districts in Seoul.11 Specifically,
2
Γ(1 − wd
)
Variance
=
2
1 2 −1
Γ(1 − wd )
Mean

(9)

where Γ is a Gamma function. When we filter the within-district wage dispersion data
through this equation, we get wd = 4.1642. This estimate of wd combined with the estimate
of the elasticity of commuting flows during the weekdays implies that κ = 0.0339. We
then use this estimate of κ to infer wn = 4.9144 from the elasticity of commuting flows
to distance during the weekends. Note that wn > wd which says that the variance of a
person’s productivity across districts is larger than the variance of her preferences for leisure
across districts. It also implies that the responsiveness of weekend flows to a given change in
commuting costs will be larger than that of the weekday flows.
We next use the equation for the commuting flows during the pandemic to estimate how
the commuting costs change in response to disclosure of information on COVID cases. The
elasticities of the weekday commuting flows with respect to the number of cases Cj and visits
Vj are δ a wd and ξ a wd , respectively. The corresponding elasticities of the weekend flows to
Cj and Vj are δ a wn and ξ a wn . Specifically, we estimate these elasticities from estimating
the following commuting flow equation on data during the pandemic:
∆ ln πija (t) = δ a wd ln Cj (t) + δ a (wn − wd ) ln Cj (t) × weekend + ξ a wd ln Vj (t)+
+ δ a (wn − wd ) ln Vj (t) × weekend + ϕa × weekend + θia + λaj

(10)

The dependent variable is the daily change in the commuting flows relative to the first week
of February 2020 computed from SK Telecom’s data and weekend is an indicator variable
for a day that falls on a weekend. The parameters in equation 10 are shown in columns 3 and
4 in Table 1. Using the estimates of wn and wd derived earlier along with the elasticities
of the commuting flows with respect to the disclosure of cases and visits in Table 1, the
elasticities of commuting costs with respect to the disclosure of information are δ = 0.00466
and ξ = 0.00772 for people with age< 60 and δ = 0.00621 and ξ = 0.01046 for people with
age> 60.
11

We use data from the 2018 Seoul Survey. This survey collects commuting and labor market information
of household members over age 15 from 20,000 households in Seoul.

8

Table 1: Commuting Flow Equation Estimation Before and During Pandemic

ln Commuting Flows
(November 2019)
τij

-0.1413
(0.0028)
–

-0.1666
(0.0034)
–

lnCj (t)× weekend

–

–

lnVj (t)

–

–

lnVj (t)× weekend

–

–

weekend

–

–

Nov 2019
All
Weekdays
625
0.8603

Nov 2019
All
Weekends
625
0.8405

lnCj (t)

Period
Age Group
Days
Observations
R-squared

∆ ln Commuting Flows
(relative to week 1, Feb 2020)
–

–

-0.0194
(0.0013)
-0.0034
(0.0002)
-0.0321
(0.0009)
-0.0057
(0.0003)
-0.1137
(0.0021)

-0.0258
(0.0014)
-0.0046
(0.0002)
-0.0435
(0.0009)
-0.0078
(0.0001)
-0.1180
(0.0021)

Jan-May 2020
Under 60
All
95,000
0.5439

Jan-May 2020
Above 60
All
95,000
0.5467

Notes: Cj is the number of COVID cases in j, Vj is the number of COVID visitors in j, and weekend is
an indicator variable for a day that falls on a weekend. The table shows the results of estimating equations
7 and 8 (columns 1 and 2) and equation 10 (columns 3 and 4). The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2
is the monthly average of daily commuting probability from district i to district j in November 2019. The
dependent variable in columns 3 and 4 is the change in the daily commuting probability from district i to
district j from February 1 to May 31, 2020 relative to the first week of February 2020. Column 3 includes
only people under the age of 60 and column 4 only those above 60 years of age.

We take three messages from the estimates of δ and ξ calculated from the commuting flows
during the pandemic. First, δ and ξ are negative, and the R2 in the estimates in columns 3 and
4 in Table 1 exceed 50%. This says that much of the heterogeneity across neighborhoods in
Seoul in the change in commuting inflows shown in Figure 1 can be explained by the disclosure
of COVID cases. Second, weekend commuting flows are more sensitive to COVID cases
compared to weekday flows, perhaps because the comparative advantage across locations is
weaker for leisure activities compared to work. This is consistent with the finding that in the
pre-pandemic period wn > wd . Third, commuting flows of those over the age of 60 is more
9

sensitive to information on COVID cases. We interpret this as evidence that the perceived
cost of getting infected is larger for the elderly compared to the young.
The last set of parameters of the commuting model are the mean parameters of the
Fréchet distributions of productivity and leisure E a,wd and E a,wn . Using the estimates of κ,
wn and wd , we estimate E a,wd and E a,wn from data on the commuting flows between the 25
districts of Seoul and the initial home sector shares.12 We calculate the initial home sector
shares from the Seoul Survey and Time Use Survey. During the weekdays, we find that 17%
of people with age< 60 and 61% of people with age> 60 are not commuting but earning
positive income. During the weekends, we assume that people who spend less than 5 hours
on outside activities are at the home sector. The inferred shares are 46 percent for people
with age< 60 and 67 percent for people with age> 60.
Turning to the parameters of the SIR model, the rate (per day) at which infected people
either recover or die is set to γ=1/18, reflecting an estimated duration of illness of 18 days.13
We estimate ρa from the average duration of hospital care in Ferguson et al. (2020), which
is 8 days if critical care is not required and 16 days if critical care is required. Ferguson et
al. (2020) also estimates that 6.3% of those between the ages of 40-49 require critical care
whereas 27% of those between the ages of 60-69 require it. Using these estimates, we set
ρa =1/8.5 for the young and ρa =1/10.2 for the old.
The remaining parameters in the SIR model are β and dI . We calibrate these parameters
internally using two moments from the data. First, we target total number of detected cases
in Seoul (861) until May 31st, which captures the overall spread of the disease. Second, we
target the fraction of undetected infections from the estimates in Stock et al. (2020), who
use results from Iceland’s two testing programs and estimate that the fraction of undetected
infections range from 88.7% to 93.6%. We target a fraction of 90% undetected infections,
which are also consistent with the estimates for the US in Hortaçsu et al. (2020). The
calibrated values of β and dI are 0.1504 and 0.0163, respectively; we show sensitivity analysis
to these values below.
Finally, we will also estimate the number of deaths from COVID. To do this, we set the
fatality rate to 0.21% for the young and 2.73% for the old. We obtain these estimates from
the Korean Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, which estimate fatality rates for the
groups between 40-49 years of age and 60-69 years of age.
12

We normalized the geometric average of the location parameter E a,wd and E a,wn to one.
This is the value estimated from early evidence from COVID cases in China reported in Wang et al.
(2020).
13

10

3.2

Simulation of SIR Commuting Model

We now simulate the SIR Commuting Model over two years assuming public disclosure of all
COVID cases. Our initial conditions are the first 4 cases confirmed in the city of Seoul placed
at the districts where the people infected reside. Since 90% of the cases are undetected, our
initial conditions are a total of 4 cases in quarantine and 36 cases undetected. The infected
people that are undetected follow the predicted commuting patterns of the model. The first
day of the simulation is January 30th, 2020. In the data disclosed by local authorities,
infected people who are detected report visiting two distinct districts on average in their
entire travel logs.
We first evaluate the performance of the SIR model in terms of explaining the heterogeneity in the spread of the virus across neighborhoods in Seoul. Panel (a) of Figure 2 plots the
cumulative number of reported COVID in each district in Seoul by the end of May against
the model’s prediction of the number of cases in each district. The figure shows that the
model is able to replicate well the geographical spread of the disease, as most dots are close to
the 45 degree line. Panel (b) of Figure 2 shows the dynamics of infected people that will take
place in the upcoming months as predicted by the model. The figure shows that according
to our model, infection increases up to around day 400 and decreases after then. The peak of
infection will involve less than 3% of the population at the same time. Relative to the people
below 60 years of age, there are less people above 60 years of age that are infected at a given
point in time. This is because older people are more likely to stay at the home sector and
respond more to information on the number of confirmed cases and visits in each district.
Panel (c) of Figure 2 shows the change in inflows by district during weekdays and weekends. As disease spreads, inflows to each district decline. At the peak of disease, average
inflows are 11 percent lower during weekdays and 24 percent lower during weekends. Consistent with empirical evidence in Figure 1, we also find significant heterogeneity across districts
in the change in inflows in each district. This can be seen in the 95 percent confidence interval
of the change in inflows into each district. Panel (d) of Figure 2 shows the change in economic welfare, aggregating weekdays and weekends and residents of different neighborhoods
of Seoul. Economic welfare declines because workers realize the cost of getting infected and
change their commuting behavior. At the peak of disease, economic welfare declines by 0.3
percent.

11

Figure 2: Simulated Effect of Disclosure on Commuting, COVID Cases, and
Economic Losses

(a) Detected Cases in District by May 31st

(b) Share of Infected People

(c) Inflows by District

(d) Economic Welfare

Notes: Panel (a) shows the total number of confirmed cases in the data (y-axis) and in the model (x-axis).
Each dot is a district of Seoul. The blue line indicates the 45 degree line. Panel (b) shows the share of
infected population for the young (age 20-59) and the old (age 60+). Panel (c) shows the change in inflows
by district during weekdays and weekends, along with 95 percent confidence intervals. Panel (d) shows the
change in economic welfare as a 7-day moving average.

4

Welfare Effects of Disclosure

In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of information disclosure and lockdown. First,
to quantify the effectiveness of the disclosure policy, we simulate the model without allowing
commuting to respond to information. This can be interpreted as the case without infor12

mation disclosure or, alternatively, the case where people cannot change their commuting
behavior despite of information. We believe the first interpretation is closer to the real world
given the observed changes in commuting behavior from the daily bilateral commuting data.
Second, we quantify the effectiveness of a lockdown policy, another widely used mitigation
strategy, relative to the information disclosure case.
As described in the previous section, detailed information disclosure can be summarized
into two components: (i) the total number of confirmed cases in each district for the past two
weeks, Cj (t), and (ii) total number of visits by confirmed cases to each of the districts for the
past two weeks, Vj (t). We first examine the no information disclosure case, in which both
Cj (t) and Vj (t) are not available. In this case, the commuting flow equation depends only
on the physical distance from origin to destination. Then, we evaluate a partial disclosure
case, where either Cj (t) or Vj (t) is not disclosed; the partial disclosure case reported below
are the chained results of these two scenarios.
Table 2 reports the total number of detected cases, the total number of death, and the
economic welfare losses over two years under different disclosure policies. Under partial
and no information disclosure, we find more detected cases. The difference between the
full information disclosure and partial or no disclosure scenarios is also significant when
comparing the total number of deaths. The scenario with no disclosure of information yields
42 percent more the number of deaths compared to the full disclosure scenario. This is because
individuals above 60 years of age, those that are more vulnerable to the virus, are also more
sensitive to the information disclosed and altered their commuting patterns significantly in
response.
The public health benefits from information disclosure come at the cost of economic
welfare losses. We calculate average economic welfare loss per day compared to the no
disclosure case. The daily economic welfare loss for the young (old) is 0.04 (0.05) percent
under partial disclosure and 0.14 (0.17) percent under no disclosure. Under the partial or full
disclosure, workers are able to choose their second or third best location when they maximize
their utility even if their preferred commuting choice is disrupted by the information obtained
about the confirmed cases.
We impose a lockdown policy assuming that in this case no information is disclosed.
Under the lockdown policy, similar to that so far implemented in many countries including
the United States, a certain fraction of the population is required to stay at home. In the
model, this is implemented by randomly choosing a certain fraction of people and forcing
them to stay in the home sector during weekdays and weekends. We ignore for now the
possibility that the mandated lockdown is only partially effective (e.g. people ignoring the
government’s order). Naturally, the disease does not spread at home; at home, workers who

13

Table 2: Comparison of Full Disclosure with No Disclosure and Lockdown

No Disclosure

Partial Disclosure

Total # of Cases

968,482

871,070

770,691

768,598

Total # of Death
age 20-59
age 60+

26,083
7,520
18,563

22,082
6,879
15,203

18,360
6,184
12,176

20,136
6,013
14,123

-

0.04
0.04
0.05

0.15
0.14
0.17

0.57
0.73
0.07

Welfare loss per day (%)
age 20-59
age 60+

Full Disclosure 25% Lockdown
(Korea case) Days 280 to 380

Notes: The table reports the total number of detected cases, the total number of death, and the welfare losses
over two years in the city of Seoul under no disclosure, partial disclosure, information disclosure (Korea case),
and 25% lockdown from day 280 to 380. The economic welfare losses, compared to the no disclosure case,
are shown in percent.

are susceptible cannot be infected and workers who are infected but not detected do not
spread the disease anymore. We assume that the lockdown policy is implemented from day
280 to 380, when the spread of disease is the fastest.14 To compare the disclosure policy and
lockdown policy, we choose a 25% lockdown, which gives the same total number of cases over
two years as the full information disclosure case.
Table 2 reports the total number of detected cases, the total number of deaths, and the
economic welfare losses over two years under the lockdown policy. In this scenario, the total
number of deaths is higher, especially among the old. The economic welfare losses under a
lockdown are substantially higher relative to the full information disclosure scenario. The
lockdown misallocates workers and mitigation efforts. This is because, under the lockdown
policy, workers who do not like working from home are mandated to do so. On the other
hand, under information disclosure, workers who enjoy working from home select themselves
to do so after seeing more confirmed cases and visits at their preferred districts. Similar
circumstances occur with people with low health risks or that have recovered from the disease
as they are mandated to stay home under the lockdown whereas, under full information, those
14

A lockdown implemented earlier delays infections and herd immunity, but has no impact on that total
number of infected once herd immunity is achieved.

14

that have higher health risks are those that choose to stay at home.

4.1

Sensitivity to Transmission and Detection Rates

We check the robustness of our results by checking their sensitivity to alternative values
for the transmission rate β and the daily detection rate dI . First, we run a simulation
and a counter-factual without disclosure both increasing and decreasing β by 20 percent.
Remember however that we choose β to match the total number of reported cases in Seoul
by the end of May 2020 so changing β implies that the model no longer matches this data
moment. Putting this aside, the top panel in Table 3 shows the effect of changing β. When β
is lower, the model delivers much lower number of cases and economic losses, and information
disclosure lowers the number of COVID cases by almost 70%. On the other hand, higher
β results in a higher number of cases and economic losses. Information disclosure is still
effective but less so, reducing the number of cases by 14%.
We next examine the sensitivity of the results to effectiveness of the testing regime.
Specifically, we re-calibrate the model by targeting a lower and a higher fraction of undetected
infections. Note that in the benchmark calibration, we target 90% of undetected infections to
be consistent with the estimates in Stock et al. (2020). Under 80% undetected infections, β
(0.1658) and dI (0.0357) are calibrated to be higher than in our baseline calibration (0.1504
and 0.0163) so that they also jointly match the total number of cases by May 31st. With
a much higher daily detection rate, there is more information disclosed on the total number
of cases and visits. As a result, workers change their commuting behavior more and the
number of cases declines significantly. Thus, information disclosure is more effective in this
case. On the other hand, when we target 95% of undetected infections, β (0.1496) and dI
(0.0076) are calibrated to be lower than the benchmark calibration. With lower detection
rate, information disclosure is less effective because there is less information disclosed on the
local cases and visits. So information disclosure is more effective when combined with testing
that increases share of the infected that are detected.

15

Table 3: Sensitivity to Transmission and Detection Rates

20% lower β=0.1203
No disclosure Full disclosure
Total # of Cases
Welfare Loss per day (%)

185,278
-

58,958
0.06

Frac. of undetected=0.8
β = 0.1658, dI = 0.0357
No disclosure Full disclosure
Total # of Cases
Welfare Loss per day (%)

1,167,307
-

752,295
0.17

20% higher β=0.1805
No disclosure Full disclosure
1,257,579
-

1,079,081
0.12

Frac. of undetected=0.95
β = 0.1496, dI = 0.0076
No disclosure Full disclosure
623,454
-

534,858
0.12

Notes: The table reports the total number of detected cases and the economic welfare losses over two years
in the city of Seoul under information disclosure and no disclosure with lower and higher β and with lower
and higher fraction of undetected infections. For different fractions of undetected infection, β and dI are
re-calibrated to match this new target moment, along with the number of total cases by May 31st (861). The
economic welfare losses, compared to the no disclosure case, are shown in percent.

5

Conclusion

This paper uses an SIR model with multiple sub-populations and an economic model of
commuting choice between the sub-populations to measure the effect of the disclosure of
information about COVID-19 cases in Seoul. We use the model to calibrate the effect of the
change in commuting patterns after the public disclosure of information on the transmission
of the virus and the economic losses due to the change in commuting patterns. We find that
compared to a scenario without disclosure, public disclosure reduces the number of COVID19 cases by 200 thousand and deaths by 7.7 thousand in Seoul over 2 years. And compared
to a lockdown that results in about the same number of cases as the full disclosure strategy,
the latter results in economic losses that are 73% percent lower.
We do not attempt to measure the cost of the loss of privacy from disclosure of COVID
cases, but whenever such measures are available, they can be weighted against the benefits
of public disclosure we provide here. Also, in our analysis the community (in Seoul) reaches
herd immunity within the next two years. We assume no vaccine will be available in the next
two years. The analysis will obviously be different, and the trade-offs between the different
16

scenarios we model in the paper will be different as well if a vaccine is available within the
next two years.
The broader point is that, in the absence of a vaccine, targeted social distancing can be
an effective way to reduce the transmission of the disease while minimizing the economic cost
of social isolation. Public dissemination of information as one way to accomplish that, but
there obviously can be more effective ways to target social distancing.

17

References
Ahlfeldt, Gabriel M, Stephen J Redding, Daniel M Sturm, and Nikolaus Wolf, “The economics of density: Evidence from the Berlin Wall,” Econometrica, 2015, 83 (6), 2127–2189.
Alvarez, Fernando E, David Argente, and Francesco Lippi, “A simple planning problem for
covid-19 lockdown,” NBER Working Paper No. 26981, 2020.
Antràs, Pol, Stephen Redding, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Globalization and Pandemics,”
2020.
Cuñat, Alejandro and Robert Zymek, “The (Structural) Gravity of Epidemics,” 2020.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo, Amit Khandelwal, Wookun Kim, Cristiano Mantovani, and Edouard
Schaal, “Optimal lockdown in a commuting network,” NBER Working Paper No. 27441,
2020.
Farboodi, Maryam, Gregor Jarosch, and Robert Shimer, “Internal and external effects of
social distancing in a pandemic,” NBER Working Paper No. 27059, 2020.
Ferguson, Neil, Daniel Laydon, Gemma Nedjati Gilani, Natsuko Imai, Kylie Ainslie, Marc
Baguelin, Sangeeta Bhatia, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, ZULMA Cucunuba Perez, and Gina
Cuomo-Dannenburg, “Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to
reduce COVID19 mortality and healthcare demand,” 2020.
Hortaçsu, Ali, Jiarui Liu, and Timothy Schwieg, “Estimating the Fraction of Unreported
Infections in Epidemics with a Known Epicenter: an Application to COVID-19,” NBER
Working Paper No. 27028, 2020.
Keeling, Matt J and Pejman Rohani, Modeling infectious diseases in humans and animals,
Princeton University Press, 2011.
, Leon Danon, Matthew C Vernon, and Thomas A House, “Individual identity and movement networks for disease metapopulations,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2010, 107 (19), 8866–8870.
Monte, Ferdinando, Stephen J Redding, and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg, “Commuting, migration, and local employment elasticities,” American Economic Review, 2018, 108 (12),
3855–90.

18

Stock, James H, Karl M Aspelund, Michael Droste, and Christopher D Walker, “Estimates
of the undetected rate among the sars-cov-2 infected using testing data from Iceland,”
MedRxiv, 2020.
Tsivanidis, Nick, “Evaluating the Impact of Urban Transit Infrastructure: Evidence from
Bogotá’s TransMilenio,” UC Berkeley, mimeo, 2019.
Wang, Huwen, Zezhou Wang, Yinqiao Dong, Ruijie Chang, Chen Xu, Xiaoyue Yu, Shuxian
Zhang, Lhakpa Tsamlag, Meili Shang, Jinyan Huang et al., “Phase-adjusted estimation of
the number of coronavirus disease 2019 cases in Wuhan, China,” Cell discovery, 2020, 6
(1), 1–8.

19

