                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           IMPACTS OF STATE REOPENING POLICY ON HUMAN MOBILITY

                                         Thuy D. Nguyen
                                         Sumedha Gupta
                                         Martin Andersen
                                           Ana Bento
                                         Kosali I. Simon
                                          Coady Wing

                                       Working Paper 27235
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27235


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27235.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Thuy D. Nguyen, Sumedha Gupta, Martin Andersen, Ana Bento, Kosali I. Simon, and
Coady Wing. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Impacts of State Reopening Policy on Human Mobility
Thuy D. Nguyen, Sumedha Gupta, Martin Andersen, Ana Bento, Kosali I. Simon, and Coady
Wing
NBER Working Paper No. 27235
May 2020
JEL No. I1

                                         ABSTRACT

This study quantifies the effect of state reopening policies on daily mobility, travel, and mixing
behavior during the COVID-19 pandemic. We harness cell device signal data to examine the
effects of the timing and pace of reopening plans in different states. We quantify the increase in
mobility patterns during the reopening phase by a broad range of cell-device-based metrics. Soon
(four days) after reopening, we observe a 6% to 8% mobility increase. In addition, we find that
temperature and precipitation are strongly associated with increased mobility across counties. The
mobility measures that reflect visits to a greater variety of locations responds the most to
reopening policies, while total time in vs. outside the house remains unchanged. The largest
increases in mobility occur in states that were late adopters of closure measures, suggesting that
closure policies may have represented more of a binding constraint in those states. Together,
these four observations provide an assessment of the extent to which people in the U.S. are
resuming movement and physical proximity as the COVID-19 pandemic continues.

Thuy D. Nguyen                                  Ana Bento
Indiana University                              School of Public Health
Bloomington, IN 47401                           Indiana University
thdnguye@indiana.edu                            Bloomington, IN 47401
                                                abento@iu.edu
Sumedha Gupta
Department of Economics                         Kosali I. Simon
Indiana University-Purdue                       O’Neill School of Public and Environmental Affairs
University Indianapolis                         Indiana University
425 University Blvd.                            1315 East Tenth Street
Indianapolis, IN 46202                          Bloomington, IN 47405-1701
sugupta@iupui.edu                               and NBER
                                                simonkos@indiana.edu
Martin Andersen
Department of Economics                         Coady Wing
University of North Carolina at Greensboro      Indiana University
Bryan, Room 448                                 1315 E 10th St
Greensboro, NC 27402                            Bloomington, IN 47401
msander4@uncg.edu                               cwing@indiana.edu
1        Introduction

In March and April 2020, state governments implemented social distancing policies to
control the spread of COVID-19 in the United States. These government actions, com-
bined with private responses to the risk of infection, effectively shut down a large share of
U.S. economic and social activity. Research based on other epidemics shows that human
mobility plays an important role in the spread of many infectious diseases (Wesolowski
et al., 2016). In recent work on the COVID-19 epidemic, Gupta et al. (2020) examine
the effects of a variety of state and local policy actions (emergency declarations, school
closures, restaurant dining-in prohibitions, non-essential business closures, and stay-at-
home mandates) on cell phone-based measures of mobility and interaction. Their event
studies suggest that state distancing policies led to small reductions in mobility that grew
over time, and also that early and information-focused state policies may have had the
largest causal influence on mobility patterns. There is also emerging evidence that state
shutdown policies have helped reduce the transmission of the SARS-COV-2 virus over the
past several weeks (Courtemanche et al., 2020; Dave et al., 2020; Friedson et al., 2020).
Inducing higher levels of social distancing and keeping transmission rates low may help
protect the viability of local health care systems by reducing peak utilization of limited
health care resources like Intensive Care Unit (ICU) beds and ventilators. Thus, there is
evidence that social distancing policies yield important social benefits, slowing the pace
of the epidemic, preventing surges of healthcare demand, and perhaps ultimately saving
lives.
    Nevertheless, states’ broad-based (non-targeted) social distancing responses likely
have very high costs. Over 27 million people have filed new unemployment insurance
claims since February, according to the U.S. Department of Labor. Much of this rise ap-
pears to be a nationwide response to the epidemic, but research is beginning to emerge on
the role of early social distancing policies (Rojas et al., 2020; Kahn et al., 2020). Recent
job losses are lower among those whose work can at least partially be completed remotely



                                             2
and among those working in essential industries (Montenovo et al., 2020). But overall the
situation is dire: job losses between February and April 2020 already dwarf the job losses
from peak to trough of the entire Great Recession. Mass unemployment will place enor-
mous strain on household and national finances, and the experience of unemployment is
damaging to mental and physical health (Sullivan and Von Wachter, 2009; Krueger et al.,
2011). Given this situation, the pressure on state governments and individual households
to restart economic activity is high (Mervosh et al., 2020).
   Most states started to lift some of their social distancing policies in late April and
early May 2020. But the decision to reopen is controversial. Proponents of reopening
contend that strict shutdown policies are unnecessarily harmful to a state’s economy,
especially if the state appears to have stabilized or experienced declines in daily death
or new cases (Tankersley, 2020; Cajner et al., 2020). At the same time, public health
officials who advocate for more cautious policy raise concerns about a second wave of
infections (Treisman, 2020).
   In this study, we examine the early effects of state reopening policies on mobility
patterns. We discuss the nature and timing of reopening policies across the country, and
we use multiple cell-phone-based data sources to measure various dimensions of mobility.
Our paper makes four main empirical contributions. First, we document that there
has been a clear increase in mobility levels in most states since mid-April. Whatever the
cause of the increase, the data make it clear that a reopening phase really has begun. The
resurgence of mobility is small relative to the decline that occurred during the lockdown
that took place in early March, but it is observable across a broad range of cell-phone-
based metrics.
   Second, the size of the increase in mobility across counties is strongly associated with
temperature and precipitation patterns. For each county in the country, we computed the
change in average mobility between April 15 and May 6. In the average county, mobility
increased by about 3 to 30 percentage points depending on the measure of mobility (except
a 3% decline in mobility in residential areas). We found that counties where temperature


                                            3
increased by 4 degrees Celsius (1 standard deviation, SD), the change in mobility (mixing
index) was about 2% (0.11 SD). That reopening is sensitive to weather conditions may
suggest the simple fact that good weather is a complement to mobility-based activities.
Various outdoor recreation activities (beaches, pools, and parks) are simply more fun in
good weather.
    Third, we estimate event study models to trace out the ways in which mobility pat-
terns respond to state reopening policies. These estimates suggest that four days after
reopening, reopening policies seem to increase most measures of mobility by 6 to 8%,
although the effects vary across outcomes. These results help to highlight the importance
of using multiple measures of mobility, as each metric may carry different implications
for transmission. Comparing results across pairs of contiguous counties, we find that the
changes in mobility are larger in models that account for spillover effects on neighboring
counties, indicating that even “untreated” counties experience increases in mobility when
a neighboring state reopens.
    Fourth, the reopening effects are largest among states that were late adopters of closure
policies. This suggests that closure policies may have represented more of a binding
constraint in those states. One possibility is that policies in late adopting states distorted
private behavior more because people were less willing to engage in social distancing on
their own. This could reflect differences in actual or perceived risk of infection, differences
in the “affordability” of social distancing in some state populations, or differences in the
way that the policies were enforced.



2     Background

2.1    Effects of State Closure Policies

In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, all states took official actions to encourage or
mandate social distancing through emergency declarations, school closures, non-essential
business closures, restaurant dining-in prohibitions, and stay-at-home orders and advi-

                                              4
sories. Stay-at-home orders have received a great deal of attention in public debates, but
they are typically the final policy in a series of state and local actions (Gupta et al., 2020).
Eight states did not issue stay-at-home orders at all: Arkansas, Iowa, Nebraska, North
Dakota, South Dakota, Oklahoma, Utah, and Wyoming. These states did take several
other policy actions, however. Connecticut, Kentucky, Massachusetts, and New Mexico
adopted stay-at-home recommendations but did not actually impose a mandate (Raifman
et al., 2020). Adolph et al. (2020) studies the determinants of policy implementation and
finds that state policies are spatially correlated: states were more likely to adopt a policy
if a neighboring state also adopted it.
   To the best of our knowledge, four papers have examined determinants of mobility
reductions during state closures (Gupta et al., 2020; Painter and Qiu, 2020; Abouk and
Heydari, 2020). Specifically, Gupta et al. (2020) provide a comprehensive overview of the
kinds of policies states enacted and their timing. They examine five different measures of
mobility from Safegraph and PlaceIQ. Using event study regressions to examine several
state information events and policies at both county and state levels, they find little evi-
dence that stay-at-home mandates induce distancing. In contrast, early and information-
focused actions have larger effects: first case announcements, emergency declarations, and
school closures reduced mobility by 1-5% after 5 days and 7-45% after 20 days. Painter
and Qiu (2020) uses Safegraph data on the fraction of cell devices that remain at home
all day and finds that there is an immediate 5.1 percentage point increase in this variable
following a stay-at-home order, which is 15% of the reported average overall. Andersen
(2020) use a difference in difference framework and Safegraph data on number of device
visits per county per day to examine the impact of stay-at-home orders, banning gather-
ings of more than 50 or 500 people, closing schools, restricting dining in restaurants, and
closing gyms and entertainment venues. That work suggests that there is a 19.3% change
from stay-at-home laws and effects of up to 11% from other laws. Abouk and Heydari
(2020) examines mobility indices from Google in a difference in difference framework,
studying statewide stay-at-home orders, more limited stay-at-home orders, non-essential


                                               5
business closures, large gathering bans, school closure mandates, and restaurant and bar
limits. They find that stay-at-home mandates increase the percent of individuals who are
present at home by 600%, with statistically insignificant effect from any other policy.
   There are several differences between these existing studies on the largest determinants
of mobility slowdowns experienced from early March to early April, and the literature
has not fully resolved reasons for differences in conclusions. Studies also emphasize the
importance of political variables in understanding mobility responses; the role of weather
as an instrument for mobility holds promise in newly emerging research (Kapoor et al.,
2020).
   There is also evidence that stay-at-home orders, particularly those implemented earlier
in the pandemic, reduce COVID-19 case counts and mortality. Dave et al. (2020) demon-
strates that early stay-at-home orders reduce COVID-19 case counts and mortality, while
later stay-at-home orders have no effect. Using Safegraph mobility data, they also find
that stay-at-home orders increase the share of devices that stay home by 5.2%. Similarly,
Courtemanche et al. (2020) find that stay-at-home orders reduce the COVID-19 case
growth rate by 3.0 percentage points in the first five days after implementation and that
the effect increases to an 8.6% reduction after 21 days; closing restaurants has similar ef-
fects on the growth of COVID-19 cases, although with a flatter trajectory. Friedson et al.
(2020) uses a synthetic control method to estimate the effect of California’s stay-at-home
order on COVID-19 case counts. In their study, they find that the stay-at-home order
reduces COVID-19 cases by approximately 20 to 45 fewer cases per 100,000 two to three
weeks after adoption. In log linear models, their estimates indicate that stay-at-home
orders reduce COVID-19 case counts by 40 to 50%. Collectively, these papers suggest
that stay-at-home orders reduce disease transmission, with the implication that they do
so by increasing social distancing.




                                             6
2.2    State Reopening Policies

By mid May 2020, 36 states had started to unwind some of the policies adopted during the
shutdown (Mervosh et al., 2020; Raifman et al., 2020). But the details of the reopening
policies vary across states. In this study, we mostly define reopening as the first action a
state takes to resume non-essential business activity. This is not the only way to measure
the concept of reopening, of course. Another option is to use the date when stay-at-home
(SAH) orders are lifted. In most states, SAH orders end on the same day that some non-
essential businesses are allowed to open. A third approach would focus on how gradually
vs. suddenly a state reopens its economy.
   One advantage of the first reopening action definition is that – in a difference in differ-
ence framework – the first action may serve as a reduced form measure of the collection
of reopening actions that follow. Another advantage is that the first reopening step may
send a strong signal that the government thinks it is safe to start returning to regular
life. It is possible that people may respond more to the initial reopening announcement
than to incremental changes in the degree of opening. Even before official state closures,
attention to the coronavirus as measured by internet search behavior in a state increased
suddenly when the state announced its first positive case (Bento et al., 2020). Earlier
work on state closures suggests that mobility effects are largest for information-laden
policy actions (Gupta et al., 2020). Of course, this argument is mainly conjecture. It
is certainly plausible that opening restaurants open at 20% capacity will have a smaller
effect on mobility than opening restaurants at 80% capacity.
   The effects of reopening may depend on how binding the various shutdown mandates
actually were in practice. If reductions in mobility were primarily driven by “private”
responses to the change in public health conditions, then it is possible that lifting a
state social distancing mandate will not generate large increases in mobility. People
may continue to keep their distance and avoid group gathering places because they are
concerned about the health risks of the virus. It is also possible that maintaining high
levels of social distancing for a longer period of time may accumulate some curbed demand

                                              7
for various good and services. News reports from Georgia indicate that there were lines of
people waiting to get hair cuts after the state allowed hair salons to reopen (Stevens, 2020),
complete with visible indicators of pent-up demand due to unkempt hair or fading hair
dye. Because these reopenings occur in late spring, the warmer weather may discourage
social distancing (Kapoor et al., 2020). It is also likely that individuals will engage in less
social distancing after a reopening if they fail to take account of the infection externality
that they impose on others (Bethune and Korinek, 2020).
    Wisconsin provides a case study of the effects of rapidly reducing social distancing due
to two rulings by the state’s Supreme Court. The first ruling, on April 6, constrained the
use of mail-in voting for the election to be held the next day. The second ruling, on May
14, overturned the governor’s extension of the statewide stay-at-home order. Cotti et al.
(2020) assesses the effect of the in-person voting mandate and find significant increases
in the share of positive COVID-19 tests and new COVID-19 cases in counties that had
more in-person voting after the primary. There is no academic literature on the effect
of the second court ruling, but CBS News reported that bars and restaurants across the
state were “packed” following the ruling (O’Kane, 2020).



3     Data

3.1    State Policies

We collected and coded data on state reopening policies, starting with New York Times
descriptions of reopening plans. We gathered additional information on the reopening
schedules for each state through internet searches. We define the state’s reopening date
as the earliest date at which that state issued a reopening policy of any type. The dates
we arrived at as the first reopening event for each state are identical to the ones depicted
in figures used by the New York Times article. Panel A of figure 1 lists the states that
have reopened on each date since April 20. By May 13, 36 states had officially reopened
in some form.

                                              8
    Some states never formally adopted a stay-at-home order, but even these states imple-
mented partial business closures (i.e. restaurant closures) and some non-essential business
restrictions. Of course, measures of mobility and economic activity have fallen in these
states as well because of private social distancing choices. In addition, the lack of an offi-
cial closure does not mean that state governments cannot take actions to try to hasten the
return to regular levels of activity. For example, South Dakota did not have a statewide
stay-at-home order, but the governor announced a “back to normal” plan that set May 1
as the reopening date for many businesses. Our study period commences on April 15 to
ensure that we capture reopenings across all states. We provide the information we have
compiled from various sources on GitHub.1
    South Carolina was the first state to adopt a reopening policy, on April 20. It was
also one of the last states to adopt a stay-at-home order.2 This April 20 reopening was
partial. It started by allowing retail stores to open at 20% of capacity. By April 30, eight
states had reopened to some degree (AL, MS, TN, MT, OK, AK, GA, and SC). Eight
more states reopened on May 1; by May 13, a total of 36 states had reopened. In most of
our analyses the study period ends on May 15, which means that we are able to estimate
impacts for at least 6 days post reopening using variation from 31 state reopening polices;
we thus report effects as of 4 days after the policy.
    Stay-at-home orders and non-essential business closures are related but distinct. Sev-
eral states issued ‘stay-at-home’ mandates after they issued orders closing all non-essential
businesses, or after closing some non-essential businesses (such as gyms) and closing
restaurants for on-site dining (Panels B and C of Figure 1). Although for the most part,
stay-at-home orders coincided with orders to close all non-essential businesses, restaurants
and other select categories of business closures started well before stay-at-home orders.
Many business closures started in mid-March, along with school closures (see Figure 2.1
of Gupta et al., 2020).
   1
     We    provide     the   information    we     have     compiled    from    various    sources    at
https://github.com/nguyendieuthuy/ReOpeningPlans.
   2
     Although it issued an emergency declaration fairly early (March 13), South Carolina did not issue a
stay-at-home order until April 7. (See Gupta et al., 2020).


                                                   9
       Panel D of Figure 1 shows that by May 13, 63.5% of the U.S. population lived in a
state that had adopted some form of reopening policy. However, the pace of reopening
has been gradual. Only 36.5% of the population lives in states that opened the retail
sector by May 13, and only 33.6% are in states that opened 3 or more sectors. Panel
B of Figure 1 shows that by May 18, the last date for which we have policy data as of
this writing, most states had implemented some form of reopening. Of the 36 states that
reopened by May 13, 16 states reopened across three or more of the seven sectors that
we track.3 However, 20 states pursued a more limited strategy by opening only one or
two sectors.4
       States that either implemented fewer social distancing measures or implemented those
measures later also tended to reopen earlier, based on time since the first of four major
social distancing measures – non-essential business closures, restaurant closures, social
gathering restrictions, and stay-at-home orders or advisories. These results may reflect
either a lack of political desire to engage in distancing or a more limited outbreak (An-
dersen, 2020; Adolph et al., 2020; Allcott et al., 2020) .


3.2       Mobility Measures

We use data from four cell signal aggregators who provide their data for free to support
COVID-19 research. Each company has several different measures of mobility, which may
provide answers to different questions and have different implications. None of these data
sources provides a metric of social mobility that is theoretically ideal in any sense. Each
metric may capture a different form of underlying behavior, with different implications for
the transmission of the virus and economic activity. For example, the fraction of people
who stay at home may be less important than the degree of population mixing that
occurs in any given location. In addition, each company collects data from different sets
   3
     Following the New York Times, we track outdoor recreation, retail, food/drink establishments, per-
sonal care establishments, houses of worship, entertainment venues, and industrial areas.
   4
     For seven states we could not clearly identify the sectors that would be affected by the reopening
decision.



                                                  10
of app users, and it is possible that some of the cell phone panels are more mobile than
others. Given these complexities, we think it is particularly important in this literature
to compare across several measures of mobility. A multiple measure approach provides
a simple way to assess the robustness and generality of a result; it also may provide
opportunities to learn from differences in results across measures. In this paper, we
examine data on human movement from different data sources, including Apple’s Mobility
Trends Reports, Google’s Community Mobility Reports, PlaceIQ (GitHub repository),
and Safegraph (provided upon free research agreement).


Apple Mobility Trends

Apple’s Mobility Trends Reports (Site, 2020) are published daily and reflect requests for
driving directions in Apple Maps. This measure shows the relative volume of driving
directions requests per U.S. state compared to a baseline volume on January 13, 2020;
no county-level equivalent is available.


Google Community Mobility Reports

We extract county- and state-level measures of mobility from Google’s Community Mo-
bility Reports (Google’s Site, 2020). We use the data that reflect the percent change
in visits to places within a geographic area, including: grocery and pharmacy; transit
stations (public transport hubs such as subway, bus, and train stations); retail and recre-
ation (e.g. restaurants, shopping centers, and theme parks); and residential (places of
residence). The baseline for computing these changes is the median level of activity on
the corresponding day of the week from January 3 to February 6, 2020.


PlaceIQ

We use two anonymized, aggregated location exposure indices from PlaceIQ data (Cou-
ture et al., 2020): (1) a “mixing” index that for a given day detects the likely exposure
of a smartphone device in a county or state to other devices that day and (2) out-of-


                                            11
state and out-of-county travel indices that measure among smart devices that pinged in a
given geographic location the percent of these devices that pinged in another geographic
location at least once during the previous 14 days.


Safegraph

We use Safegraph data to measure the median hours spent at home by devices as well
as the number of devices at the census block group level that are detected to be entirely
at home during the day or to have left the house. We aggregate these to county or state
by-day levels.


3.3    County-Level Characteristics

We collect a vector of county-level covariates to understand heterogeneity in a cross-
sectional, descriptive analysis. We collect weather data (temperature and precipitation)
from the National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI, 2020). We estimate
the number of nursing home residents in a county from the 2017 Nursing Home Compare
database (CMS, 2020). County incarceration rates are obtained from the Incarceration
Trends dataset of the U.S. Department of Justice Bureau of Justice Statistics. We derive
the socio-demographic data from the 2020 Area Health Resources Files (HRSA, 2020)
and County Health Rankings database (County Health Rankings, 2020). We use the
latest year available in each original source.



4     Conceptual Framework

It has long been recognized that human mobility affects the dynamics of infectious dis-
eases (Wesolowski et al., 2016). With regard to the COVID-19 pandemic, a recent study
has shown that sustained physical distancing interventions are likely to reduce the mag-
nitude of the epidemic’s peak (Prem et al., 2020). However, human mobility results from
individual decisions regarding costs and benefits related to certain activities. For exam-


                                             12
ple, many people are grappling with the decision of when to resume travelling (perhaps
by public transport) to locations away from the home. This decision relates to measures
captured by our mobility data: the detection of cell phones in far-away states from their
usual location. Measures of out-of-state work or leisure travel will likely be shaped by
employer reactions to changes in government restrictions, and to consumer perceptions
of risk from exposure. Businesses decisions to reopen shape demand for labor, work-
travel and leisure travel; following a reopening, we would expect an increase in travel
measures. If many businesses remain partially shut down because consumer demand for
their services is depressed even when states allow reopening, then work-and leisure related
mobility measures may not change as much.
   In addition, mobility measures may depend on work and consumption decisions. Mo-
bility might not rise much if governments lift restrictions on non-essential business op-
erations but many consumers do not feel that the ’rents’ from shopping in person are
sufficient to justify the health risks of the added exposure. Likewise, people in jobs that
can be performed remotely or who have other sources of income may opt to continue
staying home (Montenovo et al., 2020). Public policies that are not related to reopening,
such as the stimulus payment, enhanced unemployment insurance benefits, and paid sick
leave may affect decisions about mobility during the reopening phase as well (Andersen
et al., 2020).
   Geographic variation in the prevalence of essential industry workers may mean that
reopening leads to larger changes in some locations than others. In rural areas, the
effects of the stay-at-home orders in terms of reduction in mobility was less marked,
likely due to the nature of rural work. We might expect that mobility effects would be
larger after lockdowns of a longer nature, but there is selection into closing and opening
dates: the states that were shut down for longer may proceed more gradually in other
ways (especially since the degree of virus spread is information that may lead to policy
change).




                                            13
5     Research Design and Methods

5.1    Event Study Analysis

We use event study regression models to examine how measures of mobility evolve during
the period leading up to and following state reopening events. Let Es be the reopening
date in state s. Then T SEst = t − Es measures the number of days between date t
and reopening. For example, five days before reopening, T SEst = −5. Five days after
reopening, T SEst = 5. We set T SEst = −1 for states that never reopen. We fit event
study regression models with the following structure:


            P−2                             P8
    Yst =    a=−15   αa 1 (T SEst = −a) +    b=0   βb 1 (T SEst = b) + Wst σ + θs + γt + st   (1)


In the model, Yst is a measure of mobility and θs is a set of state fixed effects, which are
meant to capture fixed differences in the level of outcomes across states that are stable
over the study period. γt is a set of date fixed effects, which capture trends in the outcome
that are common across all states. st is a residual error term. αa and βb are event study
coefficients that trace out deviations from the common trends that states experience in
the days leading up to and following a given policy or information event. Specifically,
αa traces out differential pre-event trends in the outcome that are associated with states
that go on to experience the policy change or information event examined in the model.
βb traces out differential post-event trends in the outcome that occur after a state adopts
the policy or experiences the information shock. The reference period in all event studies
is the period before reopening, when T SEst = −1.
    Our main specifications are based on a balanced panel of states that are observed
across the entire range of dates available for the outcome variable. To avoid bias from
composition change from one event time coefficient to the next, we set the length of the
focal event time window to run from 15 days before the event to 8 days after the event,
which keeps compositional variation low across all samples. The data span the period


                                                 14
from April 15 to as close to present as possible for each outcome because April 15 appears
to be the approximate time when shutdowns had achieved a stable pattern in slowed
movement across the nation (Schaul et al., 2020). To adjust for seasonality, we control
for state-by-day weather (average temperature and precipitation). These covariates are
represented by Wst in the regression.
   We cluster standard errors at the state level. We do not weight states by population.
Our estimates should be interpreted as reflecting the experience of the average state
rather than the average person. To help summarize results, we assess the presence of a
pre-trend based on the statistical significance of the pre-policy event study coefficients.
In our summary results, we say that a measure exhibits a pre-trend if at least 30% of the
coefficients in the pre-period were statistically significant.


Subpopulation Analysis

In addition to the state-level event-study analysis, we conduct a series of heteroheneity
analyses, by stratifying the sample in several ways. First, we run separate regressions
for rural counties and metropolitan counties, expecting that the nature of rural activi-
ties might be more essential in nature and less elastic to non-essential business closures.
Counties were separated into metropolitan and rural categories using the National Center
for Health Statistics Urban-Rural Classification Scheme. Second, we run separate regres-
sions for states with longer and shorter stay-at-home orders, expecting that fatigue maybe
captured this way. Longer stay-at-home orders are defined as those implemented more
than 25 days prior to re-opening (the median implementation period). Finally, we run
heterogeneity analysis by baseline COVID-19 death rates, expecting that where deaths
were higher, individuals maybe more reluctant to move even when restrictions are eased.
Higher baseline COVID-19 related death rates are defined as those above the median as
of April 15th, prior to re-opening.




                                              15
5.2        Border County Analysis

We also estimate models using border-county pairs that are adjacent to one another but
belong to different states.5 The border county design provides a way to control for local
area unobserved factors that may confound the effect of reopening on mobility, and also
gives an opportunity to examine the spillover effects that may occur when one state
reopens and another does not.
       Specifically, for a pair of counties c and c0 (in states s and s0 , respectively), we define
the first event date in the pair as Ec,c0 = min(Es , Es0 ) and an indicator Fc,c,c0 = 1 if
Es = Ec,c0 and 0 otherwise.6 We let T SEc,c0 ,t = t − Ec,c0 be the number of days between
date t and the first reopening in the county pair. We set T SEc,c0 ,t = −1 if neither county
has a reopening event in our data. Our county pairs model is a modification of the main
event study to include county pair fixed effects and, in some specifications, pair-by-time
fixed effects:

                        P−2
               Yct =       a=−15   (αa0 1(T SEc,c0 ,t = a) + αa1 1(T SEc,c0 ,t = a) × Fc,c,c0 )
                        P8
                    +      b=0   (βb0 1(T SEc,c0 ,t = b) + βb1 1(T SEc,c0 ,t = b) × Fc,c,c0 )        (2)

                    + Wst σ + θ(c,c0 ) + γt + c,c0 ,t


In the model, Yct is a measure of mobility for county c at time t. θ(c,c0 ) is a set of county
pair fixed effects that captures fixed differences in the level of outcomes and timing of
reopening across counties. γt is a set of date fixed effects that captures trends in outcomes
that are common across all counties in the sample. αa0 is a set of event study coefficients
that trace out how trends in a given pair deviate from the national trend in the lead up to
a reopening event in counties that do not reopen, while αa1 provide similar estimates for
how different the first county to reopen is, relative to the adjacent county that reopens
   5
      Our approach is similar to Dube et al. (2010), which uses contiguous counties to study the effects
of minimum wages, and Lin and Meissner (2020), which studies how non-pharmaceutical interventions
affect distancing.
    6
      Since counties can appear in multiple county pairs, a county may be the early county in one pair,
but the late county in another pair. It is also possible that both counties reopened at the same time, in
which case Fc,c,c,0 = 1 for both counties.



                                                      16
later. βb0 traces out changes in counties that did not reopen after the first county reopened.
Therefore βb0 includes an estimate of the common spillover effect across all county pairs
of the first county in the pair reopening. βb1 traces the change in outcomes associated
with the reopening event in the county that reopened first.
   We also estimate a second version of the county pairs model that allows each county
pair to have a separate set of date fixed effects. In this model, the αa0 and βb0 terms are
subsumed by the county pair by date fixed effects. These fixed effects flexibly capture
trends in the county that reopened later, including the spillover effect on that county
from policy changes in its pair county that opened earlier. Therefore we refer to the first
model without the county pair by date fixed effects as assuming “no spillovers,” while the
second model assumes that there are “spillovers.” Our sample for the county analysis is
constructed in a comparable manner to the main, state-level models, including using a
balanced panel. Following the state-level analysis, standard errors are clustered on state
and estimates are unweighted.


5.3    County Cross-Sectional Regressions

To understand how the mobility changes we observe during the reopening phase differ
across geographic areas with varying non-policy factors, we fit cross sectional regressions
of “long differences” in mobility measures at the county level. We estimate the long
differences ∆Yc between April 15 and May 6 in 12 measures: mobility to retail/recreation,
mobility to grocery/recreation, mobility to transit stations, mobility to workplace, mixing
index, out-of-county travel, fraction of devices left home, fraction of devices at workplace,
indicator of number of COVID-19 cases above the median (high in cases), and indicator
of number of COVID-19 deaths above the median (high in deaths). We link these long
differences ∆Yc with a vector of county-level covariates. In order to investigate the overall




                                             17
change in mobility patterns across counties, we fit the following regression:


              ∆Yc = β1 ∆W eatherc + β2 SESc + β3 U rbanc + β4 P oliticalc
                                                                                         (3)
                                       +β5 Demographyc + c


In the model, ∆W eatherc is a vector of covariates depicting the change in daily average
precipitation and temperature between April 15 and May 6. U rbanc is a vector of covari-
ates reflecting county population, population density, and urbanicity. SESc is a vector of
covariates describing median household income, poverty rate, health uninsurance rates,
number of nursing home residents per capita in 2017, incarcerated rate in 2017, and
whether the county is a major destination for recreation or retirement. P oliticalc is the
Republican vote share in the 2016 presidential election, and Demographyc includes demo-
graphic composition. We standardized all variables before estimating this cross-sectional
regression to make the estimated coefficients more comparable.



6     Results

Figure 2 shows the national and state time series of each mobility measure from February
to mid-May. Mobility fell dramatically during the lockdown phase, and there is clear
evidence across multiple measures that mobility began to increase in mid-April. The
timing of the increase in mobility varies across states and across different measures of
the outcome. Although the axis scales differ, the times at which dramatic changes occur
are about the same across all measures. To understand the connection between recent
increases in mobility and state reopening policies, we turn to event study regressions,
county-pair analysis, and cross-sectional regressions of “long differences”.


6.1    Event study analyses

Figure 3 plots event study coefficients for the Apple Mobility driving direction requests.
There was a large increase in seeking driving directions that grew with time; there is little

                                             18
evidence of a pre-trend.
   Figure 4 shows the event study coefficients for the Google Mobility outcomes - Mobil-
ity to Retail/Recreation, Grocery/Pharmacy, Transit Stations, and Stay-in Residential
Areas. The results suggest that reopening leads to substantial increases in mobility to
retail and recreation destinations; there is not much evidence of a pre-trend. There may
also have been an increase in mobility to grocery stores and pharmacies and to transit
stations, but these estimates are noisier, and it is hard to distinguish the pre-trend and
post-trend.
   Figure 5 shows the event studies for the Safegraph measures - Fraction left Home
and Median Hours at Home. These estimates are noisy, but there is some evidence that
reopening policies increase the fraction of people/devices that left the home each day.
In contrast, there is no indication that reopening leads to much change in median hours
spent at home.
   Figure 6 shows the event studies for the PlaceIQ measures - Mixing Index, out-of-state
movement, and out-of-county movement. The results indicate that reopening policies gen-
erate a substantial increase in the mixing index; there is little evidence of a systematic
pre-trend in mixing leading up to reopening. The out-of-state and out-of-county move-
ment measures do not respond much to reopening.
   To help summarize the results, the first column of table 1 reports the estimated effect
of a reopening policy 4 days after the event for each outcome presented in the event study
plots. The effect estimates are presented in percentage terms, relative to the average
level on April 15, 2020, to help make the magnitudes as interpretable as possible. Grey
shaded cells in the table indicate models in which there is some evidence of a pre-trend;
these results should be viewed with some suspicion. We group the outcomes in table
1 into measures of mobility (i.e. driving directions, mixing index, etc.) and measures
of the absence of mobility (median hours at home, stay in residential area). We expect
a positive sign on the reopening event for measures of mobility and a negative sign on
measures of the absence of mobility.


                                           19
   Overall the state-level event study results paint a very clear picture. Four days after
reopening, there is a statistically significant increase in most measures of mobility, and
most outcomes that are not statistically significant are noisy but also positive. Across
all of the mobility outcomes, the effect size ranges from about a 1% to a 22% increase in
mobility, and several outcomes cluster around 6% to 8%. Both of the measures of absence
of mobility have a negative sign, suggesting that reopening has reduced the tendency to
stay at home as well as the number of hours people spend at home each day. However,
the reopening effect on these measures appears to be smaller, and we cannot reject the
null that reopening has not affected these outcomes at all. One interpretation is that
reopening has increased the diversity of options that people have available to them, and
they are more likely to visit a variety of locations that they had avoided in previous
weeks. At the same time, people have not increased the amount of time they spend
outside their home much. One concern is that reopening appears to have a large effect
on the mixing index, which is a proxy for actual interactions between people (devices).
This may be worrisome if the mixing index represents a particularly relevant proxy for
high transmission rates.
   In addition to the state-level analysis, we also fit event study specifications to county-
level data and stratify the sample in several ways. The second and third columns in table
1 show effect size estimates from models that use only data from rural counties and urban
counties, respectively (Appendix B). These results suggest that reopening policies have
had broadly similar effects on most measures of mobility in urban vs rural areas. The
estimates from urban areas tend to be more precise, but the magnitudes of the effect sizes
are similar. One exception is that the increase in the mixing index and in out-of-county
movement are large in urban areas and negligible in rural areas.
   The fourth and fifth columns show estimates from models that are limited to states
that had stay-at-home policies in place for a short vs a long duration (Appendix C).
Here we find that the estimated reopening effects are much larger in states that were late
adopters of stay-at-home mandates and so were in lockdown for only a short time. This


                                            20
may indicate that voluntary limitation of mobility is lower in areas that took a weaker
stance during the lockdown phase. For instance, it is possible that many people in early
closure states were and are staying home of their own accord, and so lifting the mandate
does not lead to large increases in mobility. In contrast, in states that imposed a lockdown
later, restaurant and business closures may have had a binding effect on people’s behavior.
In late-lockdown states, people may have been more willing to visit restaurants if they
had been open. Now that the restaurants are allowed to open, people are returning to
them. This account seems logical to us, but it is largely conjecture.


6.2    County Pairs Results

We present event-study-style estimates of the effect of reopening in our county border
pairs model (equation (2)) in Appendix D. Figure D1 presents these estimates for our
Google Mobility data assuming that there are no spillovers. The first panel presents
results for mobility to retail and recreation locations. The pre-trend, which reflects how
mobility differs in the first county to reopen in a pair relative to the other county, is flat but
somewhat imprecisely estimated. However, after roughly one week, there is a statistically
significant increase in mobility to retail and recreation locations of approximately five
percent relative to the January 3 to February 6 baseline period. The remaining panels
typically provide little evidence for pre-trends, but the estimates are also sufficiently noisy
that one cannot make a definitive statement about changes in mobility from these models
that assume no spillovers on behavior. Figures D2 and D3 present similar estimates for
the fraction of people leaving home, the median time at home, the mixing index, and
out-of-county movement. The estimates from these models are too imprecise to permit a
reliable interpretation.
   Figure D4 presents results for the same Google Mobility data, but now we explicitly
take spillover effects into account by allowing for a county-pair-specific set of time fixed
effects. The results for retail and recreation mobility indicate that there were increases
in mobility immediately after a state reopened, although the effect appears to be slightly

                                               21
smaller than in the no-spillover model. The implication of these two models is that even
counties that do not reopen also experience an increase in mobility, which is consistent
with people in neighboring counties crossing state lines to go to retail or recreational
locations in newly opened states. Results for mobility to groceries, and pharmacies also
increase. We also find a reduction in mobility in residential areas, which may indicate
that people are spending less time in neighborhoods and more time at formal retail and
recreation venues, or groceries.
   Figure D5 conducts the same exercise using the fraction of devices that left the home
and median hours at home as our measures of mobility. As has been the case in our
other models, these estimates are noisy. However, for both measures there is limited, if
any, evidence of a pre-trend–so neighboring counties were on similar trajectories in the
pre-period–and there are some statistically significant changes in mobility in the post-
period. Figure D6 presents results for our mixing index and out-of-county mobility. We
find evidence of significant increases in mixing in the post period. This effect appears
to get larger over time, so that, after four days, there is an approximately three-point
increase in mobility as measured by the mixing index, or 8% of the mean, while there is
no change in movement out of the county.
   The effects from these event studies are summarized in columns (6) and (7) of Table 1.
These estimates indicate that mobility to transit stations in counties that reopened rose
by 9% of the April 15th mean level, relative to “closed” counties. In the last column, which
allows for spillover effects to untreated counties, we find more precisely estimated and,
in many cases, larger estimates for the change in mobility. In all cases, our results are
consistent with the state-level analyses and demonstrate that reopening increases mobility
in states. Furthermore, there appear to be positive spillover effects onto neighboring
counties, since in models that account for spillovers (column 7) our estimated changes in
mobility are larger in magnitude.




                                            22
6.3    County Cross-Sectional Analysis

In the average county, mobility increased by about 3 to 30 percentage points depending
on the measure of mobility (except a 3 percentage-point decline in mobility in residential
areas) between April 15 and May 6. Figure 7 and Table 2 show standardized regression
coefficients (per standard deviation change in the explanatory variable) from models of
the total change in mobility measures between April 15 to present. Across the 2,031
counties with complete data, we observe that better weather has important effects on
nearly all of mobility measures. As temperature rises in a county, people appear to mix
more (a 0.11 SD increase for a one-SD change in temperature) and take more purposeful
drives to grocery and retail venues (both increasing ∼ 0.2 SD), as well as take more out-
of-county trips. The opposite trend is observed with increased precipitation, where we
observe people staying at or around home (increase in driving around residential area by
0.23 SD).
   In more densely populated counties, we observe an increase in trips to retail locations
(0.049 SD) and a marginal decline in trips to grocery locations (-0.073 SD). The size of
the metro area affects the magnitude of mixing increase (0.16 in larger areas to 0.057 in
smaller areas). In general, we see an observed increase in movement by both white and
black communities, with the sharpest increase to retail. Not surprisingly, in recreation
counties, we note an increase in overall activity.
   We found interesting partisan differences in Americans’ response to the COVID-19
pandemic. In counties with a higher Republican vote share, we observe an increase
in mixing (0.32 SD) and traveling across counties (0.22 SD) accompanied by a slight
increase in mobility to workplace (0.087 SD); these results are per one SD increase in the
Republican vote share in the 2016 presidential election.
   In counties with higher poverty rates, we see an increase in grocery shopping (0.16
SD) but for the most part still decreased mobility to other venues and a decline in mixing
(-0.15 SD) relative to other areas. On the other hand, counties with a higher share of
uninsured individuals seem to observe less of an increase in grocery shopping, relative to

                                             23
others.
    For the most part, difference in average age across counties does not appear to have
a big effect on mobility patterns, except in females ages 55-64 increasing their mobility
in general and mixing (0.57 SD). At 65+, however, both females and males appear to
become more risk averse, with a marked decline in mobility across all venues and a
discernible reduction in mixing in counties with a greater proportion of males 65+ (-0.74
SD). Further research that uses individual-level data is needed to explore the relationship
between demography and socioeconomic factors and mobility changes, as there are severe
limits to what can be learned through county-level comparisons.



7     Discussion

From the the early phases of the COVID-19 epidemic, social distancing has been a central
strategy. Cell phone based metrics show large declines in mobility during the lockdown
phase, and evidence suggests that both government policy and private responses played
crucial roles. These actions have likely reduced the spread of the virus and therefore
have important social benefits. However, maintaining high levels of social distancing
places a heavy burden on families, businesses, and governments. As a result, there is
enormous pressure to lift some of the social distancing policies that were imposed during
the lockdown phase.
    State governors have faced difficult decisions when considering reopening policies. On
the one hand, residents have experienced economic losses due to business closures and
curtailment of other activities. Unemployment rates have skyrocketed (Rojas et al., 2020;
Montenovo et al., 2020), and poverty rates in the U.S. have been projected to reach their
highest levels in half a century (Parolin and Wimer, 2020). State budgets will likely face
extraordinary stress in the coming months, and there have been protests and other signs
of political unrest in some states. On the other hand, public health officials caution that
it is too early to relax restrictions. The risk of a second wave of infections is still in the


                                             24
horizon, given the estimated population of infected people and an estimated high rate
of asymptomatic COVID-19 carriage (Carroll, 2020; Gandhi et al., 0). Early reopening
states are now reporting increases an uptick in cases (Slotkin, 2020). There is still no
vaccine available, and even under optimistic scenarios, it is unlikely that a vaccine be ready
for some time (Yu and Yang, 2020). Further, there is widespread concern regarding high
levels of compliance necessary (i.e. masks, maintaining physical distance, handwashing,
etc.) that would make reopening safer (Briscese et al., 2020).
       Mobility measures from cell signals, a data source fairly new to the wider research
community, have been used extensively in the last two months to understand mobility
patterns in the COVID-19 era. In this study, we harness these data to study the causal
effect of state reopening policies on measures of mobility. Even though state reopening
decisions were made fairly recently, close-to-real-time data allow us to study movement
patterns relevant to understanding the policies’ effects as well as the behavioral decisions
that may be guiding individuals and businesses.
       Our analysis clearly shows that mobility levels started rising in most states beginning
in mid-April. So far, the increase in mobility is still small compared with the declines
that occurred during the lockdown phase; activity levels are not back to normal in any
meaningful sense. However, the resurgence of mobility is observable across a broad range
of indices. We also find that the recent increases in mobility are strongly associated with
temperature and precipitation patterns. Researchers should view this result with caution:
the seasonal properties of cell-device-based measures of human mobility are yet not well
                                                                                    7
understood. Access to a longer time series of data is not yet available.
       The most notable results in our study come from event study regressions. The models
suggest that state reopening policies do produce a fairly immediate increase in mobility.
After four days of reopening, most measures of mobility increase by 6% to 8%. Reopening
effects are the most marked in the states that were late adopters of the major closure
measures. Importantly, this suggests that policy acts as a constraint on behavior to a
   7
    Safegraph is currently releasing 2019 data, which will provide important insights into seasonal pat-
terns.


                                                  25
different degree in those states.
   We note that our study cannot draw conclusions on the extent to which Americans
follow social distancing guidelines, as the cell signal data cannot discern the use of situ-
ational mitigation strategies such as mask use. States have mostly asked business that
reopen to take steps to reduce transmission, and the CDC has issued guidelines on how
to open safely. It is possible that these policies and strategies could mean that mobility
patterns can increase without incurring a substantial increase in new cases (Hagemann,
2020). At the same time, it is fair to assume that disease transmission is positively re-
lated to the mobility measured in this study, and it is important to know to what extent
mobility increases are rooted in policy vs. other factors such as fatigue, warmer weather,
seasonal expectations, and a waning sense of the dangers of the virus.
   Many other important lines of inquiry are emerging as lawmakers assess their COVID-
19 strategies (Baqaee et al., 2020). For example, it is crucial to understand how reopening
policies may affect a resurgence of cases, hospital capacity, and deaths. There is much
concern among lawmakers, public health officials, and the general public that hospital
systems may still become overwhelmed from new cases even in areas that have not expe-
rienced a surge thus far. Indiana’s experience (Carroll, 2020) shows that from a random
testing population study, only approximately 2.8% residents may have been infected at
some point thus far. As human mobility increases, this raises questions regarding what
to expect with regard to transmission rates, hospital capacity, and mortality, as well as
for how fast the massive non-COVID societal costs imposed by closures will recover.
   Research on social distancing policy would benefit from a stronger theoretical analysis
of the incentives and constraints that shape individual and group choices regarding social
distancing. One hypothesis is that people may experience social distancing fatigue, which
could make it harder to maintain high levels of social distancing over a protracted period
of time. Fatigue could stem emotional exhaustion, isolation, or boredom. If the fatigue
theory is an important determinant of behavior, then it would be valuable to develop
social distancing policy instruments that help mitigate fatigue.


                                            26
   At a more general level, it is likely that social distancing can be viewed through the
lens of an economic model of home production. People produce social distance by com-
bining their time with other inputs, and they make decisions about how much social
distance to produce relative to other home production activities and other market activ-
ities. Understanding more about the complements (such as peer group behavior, media
portrayals) and substitutes for social distance and its inputs may be useful for developing
more effective social distancing policies. Likewise, understanding the income elasticity of
social distancing would be informative.
   Finally, it is paramount to dissect the factors that determine individual compliance
with social distancing guidelines, something only possible at aggregate area-wide demo-
graphic levels with cell data. Some degree of variation may reflect heterogeneous prefer-
ences over health and non-health goods. However, it is also possible that people behave
differently because they hold different beliefs about about health risks or are exposed to
certain types of misinformation.




                                            27
8    Tables and Figures

            Figure 1: Timing and U.S. Population covered by States’ COVID-19 Policies
                                                             (b) State Policy and Information Timing

             (a) Dates of Reopenings by State




    (c) Population Covered by Social Distancing Policies    (d) Population Covered by Reopening Plans




Note: Author’s compilations based on New York Times and other media databases. Data covered
 4/20/20-5/13/20 for (a) and (d), 1/21/20-5/18/20 for (b), and 3/15/20-4/15/20 for (c). State re-
 opening data are available on GitHub.




                                                       28
                                       Figure 2: Trend in mobility changes.
        (a) Trend in requests for driving directions                (b) Trend in mobility for retail and recreation




   (c) Trend in mobility for grocery and pharmacy                      (d) Trend in mobility to transit stations




                                        (e) Trend in staying in residential areas.




Note: Author’s calculation based on data from Apple Mobility, Google Mobility, SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility Metrics
 and PlaceIQ smart device data. Each grey line represents a state. Red lines represent states which re-opened, for the
 period after the re-opening. The thick black line represents a “smoothed” 7 day moving average of the states.




                                                           29
                                               Figure 2: (Contd.).
              (f) Trend in mixing index.                              (g) Trend in out-of-state movement.




    (h) Trend in average out-of-county movement.                       (i) Trend in fraction leaving home.




                                        (j) Trend in median hours at home.




Note:  Author’s calculation based on data from Apple Mobility, Google Mobility, SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility Metrics
 and PlaceIQ smart device data. Measures of out-of-state and average out-of-county travel measure 14-day lagged rates
 of travel outside of the “home state” and ”home county”. Each grey line represents a state. Red lines represent states
 which re-opened, for the period after the re-opening. The thick black line represents a “smoothed” 7 day moving average
 of the states.




                                                        30
          Figure 3: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Apple Mobility. Estimation
 sample window is April 8, 2020-May 18, 2020. N =1680. Vertical grey line depicts the day before
 re-opening. All models include state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at
 state level. Baseline dependent variable mean as of April 15, 2020.




                                                 31
          Figure 4: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Google Mobility. Each panel is
 a separate dependent variable. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-May 13, 2020. N =1680.
 Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include state fixed effects and date
 fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level. Baseline dependent variable mean as of April
 15, 2020.




                                                 32
          Figure 5: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility
 Metrics. Each panel is a separate dependent variable. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-May
 17, 2020.




          Figure 6: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from PlaceIQ. Each panel is a
 separate dependent variable. Measure of out-of-state and average out-of-county travel capture 14-
 day lagged rates of travel outside of the “home state” and ”home county”. Estimation sample window
 is April 8, 2020-May 13, 2020. N =1680. Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All
 models include state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.
 Baseline dependent variable mean as of April 15, 2020.




                                                 33
                              Table 1: Effect Sizes: Percentage magnitude effects of any re-opening on social distancing measures.
                                               (1)        (2)      (3)         (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)           (8)           (9)
                                              Any                                                     County Pairs Analysis         High          Low
                                           Re-Opening    Rural   Urban   Shorter SAH Longer SAH       No Spillovers Spillovers   Death Rates   Death Rates
                                                                    Effects After 4 Days
         Geographic Unit                      State     County   County      State       State          County       County         State         State
         Mobility Measures
         Request for driving directions      7%***          -        -        8%***          6%             -           -           10%*          6%*
         Mobility to retail/recreation       8%***        16%    13%**       14%***          2%           12%        13%***          8%*        10%***
         Mobility to Grocery/Pharmacy          15%        10%      15%       24%***          6%           24%         35%*            7%          26%
         Mobility to Transit Stations         6%**         1%       7%        8%***          4%           8%*         9%*           8%**           4%
         Fraction left home                     1%       -2%*    3%***        3%***         -0.2%         0.3%        0.4%            2%           1%
         Mixing Index                       22%***         2%    30%***        14%           6%            8%        8%***         33%**           2%
         Out of state movement                  7%          -        -       31%***          9%                                       3%          15%
         Out of county movement               7%*          2%    24%**          3%           1%           3%           1%            12%           9%
         Absence of Mobility Measures
         Stay in Residential Areas            -3%         1%      -5%        -9%***          5%           -5%         -3%**        -8%*            -1%
         Median hours at home                 -1%         0%     2%***        -2%*           1%          -0.6%         -1%*         -1%           -0.3%
     Note: ** and bolded text denotes effect sizes with * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01. Grey shaded cells denote violation of pre-treatment parallel
34




      trends—we do not denote statistical significance for these cells. Effect sizes are estimated using coefficients in the event-study tables, divided by the
      dependent variable value as of April 15, 2020
                        Figure 7: County Level Correlates of Mobility Measures
            (a) Long difference in mixing index               (b) Long difference in Out-of-county movement




   (c) Long difference in fraction of devices leaving home      (d) Long difference in retail and recreation




Note: Specification: simple OLS using cross-sectional data at county level. Each figure represents
 standardized coefficients and their 95% CIs from a separate regression, where the dependent variable
 is the outcome listed (long differences between April and May 6). Sources of county characteristics:
 PlaceIQ, Safegraph, Area Health Resource File and County Health Rankings; we use the latest year
 available in each original source.




                                                         35
                                                                  Table 2: County Level Correlates of Mobility Measures.
                                            (1)       (2)          (3)      (4)       (5)              (6)          (7)           (8)             (9)             (10)          (11)      (12)
                                          Retail Grocery        Transit Workplace Residential    Out-of-county   Mixing        Devices     Devices leaving      Devices        High      High
                                          driving  driving      driving   driving   driving        movement        index    leaving home   home & workplace   at workplace    in cases in deaths
     Change in precipitation             -0.20*** -0.072***    -0.096*** -0.13***   0.23***        -0.083***     -0.11***      0.057***       -0.062***         -0.19***     -0.062*** -0.14***
     between April 15 and May 6
     Change in average temperature (C)   0.20***    0.21***     0.018     -0.076***   -0.16***      0.083***     0.11***     -0.056***         0.039*           0.16***      -0.099***    -0.025
     between April 15 and May 6
     Poverty                              -0.17**      0.16*     -0.028      0.072     0.29***       -0.14**     -0.15***     -0.16***         -0.13**           0.11**      0.20***      0.22***
     Percent Uninsured                     0.061    -0.15***    -0.094*     0.016       0.020          0.039     0.22***      0.090***        0.063**          -0.077***       -0.021    -0.065**
     Metro Area > 1 Million               -0.065*    -0.0026    -0.0075     -0.023     0.073**      -0.13***      0.16***     0.063***        0.069***            -0.018     0.10***       -0.051
     Metro Area 250k to <1 Million         -0.038     -0.023     -0.030      0.016     0.0051       -0.13***     0.095***        0.027           0.032           -0.0036        0.035      -0.032
     Metro Area LT 250k                     0.018     -0.021    -0.0034    0.0099        0.012      -0.11***     0.057***        0.022          0.032*            0.0044      0.059**     -0.0047
     Percent Republican Vote 2016           0.044     -0.054      0.071   0.087***      0.054        0.22***     0.32***        -0.023          0.054*           0.12***     -0.084**       0.039
     Percent White                       0.66***    0.36***     0.29***   0.32***     -0.63***      0.25***       0.23***      0.25***        0.41***              0.13*       -0.088       -0.10
     Percent Black                       0.62***     0.21**    0.33***    0.25***     -0.58***       0.36***     0.38***        0.14*          0.39***           0.31***       -0.083      0.14**
     Median HH Income                      -0.070     -0.019     -0.096     -0.020      0.13*        -0.16**       0.031        -0.044          0.0068           0.092**     0.33***      0.27***
     Recreation County                    0.079**    0.080**      0.028    0.050**    -0.069**      -0.046**       -0.036       0.0099           0.018            0.0074     -0.053**      0.043*
     Retirement Destination               -0.0054    -0.066*    -0.0024      0.026     0.051*       -0.051**     0.064***       -0.025          -0.019             0.018       -0.014     -0.045*
     Nursing home res/1000 residents       -0.043     -0.035      -0.11      0.013      0.097         -0.029      -0.0060        0.024          -0.016          -0.067**        0.016    0.087***
     Incarcerated (jail & prison) rate    -0.11**     -0.068   -0.094**     -0.062    0.15***         -0.046     0.53***        0.026            0.020            -0.020        0.051       0.019
     Population/1000                       0.099*      0.070      0.072      0.068    -0.18***        -0.046     -0.52***       -0.022         -0.0037             0.036       -0.095      -0.062
     Pop Density                         0.049**    -0.073**     0.0032      0.036    -0.057**         0.023      -0.0081        0.025          0.0034            -0.041       0.090*      0.11**
36




     Percent Female 15-24                    0.11     0.0072      0.088      0.021       0.094         0.093      0.17***       -0.074         -0.13**            -0.055        0.072      -0.074
     Percent Female 25-34                  -0.018     0.0022    -0.22**     -0.014       0.060        0.0065       0.039      -0.21***        -0.16***          0.15***        -0.052       -0.10
     Percent Female 35-54                   -0.15      -0.13     -0.049    0.15**      0.33***        -0.095      0.24***       -0.027          -0.055            -0.029        0.063       0.048
     Percent Female 55-64                 0.50***     0.44**       0.29    0.18**       -0.24*        0.25**      0.57***       -0.12*           -0.12             0.060         0.11      -0.053
     Percent Female +65                  -0.48***   -0.42***    -0.56**   -0.30***     0.63***         -0.13      -0.0035        0.015          -0.038            -0.083     0.29***         0.11
     Percent Male 15-24                  -0.26***     -0.17*   -0.34***   -0.00032     0.23***        -0.075        0.041     -0.23***        -0.24***            0.081        -0.020     -0.0079
     Percent Male 25-34                    -0.081      -0.13       0.20       0.13        0.20         -0.10      0.29***       0.13**           0.028          -0.21***       -0.025      -0.056
     Percent Male 35-54                    -0.026     0.0041     -0.21*     -0.081      0.097         0.21**       0.0029       -0.13*          -0.080            0.12**        0.034      -0.071
     Percent Male 55-64                  -0.46***    -0.42**      -0.22     -0.055      0.30**      -0.35***     -0.74***       -0.015          -0.13*           -0.16**      -0.18**      -0.013
     Percent Male +65                       0.026       0.13       0.14    0.25**       -0.011        -0.026       0.22**       -0.21*           -0.16             0.17*        -0.15     -0.21**
     Dep. Variable Mean                      8.18       7.95       9.44       5.27       -3.22          0.65        29.80         0.03            0.03              0.00         0.11        0.11
     Dep. Variable SD                        6.22       5.97       9.42       3.64        1.65          0.30        17.39         0.04            0.03              0.02         0.31        0.31
     Obs.                                   1001        944        752       1947         997          1531         1531         2030            2030              2030         2031        2031
     R-squared                               0.22       0.13       0.09       0.10        0.23          0.23         0.44         0.09            0.15              0.14         0.15        0.12

     Note:      Specification: simple OLS using cross-sectional data at county level. Column represents standardized coefficients from a separate regression, where the dependent variable
        is the outcome listed (long differences between April 15 and May 6, the number of observations varies across different data samples). Standard errors in parentheses. * p < 0.1,
        ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01.
References
Abouk, R. and B. Heydari (2020, April). The Immediate Effect of COVID-19 Policies on Social Distancing
  Behavior in the United States. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3571421, Social Science Research Network,
  Rochester, NY.

Adolph, C., K. Amano, B. Bang-Jensen, N. Fullman, and J. Wilkerson (2020). Pandemic Politics: Timing
  State-Level Social Distancing Responses to COVID-19. medRxiv , 2020.03.30.20046326.

Allcott, H., L. Boxell, J. Conway, M. Gentzkow, M. Thaler, and D. Y. Yang (2020). Polarization and
  public health: Partisan differences in social distancing during the coronavirus pandemic. NBER
  Working Paper w26946, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Andersen, M., J. C. Maclean, M. F. Pesko, and K. I. Simon (2020, May). Effect of a Federal Paid Sick
  Leave Mandate on Working and Staying at Home: Evidence from Cellular Device Data. Working
  Paper 27138, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Andersen, M. S. (2020). Early evidence on social distancing in response to Covid-19 in the United States.
  Working Paper , 1–11.

Baqaee, D., E. Farhi, M. J. Mina, and J. H. Stock (2020, May). Reopening Scenarios. Working Paper
  27244, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bento, A. I., T. Nguyen, C. Wing, F. Lozano-Rojas, Y.-Y. Ahn, and K. Simon (2020). Evidence from
  internet search data shows information-seeking responses to news of local covid-19 cases. Proceedings
  of the National Academy of Sciences.

Bethune, Z. A. and A. Korinek (2020, April). Covid-19 Infection Externalities: Trading Off Lives vs.
  Livelihoods. Working Paper 27009, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Briscese, G., N. Lacetera, M. Macis, and M. Tonin (2020). Compliance with covid-19 social-distancing
  measures in italy: the role of expectations and duration. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Cajner, T., L. D. Crane, R. A. Decker, A. Hamins-Puertolas, and C. Kurz (2020). Tracking labor market
  developments during the covid-19 pandemic: A preliminary assessment.

                                                   37
Carroll, A. (2020). Too Many States Are Flying Blind Into Reopening. Not Indiana. News arti-
  cle, The New York Times. The New York Times: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/13/opinion/
  indiana-reopening-coronavirus-testing.html.

CMS (2020). Nursing Home Compare datasets. https://data.medicare.gov/data/nursing-home-compare.

Cotti, C. D., B. Engelhardt, J. Foster, E. T. Nesson, and P. S. Niekamp (2020, May). The Relation-
  ship between In-Person Voting, Consolidated Polling Locations, and Absentee Voting on Covid-19:
  Evidence from the Wisconsin Primary. Working Paper 27187, National Bureau of Economic Research.

County Health Rankings (2020).          County Health Rankings and Roadmaps.              http://www.
  countyhealthrankings.org.

Courtemanche, C., J. Garuccio, A. Le, J. Pinkston, and A. Yelowitz (2020). Strong social distancing
  measures in the united states reduced the covid-19 growth rate: Study evaluates the impact of social
  distancing measures on the growth rate of confirmed covid-19 cases across the united states. Health
  Affairs, 10–1377.

Couture, V., J. Dingel, A. Green, J. Handbury, and K. Williams (2020). Location Exposure Index
  Based on PlaceIQ Data. https://github.com/COVIDExposureIndices/COVIDExposureIndices/blob/
  master/documentation/LEX.pdf.

Dave, D. M., A. I. Friedson, K. Matsuzawa, and J. J. Sabia (2020). When do shelter-in-place orders
  fight covid-19 best? policy heterogeneity across states and adoption time. Working Paper, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Dube, A., T. W. Lester, and M. Reich (2010). Minimum Wage Effects Across State Borders: Estimates
  Using Contiguous Counties. Review of Economics and Statistics.

Friedson, A., D. McNichols, J. Sabia, and D. Dave (2020). Did California’s Shelter in Place Order Work?
  Early Evidence on Coronavirus-Related Health Benefits. Working Paper .

Gandhi, M., D. S. Yokoe, and D. V. Havlir (0). Asymptomatic transmission, the achilles’ heel of current
  strategies to control covid-19. New England Journal of Medicine 0 (0), null.

Google’s Site (2020).   COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports.        https://www.google.com/covid19/
  mobility.




                                                  38
Gupta, S., T. D. Nguyen, F. L. Rojas, S. Raman, B. Lee, A. Bento, K. I. Simon, and C. Wing (2020,
  April). Tracking Public and Private Response to the COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence from State and
  Local Government Actions. Working Paper 27027, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hagemann, H. (2020). CDC Issues Tools To Guide Reopening Of Schools, Businesses, Transit. News
  Article, National Public Radio. https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-live-updates/2020/05/14/
  856483424/cdc-issues-decision-tools-to-guide-reopening-of-schools-businesses-transit.

HRSA (2020). Area Health Resources Files. https://data.hrsa.gov/data/download.

Kahn, L. B., F. Lange, and D. G. Wiczer (2020). Labor demand in the time of covid-19: Evidence from
  vacancy postings and ui claims. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Kapoor, R., H. Rho, B. Sharma, K. Sangha, A. Shenoy, and G. Xu (2020). God is in the Rain: The
  Impact of Rainfall-Induced Early Social Distancing on COVID-19 Outbreaks. pp. 23.

Krueger, A. B., A. Mueller, S. J. Davis, and A. Şahin (2011). Job search, emotional well-being, and
  job finding in a period of mass unemployment: Evidence from high frequency longitudinal data [with
  comments and discussion]. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1–81.

Lin, Z. and C. M. Meissner (2020, May). Health vs. Wealth? Public Health Policies and the Economy
  During Covid-19. Working Paper 27099, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mervosh, S., J. Lee, L. Gamio, and N. Popovich (2020). See Which States Are Reopening and Which
  Are Still Shut Down. News Article, The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/
  2020/us/states-reopen-map-coronavirus.html.

Montenovo, L., X. Jiang, F. L. Rojas, I. M. Schmutte, K. I. Simon, B. A. Weinberg, and C. Wing
  (2020). Determinants of disparities in covid-19 job losses. NBER Working Paper, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

NCEI (2020). Daily Grids and Area Averages of Temperature and Precipitation for the Contiguous
  United States. ftp://ftp.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/daily-grids/.

O’Kane, C. (2020).     Wisconsin bars packed with patrons almost immediately after court strikes
  down stay-at-home order. News article, CBS News. CBS News: https://www.cbsnews.com/news/
  wisconsin-bars-packed-supreme-court-overturns-stay-at-home-ruling/.

Painter, M. and T. Qiu (2020). Political beliefs affect compliance with covid-19 social distancing orders.
  Available at SSRN 3569098 .

                                                   39
Parolin, Z. and C. Wimer (2020). Forecasting estimates of poverty during the covid-19 crisis: Poverty
  rates in the unites could reach highest levels in over 50 years. Poverty social policy brief 6 (4), Center
  on Poverty and Social Policy.

Prem, K., Y. Liu, T. W. Russell, A. J. Kucharski, R. M. Eggo, N. Davies, S. Flasche, S. Clifford, C. A.
  Pearson, J. D. Munday, et al. (2020). The effect of control strategies to reduce social mixing on
  outcomes of the covid-19 epidemic in wuhan, china: a modelling study. The Lancet Public Health.

Raifman, J., K. Nocka, D. Jones, J. Bor, S. Lipson, J. Jay, and P. Chan (2020). COVID-19 US state
  policy database. www.tinyurl.com/statepolicies.

Rojas, F. L., X. Jiang, L. Montenovo, K. I. Simon, B. A. Weinberg, and C. Wing (2020). Is the cure worse
  than the problem itself? immediate labor market effects of covid-19 case rates and school closures in
  the us. NBER Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Schaul, K., B. Mayes, and B. Berkowitz (2020).               Where Americans are still staying at home
  the most.      News Article, The Washtington Post.            https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/
  2020/national/map-us-still-staying-home-coronavirus/?itid=hp visual-stories-8-12 no-name%
  3Ahomepage%2Fstory-ans.

Site, A. M. (2020). Mobility Trends Reports. https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility.

Slotkin, J. (2020). North Carolina Reports Highest One Day Spike Of COVID-19 Cases. News Ar-
  ticle, National Public Radio. https://www.npr.org/sections/coronavirus-live-updates/2020/05/23/
  861561659/north-carolina-reports-highest-one-day-spike-of-covid-19-cases.

Stevens,    A. (2020).         Scenes from Georgia’s cautious reopening:           Lines start early for
  haircuts.      News Article,     The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.            https://www.ajc.com/news/
  lines-start-early-for-haircuts-georgia-begins-open/jWJvWglc5N7RlQt1Z6oDTN/.

Sullivan, D. and T. Von Wachter (2009). Job displacement and mortality: An analysis using adminis-
  trative data. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 124 (3), 1265–1306.

Tankersley,    J. (2020).        As Job Losses Mount,           Lawmakers Face a Make-or-Break Mo-
  ment.       News Article, The New York Times.             https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/09/business/
  as-job-losses-mount-lawmakers-face-a-make-or-break-moment.html.

Treisman,       R.   (2020).          Which     States       Are   Reopening?          A    State-By-State
  Guide.             National      Public     Ratio:          https://www.npr.org/2020/03/12/815200313/
  what-governors-are-doing-to-tackle-spreading-coronavirus.

                                                       40
Wesolowski, A., C. O. Buckee, K. Engø-Monsen, and C. J. E. Metcalf (2016). Connecting mobility
  to infectious diseases: the promise and limits of mobile phone data. The Journal of infectious dis-
  eases 214 (suppl 4), S414–S420.

Yu, X. and R. Yang (2020). Covid-19 transmission through asymptomatic carriers is a challenge to
  containment. Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses.




                                                41
Appendix

A     Regression Tables of Event Study Analyses

              Table A1: Effects of any re-opening on requests for driving directions.
                                                                            (1)
                                                          Change in request for driving direction
                                 15 days prior to event                   -2.350
                                                                         (1.726)
                                 14 days prior to event                   -0.669
                                                                         (1.558)
                                 13 days prior to event                   -1.078
                                                                         (1.355)
                                 12 days prior to event                   -1.777
                                                                         (1.705)
                                 11 days prior to event                   -0.710
                                                                         (1.564)
                                 10 days prior to event                   -0.107
                                                                         (1.473)
                                 9 days prior to event                    0.0816
                                                                         (1.180)
                                 8 days prior to event                   -0.0761
                                                                         (1.260)
                                 7 days prior to event                     1.171
                                                                         (1.270)
                                 6 days prior to event                     1.457
                                                                         (1.334)
                                 5 days prior to event                     0.507
                                                                         (1.137)
                                 4 days prior to event                     1.980*
                                                                         (1.073)
                                 3 days prior to event                     1.240
                                                                         (1.591)
                                 2 days prior to event                     1.350
                                                                         (1.303)
                                 Day of event                             3.215***
                                                                         (1.076)
                                 1 day after event                        3.693**
                                                                         (1.399)
                                 2 days after event                       3.678**
                                                                         (1.393)
                                 3 days after event                       4.466***
                                                                         (1.142)
                                 4 days after event                       4.959***
                                                                         (1.784)
                                 5 days after event                       5.575***
                                                                         (1.285)
                                 6 days after event                       3.803***
                                                                         (0.995)
                                 7 days after event                       7.719***
                                                                         (1.690)
                                 8 days after event                       6.240***
                                                                         (2.010)
                                 9 days after event                       8.950***
                                                                         (2.105)
                                 prcp                                    -0.0914***
                                                                         (0.022)
                                 tavg                                     0.128*
                                                                         (0.070)
                                 Observations                              1680
                                 Baseline DV mean                         69.53

Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Apple Mobility. Table presents
 coefficients and standard errors from the the event-study estimation in equation (2). Estimation
 sample window is April 8, 2020-May 18, 2020. All models include state fixed effects and date fixed
 effects. Standard errors clustered at state level are presented in parentheses. Baseline dependent
 variable mean as of April 15, 2020. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01.




                                                               42
       Table A2: Effects of any re-opening on change in mobility trends to different locations.
                                 (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)           (5)
                         Retail/Recreation Grocery/Pharmacy   Transit Stations   Workplace Residential Areas
15 days prior to event         -2.677**          -3.002**          -2.591**         0.144         0.260
                              (1.253)           (1.215)           (1.264)         (0.510)       (0.441)
14 days prior to event         -1.376            -0.955            -1.271          0.0738        -0.122
                              (0.992)           (0.873)           (1.153)         (0.762)       (0.467)
13 days prior to event         -1.780*           -1.510            -2.079           0.144         0.185
                              (0.974)           (0.960)           (1.323)         (0.760)       (0.426)
12 days prior to event         -1.424            -0.853            -2.264          0.0889         0.244
                              (1.176)           (1.136)           (1.380)         (0.647)       (0.467)
11 days prior to event         -1.669            -1.146            -0.840           0.607       -0.0463
                              (1.030)           (0.978)           (1.247)         (0.623)       (0.450)
10 days prior to event         -1.114            -0.842            -0.357           0.310        -0.196
                              (0.872)           (0.866)           (1.025)         (0.603)       (0.436)
9 days prior to event          -0.825            -0.314            -0.471           0.498        -0.363
                              (0.791)           (0.857)           (0.929)         (0.536)       (0.319)
8 days prior to event          -0.620            -0.910            -0.551           0.207        -0.167
                              (0.923)           (0.925)           (0.936)         (0.353)       (0.298)
7 days prior to event          0.0740             0.141             0.630           0.137        -0.394
                              (0.879)           (0.839)           (1.020)         (0.744)       (0.422)
6 days prior to event         -0.0542             0.475            -0.180           0.510        0.0330
                              (0.832)           (0.836)           (1.293)         (0.772)       (0.429)
5 days prior to event           0.232             1.293             0.308           0.392        -0.215
                              (0.824)           (0.877)           (1.023)         (0.639)       (0.350)
4 days prior to event          0.0780             0.447             1.320           0.808        -0.536
                              (0.732)           (0.777)           (0.973)         (0.519)       (0.331)
3 days prior to event          -0.300            -0.171             0.636           0.509        -0.313
                              (0.756)           (0.824)           (0.978)         (0.630)       (0.460)
2 days prior to event          -0.532             0.578             0.342           0.391        -0.260
                              (0.835)           (0.841)           (1.019)         (0.538)       (0.335)
Day of event                    1.349             0.684             1.105           0.693        -0.593
                              (0.823)           (0.838)           (0.933)         (0.720)       (0.385)
1 day after event               1.520*            0.650             1.071          1.589**       -0.301
                              (0.797)           (0.837)           (1.244)         (0.767)       (0.363)
2 days after event              2.882***          2.202**           2.283**        1.339*        -0.708**
                              (0.782)           (0.829)           (1.063)         (0.674)       (0.313)
3 days after event              1.793**           1.136            1.864**         1.517**       -0.544
                              (0.767)           (0.743)           (0.883)         (0.577)       (0.375)
4 days after event              2.614***          1.444             2.276**         1.383**      -0.556
                              (0.934)           (0.906)           (1.023)         (0.679)       (0.489)
5 days after event              2.759***          2.239***         2.071**         1.316**       -0.697**
                              (0.723)           (0.746)           (0.807)         (0.612)       (0.273)
6 days after event              3.629***          2.306**           1.859**        0.903***      -0.422
                              (0.855)           (0.934)           (0.887)         (0.298)       (0.291)
7 days after event              5.001***          3.700***         3.543***        1.857***      -1.283***
                              (0.881)           (0.913)           (0.962)         (0.654)       (0.419)
8 days after event              3.524***          1.946             1.815          2.334**       -0.473
                              (1.132)           (1.280)           (1.672)         (0.962)       (0.511)
Precipitation                 -0.0264**         -0.0119           -0.0571***      -0.0185**      0.0316***
                              (0.012)           (0.017)           (0.016)         (0.007)       (0.008)
Temperature                  -0.00563            0.0660**         0.0133          -0.0549***    -0.0181
                              (0.034)           (0.032)           (0.042)         (0.016)       (0.013)
Observations                    1680              1680              1680            1680          1680
Baseline DV mean               -32.96            -9.880            -40.65          -47.27         18.94

Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Google Mobility. Table presents
 coefficients and standard errors from the the event-study estimation in equation (2). Each column is
 based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-May 13, 2020. All models
 include state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level are presented
 in parentheses. Baseline dependent variable mean as of April 15, 2020. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05 *** p
 < 0.01.
                                                    43
Table A3: Effects of any re-opening on fraction of devices leaving home and median time at home.
                                                             (1)                   (2)
                                                 Fraction Leaving Home   Median Time at Home
                        15 days prior to event           -0.00383               0.0409
                                                          (0.007)               (0.125)
                        14 days prior to event           0.00279                 -0.158
                                                          (0.005)               (0.103)
                        13 days prior to event           0.00203                 -0.110
                                                          (0.005)               (0.096)
                        12 days prior to event           -0.00320               -0.0415
                                                          (0.005)               (0.121)
                        11 days prior to event           0.00167                 -0.104
                                                          (0.005)               (0.104)
                        10 days prior to event           0.00515                 -0.155
                                                          (0.005)               (0.094)
                        9 days prior to event             0.00431                -0.168**
                                                          (0.005)               (0.082)
                        8 days prior to event           0.000236                -0.0891
                                                          (0.005)               (0.083)
                        7 days prior to event             0.00612                -0.190**
                                                          (0.005)               (0.093)
                        6 days prior to event             0.00704                -0.158*
                                                          (0.004)               (0.084)
                        5 days prior to event             0.00399               -0.0896
                                                          (0.004)               (0.087)
                        4 days prior to event             0.00811**              -0.123*
                                                          (0.004)               (0.066)
                        3 days prior to event             0.00469               -0.0966
                                                          (0.004)               (0.074)
                        2 days prior to event             0.00305                -0.114
                                                          (0.004)               (0.073)
                        Day of event                      0.00620                -0.145*
                                                          (0.004)               (0.078)
                        1 day after event                 0.00986**              -0.131
                                                          (0.004)               (0.080)
                        2 days after event                0.00795*               -0.139*
                                                          (0.004)               (0.081)
                        3 days after event                0.00484               -0.0702
                                                          (0.004)               (0.075)
                        4 days after event                0.00770               -0.0814
                                                          (0.005)               (0.090)
                        5 days after event                0.00950**              -0.106
                                                          (0.004)               (0.083)
                        6 days after event                0.00532               0.0553
                                                          (0.004)               (0.081)
                        7 days after event                 0.0135***             -0.185*
                                                          (0.005)               (0.099)
                        8 days after event                0.00594               -0.0916
                                                          (0.006)               (0.108)
                        9 days after event                 0.0101*              -0.0721
                                                          (0.006)               (0.092)
                        prcp                            -0.000482***           0.00291*
                                                          (0.000)               (0.002)
                        tavg                            -0.000223              -0.00595
                                                          (0.000)               (0.004)
                        Observations                        1776                  1776
                        Baseline DV mean                   0.610                  14.56

Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility
 Metrics. Table presents coefficients and standard errors from the the event-study estimation in
 equation (2). Each column is based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April
 8, 2020-May 17, 2020. All models include state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard errors
 clustered at state level are presented in parentheses. Baseline dependent variable mean as of April
 15, 2020. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01.




                                                           44
  Table A4: Effects of any re-opening on mixing index, out-of-state and out-of-county movement.
                                    (1)                   (2)                            (3)
                               Mixing Index Total out-of-state movement   Average Out-of-County movement
      15 days prior to event      -4.832*             -0.00381                        -0.0262
                                 (2.687)               (0.006)                        (0.030)
      14 days prior to event      -1.678               0.00228                         0.0382
                                 (3.031)               (0.006)                        (0.034)
      13 days prior to event      2.181                0.00333                         0.0471
                                 (3.004)               (0.007)                        (0.045)
      12 days prior to event      0.333                0.00439                         0.0216
                                 (2.618)               (0.005)                        (0.036)
      11 days prior to event     -0.0540               0.00733                         0.0358
                                 (2.158)               (0.007)                        (0.040)
      10 days prior to event      -0.297               0.00850                         0.0410
                                 (2.614)               (0.010)                        (0.051)
      9 days prior to event       -1.244              0.000980                        0.00756
                                 (2.762)               (0.006)                        (0.037)
      8 days prior to event       -1.350              -0.00309                        -0.0120
                                 (1.866)               (0.003)                        (0.016)
      7 days prior to event        0.538               0.00346                         0.0491
                                 (2.569)               (0.006)                        (0.034)
      6 days prior to event        5.597*              0.00741                         0.0739
                                 (3.157)               (0.007)                        (0.046)
      5 days prior to event        2.913               0.00830*                        0.0457
                                 (2.182)               (0.005)                        (0.033)
      4 days prior to event        1.641               0.00999*                        0.0406
                                 (1.427)               (0.006)                        (0.030)
      3 days prior to event        2.031                0.0131                         0.0719
                                 (2.453)               (0.011)                        (0.050)
      2 days prior to event       -0.743               0.00555                         0.0252
                                 (2.579)               (0.007)                        (0.034)
      Day of event                 2.877               0.00700                         0.0574*
                                 (2.833)               (0.005)                        (0.030)
      1 day after event            10.67***            0.0138*                         0.108**
                                 (3.361)               (0.008)                        (0.043)
      2 days after event           9.037***             0.0129**                       0.0761**
                                 (2.593)               (0.005)                        (0.035)
      3 days after event           8.617***             0.0133*                        0.0606*
                                 (3.009)               (0.007)                        (0.034)
      4 days after event           9.573***             0.0211                          0.110*
                                 (3.224)               (0.014)                        (0.065)
      5 days after event           9.917***             0.0127                         0.0874*
                                 (3.653)               (0.010)                        (0.049)
      6 days after event           7.972***            0.00903**                       0.0452**
                                 (2.674)               (0.004)                        (0.020)
      7 days after event           11.93***             0.0168*                        0.0951**
                                 (4.129)               (0.008)                        (0.038)
      8 days after event           17.95**              0.0235*                         0.139**
                                 (6.975)               (0.012)                        (0.058)
      9 days after event           21.10***             0.0260**                        0.161***
                                 (5.847)               (0.013)                        (0.056)
      prcp                       -0.0423             -0.0000484                      -0.000438
                                 (0.029)               (0.000)                        (0.000)
      tavg                        -0.167              0.000261                       -0.000519
                                 (0.133)               (0.000)                        (0.002)
      Observations                 1680                  1680                           1680
      Baseline DV mean             43.25                0.300                          1.930

Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from PlaceIQ. Table presents coeffi-
 cients and standard errors from the the event-study estimation in equation (2). Each column is based
 on a separate regression. Measure of out-of-state and average out-of-county travel capture 14-day
 lagged rates of travel outside of the “home state” and ”home county”. Estimation sample window is
 April 8, 2020-May 13, 2020. All models include state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard
 errors clustered at state level are presented in parentheses. Baseline dependent variable mean as of
 April 15, 2020. * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05 *** p < 0.01.


                                                       45
B     Duration of Stay-at-Home Orders

         Figure B1: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Apple Mobility. Each panel
 is based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-May 18, 2020.
 Longer/shorter Stay-at-home orders are defined as those implemented more/less than the 25 days
 (median) prior to re-opening. Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include
 state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.Baseline dependent
 variable mean as of April 15, 2020.




                                                 46
         Figure B2: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Google Mobility. Each panel
 is based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-May 13, 2020. Longer
 Stay-at-home orders are defined as those implemented more than 25 days (median) prior to re-opening.
 Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include state fixed effects and date
 fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level. Baseline dependent variable mean as of April
 15, 2020.



                                                47
         Figure B3: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Google Mobility. Each panel
 is based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-May 13, 2020. Shorter
 Stay-at-home orders are defined as those implemented less than 25 days (median) prior to re-opening.
 Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include state fixed effects and date
 fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level. Baseline dependent variable mean as of April
 15, 2020.



                                                48
         Figure B4: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility
 Metrics. Each panel is based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-
 May 17, 2020. Longer/shorter Stay-at-home orders are defined as those implemented more/less than
 the 25 days (median) prior to re-opening. Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All
 models include state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.
 Baseline dependent variable mean as of April 15, 2020.



                                                49
         Figure B5: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from PlaceIQ. Each panel is based on
 a separate regression.Measure of out-of-state and average out-of-county travel capture 14-day lagged
 rates of travel outside of the “home state” and ”home county”. Estimation sample window is April 8,
 2020-May 13, 2020. Longer/shorter Stay-at-home orders are defined as those implemented more/less
 than the 25 days (median) prior to re-opening. Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening.
 All models include state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.
 Baseline dependent variable mean as of April 15, 2020.


                                                  50
C     Urban and Rural Counties
         Figure C1: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Google Mobility. Each panel is
 based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-May 13, 2020. Left panels
 presents results for urban counties, right panels are for rural counties. Urban/Rural counties defined
 as metropolitan/non-metropolitan counties. Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All
 models include state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.
 Baseline dependent variable mean as of April 15, 2020.




                                                 51
         Figure C2: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Google Mobility. Each panel is
 based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-May 13, 2020. Left panels
 presents results for urban counties, right panels are for rural counties. Urban/Rural counties defined
 as metropolitan/non-metropolitan counties. Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All
 models include state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.
 Baseline dependent variable mean as of April 15, 2020.




                                                 52
         Figure C3: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility
 Metrics. Each panel is based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-
 May 17, 2020. Left panels presents results for urban counties, right panels are for rural counties.
 Urban/Rural counties defined as metropolitan/non-metropolitan counties. Vertical grey line depicts
 the day before re-opening. All models include state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard
 errors clustered at state level. Baseline dependent variable mean as of April 15, 2020.



                                                53
         Figure C4: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from PlaceIQ. Each panel is based on
 a separate regression.Measure of out-of-state and average out-of-county travel capture 14-day lagged
 rates of travel outside of the “home state” and ”home county”. Estimation sample window is April 8,
 2020-May 13, 2020. First panel presents results for urban counties and second column are for rural
 counties. Urban/Rural counties defined as metropolitan/non-metropolitan counties. Vertical grey
 line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include state fixed effects and date fixed effects.
 Standard errors clustered at state level. Baseline dependent variable mean as of April 15, 2020.


                                                 54
D      Border Counties
Figure D1: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval—Border counties, No
spillovers.




 Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Google Mobility. Each panel is
  a separate dependent variable. Estimation sample window is April 15, 2020-May 13, 2020. Vertical
  grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include county pair fixed effects, date fixed
  effects, and county-by-pair fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.




                                                 55
  Figure D2: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval—No spillovers.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility
 Metrics. Each panel is a separate dependent variable. Estimation sample window is April 15, 2020-
 May 15, 2020. Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include county pair
 fixed effects, date fixed effects, and county-by-pair fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state
 level.

  Figure D3: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval—No spillovers.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from PlaceIQ. Each panel is a
 separate dependent variable. Estimation sample window is April 15, 2020-May 13, 2020. Vertical
 grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include county pair fixed effects, date fixed
 effects, and county-by-pair fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.


                                                 56
   Figure D4: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval—Spillovers.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Google Mobility. Each panel is
 a separate dependent variable. Estimation sample window is April 15, 2020-May 13, 2020. Vertical
 grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include county pair-by-date fixed effects and
 county-by-pair fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.




                                                57
   Figure D5: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval—Spillovers.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility
 Metrics. Each panel is a separate dependent variable. Estimation sample window is April 15, 2020-
 May 15, 2020. Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening.All models include county pair-
 by-date fixed effects and county-by-pair fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.


   Figure D6: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval—Spillovers.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from PlaceIQ. Each panel is a
 separate dependent variable. Estimation sample window is April 15, 2020-May 13, 2020. Vertical
 grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include county pair-by-date fixed effects and
 county-by-pair fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.


                                                58
E     Baseline COVID-19 related mortality rate

          Figure E1: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Apple Mobility. Each panel
 is based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-May 18, 2020.
 Higher/lower baseline COVID-19 related death rates are defined as those above/below the median
 prior to re-opening. Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include state
 fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.Baseline dependent variable
 mean as of April 15, 2020.




                                                   59
         Figure E2: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Google Mobility. Each panel
 is based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-May 13, 2020. Higher
 baseline COVID-19 related death rates are defined as those above the median prior to re-opening.
 Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include state fixed effects and date
 fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level. Baseline dependent variable mean as of April
 15, 2020.




                                                60
         Figure E3: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from Google Mobility. Each panel
 is based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-May 13, 2020. Lower
 baseline COVID-19 related death rates are defined as those below the median prior to re-opening.
 Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models include state fixed effects and date
 fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level. Baseline dependent variable mean as of April
 15, 2020.




                                                61
         Figure E4: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility
 Metrics. Each panel is based on a separate regression. Estimation sample window is April 8, 2020-
 May 17, 2020. Higher/lower baseline COVID-19 related death rates are defined as those above/below
 the median prior to re-opening. Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening. All models
 include state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level. Baseline
 dependent variable mean as of April 15, 2020.



                                                 62
          Figure E5: Event study regression coefficients and 95 percent confidence interval.




Note: Author’s calculation based on smart device movement data from PlaceIQ. Each panel is based on
 a separate regression.Measure of out-of-state and average out-of-county travel capture 14-day lagged
 rates of travel outside of the “home state” and ”home county”. Estimation sample window is April
 8, 2020-May 13, 2020. Higher/lower baseline COVID-19 related death rates are defined as those
 above/below the median prior to re-opening. Vertical grey line depicts the day before re-opening.
 All models include state fixed effects and date fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at state level.
 Baseline dependent variable mean as of April 15, 2020.


                                                  63
