                          NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE CASE OF THE VANISHING REVENUES:
                        AUCTION QUOTAS WITH OLIGOPOLY




                                Kala Krishna




                           Working Paper No. 2723




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                               September 1988




I am grateful to the Center for International Affairs at Harvard and The
World Bank for research support, to Vijay Krishna for asking the question, to
Susan Collins for the title, to Kathleen Hogan and Phillip Swagel for able
research assistance, and to Paul Krugman and Elhanan Helpman for access to
Chapter 4 in their forthcoming book on VERs with foreign duopoly. I am also
grateful to Lael Brainard for comments. Some parts of this paper were
presented at the Conference on International Trade at the University of
Western Ontario and to the lunch group on international economics of the NBER
in the Spring of 1988. This research is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                          NEER Working Paper #2723
                                          September 1988


                       THE CASE OF THE VANISHING REVENUES;
                          AUCTION QUOTAS WITH OLIGOPOLY


                                    ABSTRACT


       This paper examines the effects of auctioning quota licenses when market

power exists. The overall conclusion is that with oligopolistic markets,

quotas, even when set optimally and with quota licenses auctioned off, are -

unlikely   to dominate free trade. Moreover, auction quotas only strictly

dominate giving away licenses which are competitively traded if the quota is

quite restrictive.

       When there is a foreign duopoly or oligopoly and domestic competition it

is shown that such sales of licenses does not raise revenues unless they are

quite restrictive.

       An oligopoly example is explored to study the role of product

differentiation, demand conditions and market conditions in determining the

value of a license and the welfare effects of auctioning quotas. In this

example, auction quotas are always worse than free trade.

       Finally, when there is a home duopoly and foreign competition, the price

of a quota license is shown to be positive when the home and foreign goods are

substitutes but to be zero when they are conplements.



                                         Kala Krishna
                                         Department of Economics
                                         Littauer Center
                                         Harvard University
                                         Cambridge, MA 02138
1.    INTRODUCTION

      In this paper I examine the case for auction quotas when there is either

a foreign or domestic oligopoly. A companion paper' deals with monopoly.

     One of the most common criticisms of voluntary export restrictions (VERS)

and the way that quotas are currently allocated is that they allow foreigners

to reap the rents associated with the quantitative constraints. It has been

suggested that auctioning import quotas would remedy this. It is claimed that:

     "this would leave the price support features of quotas intact but
     deliver the higher profits to the U.S. economy instead of abroad."2

In an article in Business Week, Alan Blinder argues that:

     "Auctioning import rights is one of those marvelous policy
     innovations that create winners, but no losers, or, more precisely,
     no American losers. The big winner is obvious: the U.S. Treasury,
             "3


An article in Time magazine quotes C. Fred Bergsten as saying that:

     "Quota auctions might bring in revenues as high as $7 billion a
     year .°

     P.   Congressional Budget Office (CBO) memorandum5 estimates quota rents

possible in 1987 to be between 3 and 7 billion dollars. It compares this to

the Bergsten et al. (1987) estimate for the Institute for International

Economics (lIE) of 9 billion. Part of the difference, 2.2 billion, in the

estimates arises because the CBO does not include a YEA on automobiles while

the lIE does. The remainder arises from differences in procedure. Both

estimates assume perfect competition everywhere. Takacs (1987) points out that

proposals to auction quotas have become increasingly frequent.S She states:

"Commissioners Ablondi and Leonard of the U.S. International Trade Commission

(Itt) recommended auctioning sugar quota licenses in 1977. The    ITC recommended


                                          1
auctioning footwear quotas in 1985. studies by But bauer and Rosen (1985) and

Lawrence and Litan (1985) suggested auctioning quotas and earmarking the funds

for trade adjustment assistance."

      Despite the importance of the issues involved, the intuition behind such

statements and the procedure used in the estimates is based on models of

perfect competition. In such models, the level of the quota determines the

domestic price, and the difference between the domestic price and the world

price determines the price of a license when auctioned. If the country is

small, then the world price is given. If the country is large, then the world

price does change with a quota. How the world price changes is determined by

supply and demand conditions in the world market.

      However, when markets are imperfectly competitive, this analysis may well

be misleading. The reason is that in such environments, prices are chosen by

producers, i.e. there is no supply curve and the response of producers to the

constraint must be taken into account when determining the price of an

auctioned license. For example, if the response of profit maximizing producers

is to adjust their prices so that there is no benefit to be derived from owning

a license to import, its auction price must be zero

      Therefore the question that needs to be addressed concerns the behavior

of producers in response to quantitative constraints in such markets, and the

impact of this om the price of a license. There has been relatively little

work in this area. The work on the effects of quantitative restrictions in

imperfectly competitive markets is linked to this question,° but to date,

little analysis of what this might suggest about the price of a license seems

to exist.'

      In this paper, I develop a series of sodels of oligopoly which begin to


                                         2
address this issue. The models show how the way in which licenses are sold,

demand conditions, and market structure influence the resulting price of a

license. The results indicate that there is reason to expect that the price of

a license may be much lower than that indicated by applying models of perfect

competition. Thus, estimates such as those of the lIE and CBO may be far too

large. Moreover, if no revenues are raised from auctioning quotas unless they

are very restrictive, the profit shifting effect of such quotas, even when

auctioned off, is unlikely to outweigh the loss in consumer surplus of such

policies. For this reason, they tend to have adverse welfare consequences.

      In Krishna (1988) it was shown that with a foreign monopoly the price of

a license was likely to be zero. This was because with auction quotas the

monopolist found it worthwhile to raise his price and thereby shift the demand

for licenses inwards, until the price of a license reached zero. However, one

might expect that with more foreign firms this would be less likely since such

a policy would also shift demand towards the competing foreign fins. Thus.

one might expect that if competition among firms is strong enough, the prices

charged may not rise, so that the price of a license could be positive.

Competition in price with differentiated products is assuaed both for

convenience, and because competition in price a la Bertrand is more intense

than is competition in quantities'°. Even in this case, however, licenses

receive a zero price unless the quota is quite restrictive. This is because

the effect of competition from other firms does not outweigh the incentive to

strategically affect the price of a license on the part of a firm.

      A model of a foreign duopoly is analyzed in Section 2 to illustrate this

result in a simple framework. Section 3 works out an oligopoly example which

allows parametrization of several important factors such as the degree of


                                        3
substitutability between foreign products, their own demand elasticity, and the

number of foreign firms. This shows how such factors affect the desirability

of auction quotas.

      Section 4 considers the effect of imposing a quota on imports for the

case of a home oligopoly and foreign competition. I consider both the case

when foreign and domestic goods are substitutes for each other, as well as when

they are complements. In Krishna (1988) it was shown that with a home monopoly

and substitute goods, auctioning quota licenses creates an incentive for the

home monopoly to raise its price which in turn raises the demand for both

imports and their licenses, thereby creating a positive price for a license.

The same result tends to go through with more home firms despite the fact that

an increase in price of a home firm also shifts demand towards other home firms

which works against a price increase of the borne firm(s)

      When home and foreign goods are complements, and there is a home

monopoly, it is shown in Krishna (1988) that licenses have a zero price. The

same result tends to carry over with more home firms. These results are

illustrated using simple duopoly models. The results are summarized in Table 1.

      Finally, in Section 5, I conclude by discussing the effects of having

more firms at home and abroad, and directions for future research in this area.




                                          4
2.   FOPEIGN DUOPOLY

         In this section and the next I argue that even with many foreign firms,

each with some market power, a quota on total imports implemented through the

sale of licenses will tend to be welfare decreasing. The main results are:

Proposition 1. Auctioning quotas will not raise revenues for the home

government unless the quota is set significantly below the free trade level of

imports. Slightly restrictive quotas will only raise import prices and

therefore reduce welfare from the free trade level. This tends to make quotas,

even when auctioned off and set at optimal levels, worse than free trade.

However, it is no worse to auction quotas than to impose a VER where quotas are

given away. It is strictly better to auction quotas only if the quota is quite

rstrictive.

         In order to develop some intuition, I first analyze a model of foreign

duopoly. For simplicity, assume that all foreign firms are identical, i.e.,

impose symmetry. Let D1(p',pt) and D2(p1,p2) be the demand functions

facing the two foreign firms. As usual, we will let subscripts denote partial

derivatives and assume that D' > 0      for i I j and D' < 0      for i    j so

that demand is downward sloping and foreign goods are substitutes for each

other. Marginal costs of production are assumed to be constant at c for all

firms.

         In the absence of any quotas, each firm maximizes its profits,   111 (p1 ,p2)


= (p'—dD' (p1,p2) taking p3, i I j as given. The resulting first order

condition, flt(pt,p2J = 0,     defines the best response of each firs for any

price by its competitors. B1(p2) and 8(p') denote these best responses for

the two firms. They are depicted in Figure 1. Their intersection gives the


                                            S
Wash equilibrium prices (p**,pk*), which in turn gives rise to the free trade

level of imports denoted by V.

(FIGURE 1 here)

      Now consider the effect of a quota at the tree trade level, implemented

by the sale of licenses. At this point it is important to be clear about

exactly what constitutes a license, how licenses are sold, and what the timing

of moves is. Throughout this paper a license is defined to be a piece of paper

which entitles its owner to buy one unit of the product in question at the

price charged by the seller.

      The licenses are sold in a competitive market to either competitive

domestic retailers with zero marginal costs of retailing or to consumers

directly. I assume that the timing of moves is as follows. First, the

government sets the quota. Then the firms set their prices. Finally, the

market for licenses clears. This timing is consistent with the idea that the

market for licenses clears more frequently than the monopolist sets prices, and

that the government sets the quota even less frequently than the monopolist

sets prices. Note that other assumptions about the market structure in the

market for licenses can be made, and future work is planned in this direction.

      The model is then solved backwards as usual. Consider the market for

licenses first. If the prices charged by the firms are (p',p') and the price

of a license is I.,      then the demand for licenses must be the same as the

demand for imports at Cp'+t,pt+I.1), namely D'(pl+L,pt+L) +      Dt(pt+L,pz+L).
The supply of licenses is V. the level of the quota. Thus the equilibrium

price of a   license,   when prices p' and p2 are charged by the firms and V

is the level of the quota, is given by L(p',p',V) where L(•) is defined by

the market for licenses clearing. Notice that if D' (pt ,pI) + DI (pI ,pZ) C


                                            6
then L(pt ,p2,V)            0 as defined so far. However, since a quota is not binding

if such a high price is charged, L() is defined to be zero in this case.

        Also, L(p',p2.V)               is decreasing in all its arguments so that                               0,
                                                                                                     L1(•)
L() ( 0,       L(•) < 0.           This implies that the combinations of p1 and p2

such that the license price is just equal to zero is given by a downward

sloping line in Figure 1. This is depicted by the line L(p',p2,V') = 0                                       when

the quota is set at the free trade level. Naturally, this line goes through

the Nash equilibrium point (pl*,p2*). For prices above and to the right of

this line, prices are so high that the quota is not binding and a license has

no value. For prices below and to the left of this line, the quota is binding

so that the price of a license is positive.

        Moving to the second stage, each firm's profit function is also altered

by the quota. Consider firm 1. For any price charged by firm 2, if it charges

a price above the line L(pt,pZ,VF) = 0,                              its profits are unchanged by the

quota. Bowever, if it charges a price below this line, L(•) is positive so

that its profits are given by ñl(pl,pZ,vF) =                             (pt_C)Dl(pt+L(pI,pZ,vF),      p2 +

L(pi,p2,Vtfl.         Notice that along the line L(plpZVF) =                           Q     flt(•) equals

n'(),     and that (V (.)          = flI (.)      + (p'—C)   CD1 (.)      + D' (•)JL   C')

        Assume that D' 1.) + D1 C.) <
                             1           1
                                                       0;   that is, the effect of all prices rising

equally is a reduction in demand; i.e., own price effects outweigh cross price

effects. It is clear now that fl1(.) ) fli(.)
                                                   1             1


        Therefore only three possible cases exist when considering the

derivatives ñ'(.)
                  I
                             and       nil.)
                                        I
                                             along L(') = 0.                 Either:

        (a)   fl'(.)
               1
                        > fl1()
                           1
                                )— 0,        -
                                                 or

        (b)   fl'(•)
               1
                        >   0 )   fl'('), or
                                   1


        (c) 0 )       fl' C') ) fl' (•).
                                   1



                                                             7
Recalling that profits are given by II' C.) below the line L (pt ,pZ,VF) = 0,

and by fl't.) above the line, this means that the conposite profit function

facing firm 1 with a quota, denoted by flt (.) ,        must look like that depicted in

Figure 2(a), (b) and Cc) in these three cases.

(FIGURE 2 here)

         Assume that both I1'(•) and fl'() are concave in p' given p2. Let

g (p2)     maximize ii'   (•)   with   respect to p'. If we draw N C.)     and      112 (.)


as   in Figure 2. it is obvious that in case (a) it is best for firm 1 to price

along 31(p2), in case (b) to price along LC•) = 0,              and in case (c) to price

along 3'(p2)

         Returning to Figure 1. the fact that $1' C.) N C.) means that B'(p2)

lies to the right of B'(pz) as shown. Similarly, B2(p1) lies above

B2(p'). Let their intersection be at (pt,p2). The effect of the quota system

on the best response of firm 1 is now apparent. Let B' (pt) intersect L()

when p2 =     p2   and i2(pt) intersect L(•) when p' = p'             as depicted. If

p2 exceeds p2* then both B'(•) and i'(•)                lie   above   L(') =   0,    so that

fl'(-) and WI.) are both positive along L(•) = 0.                Hence, we are in case

(a). When p2 lies between p2 and p, we are in case (b), and when p2

lies below p' we are in case Cc). Therefore, the best response function for

firm 1 given the quota is B'(p') which is drawn as a dark line in Figure 1.11

         Analogous arguments show that for firs 2 the best response function is

given by B2(p') depicted by the dark dotted line in Figure 1. Notice that

the equilibrium is not affected when a quota at the free trade level is

imposed. Since the equilibrium lies along L(•) • 0             selling licenses does not

raise revenues.

       Another way of understanding why the free trade equilibrium remains the


                                                8
equilibrium is to note that given the price of the other firm, the quota makes

the demand curve facing a firm more inelastic whenever the quota binds, and

leaves it unaffected otherwise. However if p2 = p2k, the quota binds only if

pt   pl* so that demand is more inelastic for price decreases but not for

price increases. Thus, there is no incentive to change price from p1*

Similarly, firm 2 also has no incentive to change its price from p2 so that

these original prices constitute a Nash equilibrium even with the imposition of

the quota at the free trade level.

      Now consider the effect of reducing the quota. This shifts L() =        0


outwards. Corresponding to this quota are B' (.) and 32 (.)        analogous to

those drawn in Figure 1. Figure 3 shows the effect of the lower quota on

firts reaction functions. It is easy to verify that this quota does affect

the equilibrium.'2 In fact, there are a continuum of equilibria along the

segment EF of L() = 0      in Figure 3. However, all the equilibria correspond

to L() =   0   so that even if the quota is slightly restrictive, the license

has no value in equilibrium.

(FIGURE 3 here)

      Finally, if V is so small that the Ia(s) = 0     line lies above the

intersection of the B1() and             lines defined by that V, then the

equilibrium is unique, and is given by the intersection of 31(.) and

jZ(.)*3 Again this comes from deriving B'() and D(•) by comparing the

derivatives of fl(s) and fl(S) along Id) =      0.   In this case, as prices are

such that the quota binds in equilibrium, the licenses raise positive revenues.

However, this occurs only when the quota is quite restrictive. In this event,

the consumer surplus loss is large so that the optimal quota level when

licenses are auctioned need not be a restrictive one since welfare first falls


                                         9
and only then rises as the quota falls.'4 Xrugman and Belpman (1988), in

studying the effects of a VER or quota with foreign duoply, show that for a

linear example it is never optimal to set a restrictive quota.

      A simple example is developed in the next section in order to better

understand how market structure and demand conditions affect the welfare

comsequences of such quotas.




                                       10
3.     AN ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE

       The effects of the quota system as described in the previous section

depend on substitutability between products, overall demand elasticity for the

product group, and the number of firms in the market. The following example

illustrates the influence of these parameters. The main results are summarized

in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2. In the CES/CED formulation used below, the ratio of the free

trade level of imports to the quota at which the license price becomes

positive. V, is given by:

          =
              ((a(n—l)
                         — m)    (a(n—l) +   0
                  (o(n—l)       (ath—l) + c—n)

       As the number of firms, n. or substitutability between their products,

a, becomes infinite, this goes to 1 and the results approach those of the

competitive case. Moreover, for this parametrization, auction quotas always

reduce welfare below its free trade level.

       Demand arises from utility maximization with the utility function given

by:

       u(S,n) =   P   + N

where S should be thought of as the services provided by the various products

consumed. Also, S           F(x',..x), where F(•) is a standard constant returns

to scale production function, which can be thought of as a household production

function, and (x',..x) are the quamtities of the n differentiated products

consumed. The function Pi•) is assumed to take a CES form so that

S =   (I(x')']    where TLN—,1). Recall that the elasticity of substitution



                                                 11
a =          and       ado,—). The consumption of the numeraire good is denoted by
N in the utility function. This parametrization draws attention to the

crucial parameters, the substitutability between goods as given by a, and the

demand elasticity for the aggregate good as caputed by a.

        Since demand is for services produced, the demand for a particular

variety of the good is a derived demand, derived from the demand for services.

Because services are in essence produced by the consumer, the price of a

service, P, equals the cost of production. Hence,

           P =    bCp',..p°)     =

where r =         y    t(——,l)       for the CES case.
                 i—i
The demand for a particular variety is given by:

        x' (pl,..pO) =     a'   (p',..p)D(ø(p' ,..pflfl,

where D(') is the demand for services, and a' C.)                     is the unit input

coefficient, i.e.. it is the amount of variety i needed to make a unit of

services given the prices of these varieties, The derivative of •() with

respect to p' is at(') by Shephard's lemma.

        The specification chosen, along with utility maximization yields:

        D(p) =

The elasticity of demand for services, t,                 is   thus a constant and equals

        The key parameters of the model are a,                 c, and n. Assume that each

variety is produced at a common marginal cost, c. The profits of the itb

firm   are given by:

        fl'(pl,,.po) = (p1 —         c)x1(pl,..pa)
        Profit maximization by each firm, taking other prices as given, yields

the first order condition:


                                                     12
         xt(l —    (p_—_c)(p'          + Ce')]           o                                                       (1)
                        pt


for the jib firm, where pi = -öa'
                                           '
                                                    bp' at
                                                             L    and    e'    !.LDL.
                                                                                      P
                                                                                             the      share of the

itb variety in cost. For our specifications, 0' = land                                           p1     (l—r)(n—l),
                                                                                  n                          n
while p' = 5a'          L     = (l—r)
                                   n
                                           in the symmetric equilibrium. In turn this gives:
                  ôpJ a'

         p' = p =      c(a(n—l)+t)
                       c(n—l)+t—n
in the symmetric equilibrium'5. Call this price p' and let nx(p'                                                     pF) =

yr   -



         Now consider the effect of a quota at V. As usual, the price of a

license is given by LCp'                        p",V) defined by the market clearing condition:

                  (p' + 1..            p° + I) = V                                                               (2)


if the quota hinds, and by zero if it does not. Therefore, if p is charged

by all firms in the symmetric equilibrium, while pY CV)                                     is the price needed

for total demand to equal the quota, the license price is given by:

         L(,V) = Xax(pV(V)— p.                 0]    .                                                           (3)
         If the quota is binding, then each firm •aximizes:

                             =   (p' — c)xt(p'+L(.),,p°                 + L('))

This gives the first order condition:

         x'(l —(p + ee') ]                     + (Ii(p' —         c)lx']      = 0         .''h                   (4)


         The second term enters because of the effect of a change in a firm's

price on the price of licenses. It is convenient to rewrite the second term of

(4) as:

              (pt_c)                  ' (pJ+L(•))
          L       pt             ml    S


However, recall that:



                                                             13
            xi
            .L p' +        L())   = — (p' + tOt)
                                                    I
                                                                      and
            xl


            xl
            .2. p' +       L())                    — tOJ
            xl                            3


Also,       —p + I p'         0 since a' 1.)                      is homogeneous of degree zero. The above
                   Ji
allows the second term of                      (4)          to be written very simply in the symmetric

equilibrium as:


        EL (p' —
            I
                       c) I xt] =                  (p—c) Lx            £
                                                        p     (pit)

where            is the elasticity of L(=) with respect to p.                                                 in   the
                                                                                                 I.


symmetric equilibrium. Noreover, using (2) shows that:
                   a          a       a
        L        —1x3
                  3=1 I
                        / itI
                            I   I x1
                              1=2  .1


But with symmetry, x' =               x3           v i,j, and x' =               x:   for   i   j,        a   s, so
        L = — 1 and           a   =
                   n                  Lii


        Using the expressions for u3 and 9 in the symmetric equilibrium

gives (4)         to be equivalent to:

                1— a(n—1)                      .
                                                         (p—c)        =0 .                                               (5)
                       n          n           ii




Solving for p iii            (5) gives a solution p*(v) where L(') •is defined by

(3). Thus p'(V) is the equilibrium price with a quota at                                             V.

        We are interested, among other things, in the question of how restrictive

the quota has to be for a license price to become positive. In Section 2 we

showed that this corresponds to the quota being set so that it is just binding

at the symmetric equilibrium assuming that the constraint is binding, i.e. set
at   demand when p solves (5) with L()                                       0


                                                                      14
           Solving for p in           (5) with L(•) = 0                 gives:
                                                           —t
           pt =    cca(n-1))    ,   and    Vt       (pa)                                        (6)
                   c(n—l)—n

Thus, the ratio of the free trade level of imports, V', to the quota at which

the license price is positive is:

           V' =             — n)       (o(n—1) + a)
           Vt      (e(n—l)
                       q(n-1)        (o(n—1) + £ — n)

Notice that r exceeds p', so that V' exceeds Vt, and that as n —) —,
—
VT
     —>    1 .     As the number of firms or substitutability between their products
Vt
becomes infinite, competition becomes intense and we aproach the results of the

competitive case.
                                                                                 yr
           In    order to get some idea of the magnitude of — , consider its value
                                                           Vt
for a = 2,          a = 2, n = 4.         Rere it equals (1.5)2, so that imports must be

more than halved in order to make the license price positive.1?                           If auction

quotas do not raise revenue, they must reduce welfare as they further restrict

consumption without shifting profits. Since welfare falls as V is reduced

from VT to Vt. and only rises after that, even optimally set auction quotas

are unlikely to raise welfare. In fact, for the example developed here,

auction quotas can never raise welfare. An outline of the proof follows.

           Welfare under free trade, W', is given by;

           V = ($F)a     — DpFZF          (51)t —

where the superscript "F., denotes free trade. The second equality arises since

     =    as?.     and nap?         PS? where pSF               is   the price of S under free trade.

V therefore equals the area of the shaded region in Figure 4.

(FIGURE 4 here)

           Welf are under the quota V is given by V where:

           yV =    [(5V)0   —   (pt(y)    + L())x') + nI,()x

                                                            15
where S'      is the level of s,                     Xv 5 the level of a firm's output, and P*(V)

is the equilibrium price charged by a firm, when the quota is V. The price

consumers pay for x is P*(V) + [dO), so that the first term in V is

consumer surplus, while the second is license revenues.

         Since xv = aSV           •    we know that naP* (V) = p*S (V), and the price charged

by producers for a service is naI1(•) =                       1/(),   the implicit price of a license

to import a service. Also,                     (P*S(V) + LS(.)) =     p*SC(V),        the price to

consumers of a service with a quota of V. Thus ii" can be rewritten as:

         V [(Sv)0 — p*SCW)SV]                    + tS(.)SV

V is      thus depicted by the cross—hatched area in Figure 4. Clearly, welfare

cannot rise due to a quota unless the price charged for a service by firms

p*S(V)     falls below SF                    Since    p*S(V) = naP*(V)      _(1r)
                                                                                       p*(V) this
                                                                            dP*(V)
cannot occur unless P*(V) falls as V falls, i.e.                                         > 0 for some
                                                                                 dv
V. However, dP*(V)/dV is negative in our example, as shown below.

         Recall that P*(V) was defined by (5) when L(') was defined by (1).

Using (5) gives:

         (p*(%t) + I()) =             a(n_l)(P*(V)      —   C).
                                         0
However, as all demand is met at P*(V) + L(') by the definition of LU').
                                                              I   I
and as V = nxv       = naD =
                                                         ru-i
                                       n_(Ifr) ((P +1.) n ]           in equilibrium,
                                                        a
                         —i             —1


         (p+L) =   (aVn
                        ra_in r
                              )

                            a—i —air
               =     Cay)      n

Using this in the above expression derived from (5)                        gives:

         (P*(V)_C)   =        Cay)
                                       (a_i)
                                               n
                                                (i_a/r)
                                             aCm-i)
Thus:

                                                            16
     dP*(V)   0, so that the price charged by the firm must rise as V
       dv
falls. Hence, welfare cannot increase when quotas are auctioned off.




                                       17
4.    DUOPOLY AT HOME

      In the previous sections we considered the effect of the quota system on

the price of licenses when there were many foreign firms. Here we see what

happens when there is foreign competitive supply but market power on the part

of hone firms. The case of duopoly is considered for convenience here, the

main results are summarized in Proposition 3.

Proposition 3. With home duopoly and foreign competitive supply, a license has

a positive price in the pure strategy equilibrium if home and foreign goods are

substitutes and the quota is at or close to the free trade level. If they are

complements, a license has a zero price. In either case, such a quota system

is unlikely to raise welfare.

      In Krishna (1988) it was shown that with a home monopoly and foreign

conpetitive supply, a license has a positive price when the hone and foreign

goods are substitutes and the quota is close to the free trade level. However,

because of the absence of profit shifting effects and because prices to

consumers rise, there is only a dead weight loss from such policies. When

goods are complements, a license has zero price. Again, quotas are welfare

decreasing. it is worth asking whether similar results would be obtained when

a home firm has competitors who are also unrestricted by a quota and have

market power.

4.1   The Model

      Consider a market in which differentiated products are sold. There are

two firms with market power which are not subject to a quota, which I call home

firms.11 Let (p',p2) be the prices of the home firms, and p* be the price

of the competitive foreign firms who make a homogeneous product. All firms


                                       18
have identical constant marginal costs of production, C. The home firms make

products which differ both from each other and from the goods produced by the

foreign firms. The case of symmetric firms will be considered here in order to

focus on the effects of the quota system. D' (p' ,p2 ,p*), 0 (p1 ,p ,p*) and

D*(pl,pZ,p*) are the demands facing the two home firms and the foreign firms.

Since the foreign firms are competitive. p = C.

           In the absence of any quotas the home firms maximize profits,

D' (p' ,p2,C)(pt — C)      for i = 1.2   by choosing p' *   taking   as given pi,

j     i,     and C.1 This results in two best response functions, B' (p21C) and

82 (p' ,C) whose intersection gives the Nash equilibrium N as shown in Figure

5. These equilibrium prices are labeled (p1N,ptN). D*(pl,pZII,C)              0"
gives the level of imports under free trade.

(FIGURE 5 here)

4.2        Effect of a Quota

           Now consider the effects of a quota on imports at the free trade level so

that V = D*F. The case when imports and domestic goods are substitutes is

discussed first. As usual, the market for licenses determines their price;

this market clears when:

           Dt(p',p20C + 1.) =   DEE                                             (7)


The license price is then implicitly defined by this to be Nax(O,L(p',p',V)]

where V is the level of the quota.

           Notice that L(') is increasing in pl and p2 but decreasing in V.

Raising the price of substitutes for imports shifts the demand for imports (and

thus licenses) outward, thereby raising their price. Raising the quota level

shifts the supply of licenses outwards, reducing their price. Also, for a

given p and V. the combinations of p' and p' that keep D*(pI,pl,C)


                                             19
V is downward sloping. Am increase in p' raises D*(.) and a decrease in

p2 is required to keep D() equal to V. If V = D*F,                            this line along

which the market for licenses clears also passes through the free trade

equilibrium. This is shown in Figure 5, where the line D(p',p2.C) =

goes through N. Points above and to the right of this line are points where
the quota is binding, and the license price is positive. At points below and

to the left of the line, the license price is zero.

      Now consider the effect of the quota on the second stage of the game

where firms choose prices. The first question to ask is how the quota affects

the demand curve facing a firm. Let p1 = p1(p2,C,V)                        and p2 = p2(pt,C*,V)

be two ways of denoting the line where the quota just binds. Given p2. if



firm 1 is given by Dt (pl ,p,C +L(pt ,p2 ,C,V) =

than pl (.) ,
                                                             '
p1 exceeds p' ('1, then the license price becomes positive and demand facing

                                                                 (p& ,p2 ,C,V). If p' is less

                 demand is unaffected by the quota. Let D' (p' VP2 .C,V) be the

demand facing firm 1 under a quota. Then,

      D' (p' ,p2 .C.V) =   Dt   (p1 ,p2 ,C}     if p' I     p1 (p2 ,C,V)

                           D1 (p1 'p2 ,C,V) if p'           p1 (p2 ,C,V}

      Now notice that at p5 =           pl(.)     D'(') =    1(.)     and that Dt(•) =      D1()   +

D'(•)L
 I    S
          (•).   Since D'L(•)L
                        2    1
                               >0, 5l(') exceeds D1('), so that the inverse
                                     1             1


demand curve facing firm 1 is steeper for price increases above p1 (•)                      than
for price decreases. This creates an incentive for firm 1 to raise its price.

      This change in the demand curve facing firm 1 affects its profit

function. Let n' (p',p',c,v) denote its profits function under the quota.

Clearly

      fll(pt,p2,c,V)       mc.) — (p' — C)D'(p1,p2,C)                if    pl (p'(p',C,V)
                                     a (p1 —    C')D'(p',p,C.V)      if pt ) p'(p',C,V)


                                                  20
since the profit function fl(•)                  is made up of pieces of fll(.) and h'().

Similarly      demand under the quota is also made up of two component•parts. Also,

         )   fl't),    and flt(.) =    ñ'() at            p' =    pl(pZCV)
         Hence, three possibilities exist. Either (a)                          IV ()       fl N)    0 or (h)

flit.)       0 > fl'(.) or (c) 0               fli(.)    fl1N)     when evaluated at p' •            pit.).
Assuming that both N N) and ii' (.)                      are concave, N N) Can be traced out

by drawing the analogue of Figure 2. In contrast to the fl's depicted                                 in

Figure 2 for which the lower of the two prof it functions applies, here the

upper portion is relevant, so that fit.)                        is given by the upper parts of the

curves in the three cases. Note that fit.)                        is   not concave in this case as the

quota binds for high, not low values of p1. If we are in case (a) the maximum

of fl'N) occurs at 51(.),                  the    peak of fi'N).          If   we are in case (b) it then

occurs at either B'N) or '(')                       depending on whether NC') or fl1() has a
higher maximum point. In case (c) it occurs at B' C.).                               Let    B' (p) denote the

maximum points of fl'N).

         Now looking at Figure 5, note that if p                        is less than p2            (where

I' (•)       cuts   the constraint line) both fl' (.)               and    II' C.)     are decreasing in p'

when     evaluated at p'      =   p' C.)   •     i.e.   along the constraint line. Hence we are

 in case Cc) and B'N) =            B'().          Similarly, if p2 exceeds pfl, then we are

 in case (a) and B1N) =            i'(.). If            p' lies between                 and pl$, Vt.)

 could       be either ut.)       or B'(') or both. Indeed, it could jump any number of
 times in this region. For this reason B' N) is not drawn in the figure in

 this    interval      and is depicted by the dark lines in figure 5 for the other

 intervals.

             Similar   arguments for firm 2 give its best response function B'N).

 Again, B2N) is not drawn for p1 in between ' and p" but is given by

                                                          21.
the dark line in the other intervals. Since both fli (.)          and   fl2 (•)   are   non—

concave, there can be a number of mixed strategy equilibria. However, only one

pure strategy equilibrium exists; this occurs at E, the intersection of

'(') and                     Since E lies above the D*(.) = DIF    line, the price of a

license must be positive in equilibrium."

4.4    Welfare

       The fact that selling licenses raises revenues does not, however, mean

that this policy leads to an improvement in welfare. Because the foreign

supply is competitive, the quota system does not shift profits, so that the

gain in revenue comes at the expense of consumer surplus. A quota thus results

in a dead weight loss, despite the positive license price and revenue thereby

derived. This argument is made a bit more formally in what follows.

       Assuming the existence of a numeraire good and an aggregate consumer who

gets all profits and license revenues, welfare is:

       V =   [u(xl,xZ,x*)      _psxl — p2x2 — CC*+L)xI)

        + (ptxa —          Cx') + (px2 — Cx2)   + Lxt

where x',x2 and xt are the consumption levels of the two home and one

foreign good. The first term in brackets gives consumer surplus, the second

and third give profits of the two home firms, and the last gives license

revenues.     License revenues are a transfer from consumers to the government,

and thus net out of welfare, as do the revenues of the domestic firms, which

equal consumer expenditure, Thus:

      AV=    Cu
                  1
                      —   C)dx' + Cu — C)dxt + Cu — C)dx*
                                   2

      As u        and u       equal the price consumers pay by utility maximization,

and since this exceeds C, the first two terms will reduce welfare if a quota

reduces the consumption of the home goods, since the home firms' market power


                                                22
means that too little is being consumed to begin with. Furthermore,          ii




equals     C + L   by utility maximization. Also, as the quota is it the free

trade level, dx* = 0.      A quota at the free trade level therefore reduces

welfare if consumption of both home goods falls. As the consumption of imports

remains constant, and the price to consumers of all goods has risen, this drop

in consumption of the home good is to be expected.

         Finally, it is worth noting the effect of a quota set close to the free

trade level. It is easy to see that by continuity arguments a slightly

restrictive quota has similar effects on prices and welfare as a quota at the

free trade level."

4.5   Complements versus Substitutes

      One might ask whether licenses command a positive price in equilibrium

when the domestic products are complements for the imported good. In Krishna

(1988), it was shown that with home monopoly and complementarity between the

home good and imports, the price of licenses was zero. It is easy to see that

the same result is obtained with more hone firms.

         Suppose that the quota is set at the free trade level. The price of a

license is again implicitly defined as before by L(p',p',V). However, 14•).

is decreasing in p' and p2 as the goods are complements. 14') is also

decreasing in V. As before, the line along which the license price just

equals zero is downward sloping in the (p',pZ} space. However, with

complementarity, the license price is positive below and to the left of this

line and is zero at points above and to the right of this line.

      This defines D' (pl ,pt ,C,V) ,   the   demand facing firm 1 under the quota

system, as:

      D'(p',p2,C,V) c    D'(p',r,C)      if pt ) pt(p24C,V)


                                              23
                    = 5' (p1 ,p2 ,C,V) jf p1 1       p1 (p2 ,C,V)

Also, since D'(.) =
              1
                      fl1(.) + D'N)LC.)
                      1        3
                                           as before, and as D'(.)LL) >      0, the
                                                                     1

inverse demand curve corresponding to 5'       (•)    is steeper than that

corresponding to Dt (•). However, since D' (•) equals D' () only for low

enough prices; this does not create any incentive for firm 1 to change its

price from p'" if firm 2 charges p2N. The same goes for firm 2, so that

the free trade equilibrium remains an equilibrium. Hence the price of a

license is zero.

      It should be clear by now that this case can be analyzed exactly as was

the case of foreign duopoly and home competition with substitute goods. Again,

Figure 2 represents the three possible cases and Figure 1 the equilibrium with

and without a quota at the free trade level.22 If the quota is set below the

free trade level, then the line such that the license price is just zero moves

outward as higher domestic prices lead to lower demand for the complementary

import. This quota level in turn gives rise to best response functions

analogous to those for the case of a quota with foreign duopoly and home

competition. Figure 3 therefore depicts the best response functions. Again,

any point between Er is an equilibrium, and at all of these points the

license price is zero. If the quota is set below the free trade level, then it

has no effect. When the quota is set at the free trade level, the license

price remains zero, and the quota does not change welfare. Quotas set below

this level tend to reduce welfare because of the absence of any profit shifting

effects. In essence, the loss to consumers outweighs the sum of the gains to

home producers and the license revenue raised.




                                          24
5.   CONCLUSION

     The previous sections analyzed the effects of a quota auction system for

both competitive home and foreign supply, and duopoly or oligopoly abroad or at

home. The main conclusion was that even when licenses do bring in revenues.

welfare is likely to fall. A final case to consider is that of one home and

one foreign firm. Even here, the incentive exists for the firms to appropriate

license rents by raising their prices. The domestic firm can increase the

demand for the foreign product by raising its price. This causes the quota to

bind, which makes the demand function for the domestic firm less elastic for

price increases. There is thus an incentive for the domestic firm to raise its

price. This in turn makes it optimal for the foreign firm to raise its price

when the goods are substitutes since an increase in the domestic price shifts

out demand for the foreign good. Because a quantitative constraint acts like a

capacity constraint on the foreign firs, there is no pure strategy equilibrium

in the game with a quantitative constraint. See Krishna (1984) •for a more

detailed analysis.

      The absence of pure strategy equilibria in such games has been known

since the time of Edgeworth's classic criticism of Bertrand. The mixed

strategy equilibrium involves the domestic and foreign fins charging prices

such that demand for the foreign fir. exceeds the level of the constraint with

a non—zero probability. In this event, a license is valuable and for this

reason, the price of a license, even when the quota is set at the free trade

level, is positive. However, as   the   level of the quantative constraint falls.

the equilbrium prices charged tend to rise so that there seems to be no reason

to expect the price of a license to rise as the constraint becomes •ore


                                          25
restrictive.

        Thus, with substitute goods, the price of a license may veil be positive

even when the constraint is set above the tree trade level, and may not even be

related to the restrictiveness of the constraint!

        When the foreign and domestic goods are complements, the effects of a

quantitative constraint are quite different. The domestic firm can make the

constraint bind on the foreign firm by charging a low price. This raises the

demand for the foreign firm above the level of the constraint and thereby

raises the effective price of the foreign good, which is what enters the

domestic demand function when there is excess demand for imports. However,

this does not benefit the domestic firm since the goods are complements. For

this reason, the domestic firm chooses not to try and make the quota bind

strictly on the foreign firm. A quantitative constraint on the foreign firm

thus leads to a pure strategy equilibrium in which prices charged are such that

the demand for the foreign product exactly equals the level of the constraint.

For this reason, the price of a license is zero, even when the constraint is

set below the level of imports under free trade. These ideas are formalized in

Krishna (1987)

        The price of a license under duopoly is therefore zero when goods are

complements, and positive when goods are substitutes. In addition, the price

of a license in the latter case need not depend upon how restrictive the

quantitative constraint is since the equilibrium prices also tend to rise as

the quota is made more restrictive. Welfare is unlikely to rise in either

case.

        While simple models such as these help illustrate why auctioning quotas

may not raise much revenue in imperfectly competitive markets, it would be


                                         26
useful for policy purposes to determine empirically the welfare consequences of

such schemes. Recent studies by Dixit (1985), Venables and Smith (19B6), and

Krugman (1986) on computable partial equilibrium models hold much promise, and

work on this front is under way.

      Another area where work is needed concerns the determinants of market

structure in the market for licenses itself. In this paper I assume this

market is competitive. It is worth exploring when this is likely to occur,

when there will be incentives for agents to cartelize this market, and who will

have the greatest incentive to do so.




                                        2'?
                                          FOOTNOTES


 l.See   Krishna (1988), "The Case of the Vanishing Revenues: Auction Quotas with

Monopoly."
2.Business Week, March 16, 1987. p. 64.

3.Ibid, March 9, 1987, p. 27.

4.Time, March 16, 1987, p. 59.

5.Memorandum of February 27, 1987, from Stephen Parker on revenue estimates for

auctioning existing import quotas (publicly circulated).

6.The interested reader should consult Bergsten ct al. (1987) and Takacs (1987)

for a historical and institutional perspective of work in this area.

7.See Takacs (1987), footnote 7.

8.See Krishna (1987) for a survey of this work. In particular, Krishna (1984)

and Krugman and Helpman (1988) on quotas and VERS with oligopoly are related to

the question of the effects of auctioning quotas with oligopoly.

9.Krugunan and Helpman (1988), chapter 4, contains a linear example of the model

presented in the next section. Krugman and Relpman work through a linear

example using marginal revenue and cost curves to study the effect of a VER.

The focus here is on auction quotas rather than VERS, the exposition differs

from theirs, and I do not assume that demand is linear. I am grateful to them

for allowing me access to their manuscript.

10.5cc Eaton and Grossman (1986) for a discussion of the role of the strategic

variable.

11.Although, for convenience, the Figures, 1, 3 and S depict the linear demand

case, the arguments do not rely on linearity, only on uniqueness and stability
of the equilibria.

                                        28
12.Note that ;1(.) is defined by looking at fl1(.) and fli(.) along t(•)

C to determine whether case (a), (b), or (c) is the relevant one. The same

procedure applies for 32(.)

13.1 am assuring that    fi'   (•) and   B2 (.)    have a unique intersection.

14.Although Figures 1 to 3 depict upward sloping best response functions, the

same results are obtained if they are downward sloping The symmetry assumption

is likewise made for convenience but is not crucial to the results.

lS.As expected, p rises with c but falls with a and t so that as goods

get better substitutes or demand for services gets more elastic, prices fall.

p also falls with n if a            tic. Also. a(n—l) + t must be positive for p

to be positive.

16.Note that goods could be substitutes or complements for each other as

A!.      =
                 in the symmetric equilibrium. If a > c, goods are substitutes,
6pJ x'       n


while if a < t they are complements.

11.Wotice that if a is small relative to n, V becomes negative so that

any quota gives a zero license price and quotas are always harmful.

l8.They could be foreign ones that are Dot subject to a quota as would be the

case with country specific quotas such as the voluntary export restraints on

automobiles in 1981, aimed at Japan.

19.We are considering a Bertrand Nash equilibrium with differentiated products

both for convenience and because price competition is regarded as more intense

than quantity competition, so that the effect of having competitors who are not

subject to a quota will be greater here.

 20.klthough Figure S depicts upward sloping best response functions, the same

 results are obtained when they are downward sloping.


                                                  29
21.By varying the quota one can construct examples where there are two pure

strategy equilibria, at E and at N, as well as ones where there is only one

at N.

22.$imilar results are obtained with downward sloping best responses.




                                       30
                                   REFERENCES

Bhagwati J. N. 1965. "On the Equivalence of Tariffs and Quotas." In R. E.

      Baldwin, et a].. (eds.) Trade Growth and the Balance of Payments. Essays

      in Honor of Gottfried Haberler. Chicago, Rand McNally.

Bergsten, C. F., Kimberly, A. E., Schott., and Takacs, V. E. 1987. "Auction

      Quotas and United States Trade Policy", Policy Analyses in International

      Economics 19, Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C.,

      September.

Dixit, A. 1985. "Optimal Trade and Industrial Policy for the U.S. Automobile

      Industry." (Mimeo)

Hufbauer, G. and Rosen. II.   1986. "Trade Policy for Troubled Industries",

      Policy AnalyseS in International Economics 15, Institute for

      International Economics, Washington, D.C.

Krishna, K. 1984. "Trade Restrictions as Facilitating Practices", NBER

      Working Paper No. 1546.

                    "What do VERS do?", HER Discussion Paper No. 1323.

            1988. "The Case of the Vanishing Revenues: Auction Quotas With

      Oligopoly." (Mimeo)

Krugman, P. 1986. "Market Access and International Competition: A Simulation

      Study of 16K Random Access Memories," NBER Working Paper No. 1936.

Krugman, P. and Helpman E. 1988. Textbook on trade policy with imperfect

      competition. (Forthcoming)

Lawrence, R.Z. and titan, R.E. 1986.     'Saving Free Trade", The Brookings

      Institution, Washington, D.C.

Takacs, W.E. 1987. "Auctioning Import Quota Licenses: An Economic Analysis",

      Institute for International Economic Studies, University of Stockholm,
     Seminar Paper No. 390, September.

Venables, A. and Smith A. 1986. "Trade and Industrial Policy Under Imperfect

     Competition", Economic Policy 3, October, pp. 622—671.
        q,s            0
qIt.

                        ,'h
  It.


QIt,              'S
  It.

                  q1 qIv'

    0                         q
              4
                            Flpure 2


$


                                                    Ito




    0       1k) =0              B(.)                      p
                               (a)


    $




                                              x()

        0   B(•)aO          L&)—0                             p

                              (b)

        $




                                                                  )




        o            B(.)              B(s)                   P
           p4   p3
     C     t




                     w
                     ciT

A    'Vt
      -S             Wi
It
                  FIgure 4



    PS




    *sc
P( V)                                      .1
                                      -I


    SF
                             5= I
                             D




p                                L3

    *5
P (V)



              V       F
     0    5       5                             S
                       Figure S


                12        _J 2                  0
                B(P)      B(P)         45
                                            _2 i
p2                                          8(P)
         A1 2
         8(P)                                   21
                                                8(P)

                                           A2       i
                                           8(P)

2N
                                  *
                                      (P ,P2 ,C) =
                                       1
                                                        D




     0
           pP iN
           -1                                           P1
                             Table 1

      Effects or Quota Auctions at or clése to Free Trade Levels

                            Complements                Substitutes



  Home                     L(j=O                       LC)>O
  Duopoly                  Welfare Falls               Welfare Falls




Foreign                                L(i)'O
Duopoly/Oligopoly                      Welfare Falls




Oneflomefizm               .)O                         LU)>O
One Foreign Finn           Welfare Falls               Welfare Falls
