                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE PERSUASIVE EFFECT OF FOX NEWS:
NON-COMPLIANCE WITH SOCIAL DISTANCING DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

                                           Andrey Simonov
                                          Szymon K. Sacher
                                         Jean-Pierre H. Dubé
                                           Shirsho Biswas

                                        Working Paper 27237
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27237


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2020




Authors contributed equally and names are listed in reverse alphabetical order. We thank Nielsen,
SafeGraph, HomeBase and Facteus for providing access to the data. We also thank the NBER for
helping with the purchase of some of the Nielsen data. The opinions expressed in this paper do
not reflect those of the data providers. We are extremely grateful to Matt Gentzkow for extensive
comments and suggestions. We also thank Tomomichi Amano, Charles Angelucci, Oded Netzer,
Maria Petrova, Andrea Prat, Anita Rao, Olivier Toubia, Raluca Ursu, Ali Yurukoglu, participants
of the NYC Media Seminar, 2020 Marketing Science conference, and the Columbia COVID-19
Symposium for comments and suggestions. Supported by the Chazen Institute for Global
Business at Columbia Business School. Dubé acknowledges research support from the Kilts
Center for Marketing and the Charles E. Merrill faculty research fund.The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Andrey Simonov, Szymon K. Sacher, Jean-Pierre H. Dubé, and Shirsho Biswas. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Persuasive Effect of Fox News: Non-Compliance with Social Distancing During the Covid-19
Pandemic
Andrey Simonov, Szymon K. Sacher, Jean-Pierre H. Dubé, and Shirsho Biswas
NBER Working Paper No. 27237
May 2020, Revised July 2020
JEL No. D72,I12,I18,L82

                                          ABSTRACT

We test for and measure the effects of cable news in the US on regional differences in compliance
with recommendations by health experts to practice social distancing during the early stages of the
COVID-19 pandemic. We use a quasi-experimental design to estimate the causal effect of Fox
News viewership on stay-at-home behavior by using only the incremental local viewership due to
the quasi-random assignment of channel positions in a local cable line-up. We find that a 10%
increase in Fox News cable viewership (approximately 0:13 higher viewer rating points) leads to a
1.3 percentage point reduction in the propensity to stay at home. We find a persuasion rate of Fox
News on non-compliance with stay-at-home behavior during the crisis of about 5:7% - 28:4%
across our various social distancing metrics.


Andrey Simonov                                  Jean-Pierre H. Dubé
Columbia Business School                        University of Chicago
90 Morningside Dr Apt 6C                        Booth School of Business
New York, NY 10027                              5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
andsimonov@gmail.com                            Chicago, IL 60637
                                                and NBER
Szymon K. Sacher                                jdube@chicagobooth.edu
Columbia University
szymon.sacher@columbia.edu                      Shirsho Biswas
                                                The University of Chicago
                                                Booth School of Business
                                                5807 S Woodlawn Ave
                                                Chicago, IL 60637
                                                sbiswas@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction
The COVID-19 crisis has renewed concerns about the dangers of misinformation and its persua-
sive effects on behavior. The US response to the pandemic is deeply divided along partisan lines,
with Republicans more skeptical about the risks of the pandemic and less engaged in social dis-
tancing than Democrats (Barrios and Hochberg, 2020; Allcott et al., 2020). Correlations between
these differences in reactions and beliefs and exposure to the left- and right-leaning news sources
(PewResearch, 2020) are suggestive, albeit inconclusive, of an effect of differential messaging by
politicians (Beauchamp, 2020) and the major media outlets that support them (Aleem, 2020). The
largest US cable news channel, Fox News, finds itself at the heart of this controversy, with a class
action1 alleging that Fox News and other defendants “willfully and maliciously disseminate false
information denying and minimizing the danger posed by the spread of the novel Coronavirus,
or COVID-19, which is now recognized as an international pandemic” (Ecarma, 2020). The per-
suasive effect of a leading news media channel could have harmful consequences for the public
if viewers disregard the social-distancing practices recommended by leading health experts and
health organizations (CDC, 2020b; Kissler et al., 2020a). In addition to personal health risks, non-
compliance could also create a negative health externality through the transmission of disease to
others in the community (Ferguson et al., 2020).
    We test for and measure the potential persuasive effect of Fox News viewership on social
distancing compliance during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic in the US.2 The COVID-
19 outbreak is not the first instance where a US media outlet like Fox News finds itself accused
of broadcasting misinformation.3 However, a persuasive effect during the COVID-19 crisis allows
us to test whether Fox can affect behavior in a way that defies the recommendations of health
experts. An extant literature has found how slanted news coverage can cause viewers to doubt or
reject well-established scientific expert advice on policies for global warming (Hmielowski et al.,
2014) and vaccinations (Lewandowsky et al., 2017). The literature on advice-taking has found in
lab studies that decision-makers tend to overweight their opinions relative to those of an advisor
leading to inferior outcomes, even when the advisor is recognized as a highly-trained expert (e.g,
Harvey and Fischer (1997) and survey by Bonaccio and Dalal (2006)). Our case study therefore
    1 Claim #604 171 241, filed on April 2, 2020 by the Washington League For Increased Transparency and Ethics.
See https://www.sos.wa.gov/corps/business.aspx?ubi=604171241.
   2 See also the contemporaneous study by Bursztyn et al. (2020).
   3 A recent literature has analyzed what appears to be an increase in the supply of fake news, especially online

(Flynn et al., 2017; Lazer et al., 2018; Allcott et al., 2019). Some studies have demonstrated that fake news is seen
and recalled by consumers and, in some cases, changes their beliefs. During the 2016 elections, Allcott and Gentzkow
(2017) estimate that the average US voter saw and remembered at least one fake news story. Media misinformation
can also have a persuasive impact on beliefs (Allcott and Gentzkow, 2017; Guess et al., 2018).


                                                         2
offers a novel opportunity both to test for a persuasive effect of news media and its potential to
impact behavior in a manner that defies expert advice during a crisis.
   Our key data consist of Nielsen’s NLTV panel, measuring differences across US cable sys-
tems in the viewership of the three leading cable news channels: FOX News, CNN and MSNBC;
although in the main analysis we focus on the first two due to their higher viewership levels.
Nielsen’s FOCUS data tracking the line-up of channels across US cable markets will also play a
key role in our empirical strategy. We match viewership with a specific form of social distancing
behavior: the propensity to stay at home. Stay-at-home behavior is not only easier to measure, it
also matches more closely with state and municipal measures to manage compliance with social-
distancing behavior (hereafter “SD”). Since most social distancing policies allow for some forms
of essential trips away from home, we use SafeGraph data that track multiple forms of stay-at-
home behavior derived from cellphone location data. We then measure SD as the within-market
evolution in daily stay-at-home propensity relative to the baseline level in January 2020, before the
US outbreak of COVID-19. To measure the impact of social distancing on economic outcomes,
we use transaction data from Facteus and firm closure data and employee counts from Homebase.
   Our key empirical challenge arises from the likely self-selection of consumers’ cable news
viewing choices. Consumers base their television viewership choices on preferences that are likely
to be correlated with the factors influencing their SD choices. Following Martin and Yurukoglu
(2017), we exploit the quasi-random assignment of each news channel’s relative position across
cable markets. We find that channel position is a strong instrument and that a 1 standard deviation
decrease in position (towards 0) increases viewership by 0.158 rating points for Fox, and 0.091
rating points for CNN. News channel position across markets is also independent of the socio-
demographic factors that predict differences in SD behavior, consistent with our assumption of
random position assignment. Our IV approach will only use the incremental viewership across
markets induced by differences in channel position to measure the persuasive effect of viewership
on SD.
   OLS analysis of our SD measures generate a positive and statistically significant effect of Fox
News viewership from early March onwards. However, our IV estimates are considerably larger
and indicate a take-off in the Fox News effect in early March and a stabilization in mid March,
almost immediately after the declaration of a national emergency. We find that a 10% increase in
Fox News cable viewership (approximately 0.13 viewer rating points), which is approximately the
viewership change induced by a one standard deviation change in the Fox News channel position,
leads to a 1.3 percentage point reduction in the propensity to stay at home. The corresponding
average partial effect of Fox news viewership implies that 1 rating point increase (near doubling)


                                                 3
in cable viewership of Fox News reduces the propensity to stay at home by 9.9 percentage points
compared to the pre-pandemic average. Since the supply-side measures, such as business closures,
start to happen only two weeks later after the take-off of Fox News effects, the magnitudes of the
viewership effects reflect the persuasive effect of Fox News on viewers and not a feedback effect
from the equilibrium response of firms, at least early on. Our findings for CNN are inconclu-
sive, with imprecise point estimates centered near zero. Our findings imply a persuasion rate of
Fox News on non-compliance with stay-at-home behavior during the crisis of about 5.7% − 28.4%
across our various social distancing metrics. These magnitudes are comparable with the persuasion
rate of Fox News on voting behavior in the 2004 and 2008 presidential elections (Martin and Yu-
rukoglu, 2017). An exploratory analysis of transaction data from debit cards produces inconclusive
findings regarding an effect of Fox News viewership on consumer shopping behavior.
    Our data do not enable us to test the underlying mechanism through which Fox News view-
ership generates a persuasive effect on social distancing compliance. DellaVigna and Gentzkow
(2010) discuss two potential mechanisms. First, Fox News may change viewers’ beliefs in ways
that diverge from those expressed by leading health experts, causing a divergence from the rec-
ommended behavior or “egocentric advice discounting” (e.g. Yaniv and Kleinberger (2000) and
Yaniv (2004)). For instance, the coverage of COVID-19 may persuade viewers that social dis-
tancing is less effective than experts claim.4 Independently of the content of current broadcasts,
long-term exposure to Fox News may simply cause broad distrust in scientific experts (Hmielowski
et al., 2014) or in institutions (Sapienza and Zingales, 2012), including government agencies like
the CDC, perhaps destroying local social capital (Guiso et al., 2004) and, in turn, reducing the
propensity to internalize the externality from leaving home during the pandemic. Second, Fox
News viewership may reduce a viewer’s utility from SD compliance.5
    We also cannot directly test the extent to which our Fox News viewership effects reflect direct
persuasive effects as opposed to indirect effects mediated by political polarization (Martin and Yu-
rukoglu, 2017; Allcott et al., 2020). A growing association between distrust in scientific research
and conservative political views has emerged in the US since the 1970s (Gauchat, 2012); although
cultural worldviews have been found to be stronger predictors of trust in scientific experts than
political opinions (Weaver et al., 2017; Leiserowitz et al., 2013). We provide suggestive evidence
supporting the direct persuasive effect of Fox News on SD. Our findings are strongest in markets
   4 Several studies have studied the impact of fake news on beliefs (Allcott and Gentzkow, 2017; Barrera et al., 2020)
and its potential persuasive effect on voting behavior (Guess et al., 2018).
   5 For instance, Tuchman et al. (2018) find a complementary effect of brand advertising on consumer propensity to

buy the advertised brand, and Kamenica et al. (2013) find a physiological effect of advertising on the efficacy of a
drug. Viewership of Fox News might value the defiant aspects of non-compliance in social distancing behavior.



                                                          4
with the highest Democratic party vote shares during the 2016 election, suggesting that viewers in
strong Democrat markets are the most likely to be persuaded. In addition, our Fox News effects are
largest in late March and April when the White House actively endorsed the CDC’s recommenda-
tions for SD and lockdown but several Fox News hosts maintained their active stance against these
measures.
    We do not attempt to attribute the Fox News effects to health outcomes, namely cases and
deaths, for several reasons. First, to the best of our knowledge, COVID-19-related cases and deaths
are tracked at the more aggregate county level and not at the zipcode level. Second, at the time of
writing, experts still disagreed about the accuracy and reliability of current data which would limit
the interpretabilty of any association we might find with our behavioral outcomes (e.g., Nishiura
et al. (2020) and Akhmetzhanov et al. (2020)); although Hortacsu et al. (2020) have developed a
promising approach to infer the number of unreported infections. Multiple studies have pointed
towards the importance of social distancing for containing the disease (Matrajt and Leung, 2020;
Kissler et al., 2020b). Therefore, we believe our findings of FOX News effect on compliance
should inform epidemiological models on the extent to which, if any, these viewership effects are
large enough to impact transmission rates of the disease.
    Our findings add to a rapidly-emerging body of literature studying differential rates of com-
pliance in social distancing across the US in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. Several studies
have looked at differences associated with political partisanship, such as the correlation between
perceptions of risk, Trump support and social distancing (Barrios and Hochberg, 2020; Allcott
et al., 2020), beliefs associated with support for the Republican versus Democratic party (Painter
and Qiu, 2020), income (Wright et al., 2020), ethnic diversity (Egorov et al., 2020), or internet
access (Chiou and Tucker, 2020). Our work complements these findings by establishing a causal
effect of Fox News viewership on SD, which may account for some of these other correlates to the
extent that Fox viewership is correlated with political beliefs and other factors.6
    Closest to our work is the contemporaneous study by Bursztyn et al. (2020) to compare the
effects of viewership for Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight, two shows with different coverage
of COVID-19 coverage, on social distancing behavior. Our work differs in three important ways.
First, we measure the effect of TV viewers’ exposure to Fox News overall, rather than to a specific
show. Second, we measure SD compliance using actual cellphone movement data, allowing us
to attribute the effect of Fox News viewership on realized forms of social distancing. In contrast,
Bursztyn et al. (2020) use self-reported behavior from a survey of approximately 1,000 people.
   6 Gitmez et al. (2020) discuss this causal effect in the context of a theoretical model with endogenous acquisition
of information by news consumers in the economy.



                                                          5
Similarly, our data and identification strategy uses a granular cross-section of thousands of cable-
system level markets, as opposed to the coarser 210 DMA markets used in Bursztyn et al. (2020).
    More broadly, our work contributes to research on the persuasive effects of the news media on
on political opinion (Gerber et al., 2009) and various behaviors including political participation
(Gentzkow, 2006; Cagé, 2019), voting (Chiang and Knight, 2011; Snyder Jr and Strömberg, 2010;
Enikolopov et al., 2011), criminal sentencing decisions (Lim et al., 2015), hurricane evacuations
(Long et al., 2019), global warming (Hmielowski et al., 2014), and genocide (Yanagizawa-Drott,
2014).7 A subset of this work has found a persuasive effect of Fox News on voting behavior
(DellaVigna and Kaplan, 2007; Martin and Yurukoglu, 2017) and criminal sentencing (Ash and
Poyker, 2019). A related literature has looked at the supply of fake news (e.g., Allcott et al.,
2019) and the persuasive effect of fake news on beliefs (Allcott and Gentzkow, 2017; Guess et al.,
2018); although persuasive effects have mainly been measured for small news outlets and online
social media platforms. Our use of the Martin and Yurukoglu (2017) instrument reflects a broader
literature devising empirical strategies to measure the causal effect of communication media on
sales.8
    Sections 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, respectively, present a discussion of misinformation during the US
COVID-19 outbreak, our empirical model, our data, our results and our conclusions.


2      Fox, Misinformation and Social Distancing During the COVID-
       19 Outbreak in the US
Forty-nine percent of the US population uses television news programs as their primary source of
news (Shearer, 2018). It is therefore unsurprising that groups like the WLFITE have concentrated
their concerns about the potential harmful effects of alleged misinformation during the COVID-19
outbreak at Fox News, the largest US cable news channel for the past decade (Wulfsohn, 2020).
Of interest is whether exposure to cable news can persuade viewers to disregard warnings by
the global health community and engage in behaviors deemed risky by most health experts. As
explained above, it is unclear whether viewership effects reflect the impact of specific broadcasts
per se or reflect the effects of long-term exposure on trust in institutions or polarized attitudes
    7 Shapiro (2016) provides a model of media coverage of scientific information and applies it to the coverage of
climate change.
   8 These methods include geographic regression discontinuities (e.g., Shapiro, 2018; Shapiro et al., 2019; Spenkuch

and Toniatti, 2016), timing discontinuities (e.g., Sinkinson and Starc, 2019), instrumental variables (e.g., Gordon and
Hartmann, 2016) and the difference in timing between advertising scheduling and viewership, especially for Superbowl
ads (e.g., Hartmann and Klapper, 2016; Stephens-Davidowitz et al., 2017).


                                                          6
towards a specific political party. Regardless of the mechanism, Fox News’ coverage of COVID-19
has renewed concerns about potential risks from exposure (short or long-term) to misinformation.
    On January 30, 2020 the WHO declared COVID-19 as an international public health emergency
(Nedelman, 2020). Meanwhile, FOX News broadcast a series of stories downplaying the potential
risks from Covid-19 in the US throughout March 2020 as the virus began to threaten the US
and as Americans were forming beliefs about the severity of the threat. On February 27, host
Laura Ingraham accused the Democratic party of “weaponizing fear,” referring to them as the
“pandemic party” (The Ingraham Angle, 2020c). On March 10, popular Fox News host, Sean
Hannity, downplayed the risks of the outbreak:

      “So far in the United States, there’s been around 30 deaths, most of which came from
      one nursing home in the state of Washington...Healthy people, generally, 99 percent
      recover very fast, even if they contract it...Put it in perspective: 26 people were shot
      in Chicago alone over the weekend. I doubt you heard about it. You notice there’s no
      widespread hysteria about violence in Chicago.” (MediaMatters, 2020)

On the same day, Ingraham echoed this sentiment of the low risks from COVID-19:

      “We need to take care of our seniors. If you’re an elderly person or have a serious
      underlying condition, avoid tight, closed places, a lot of people, don’t take a cruise
      maybe. Everyone else wash your hands, use good judgment about your daily activi-
      ties.” (Farhi and Ellison, 2020)

    Some of the Fox News opinions echoed statements from the White House. On February
2, 2020, President Trump explained to Fox New host, Sean Hannity: “We pretty much shut it
[COVID-19] down coming in from China.” (Puhak, 2020). On March 9, the day before the Han-
nity broadcast above, President Trump tweeted: “The Fake News Media and their partner, the
Democrat Party, is doing everything within its semi-considerable power (it used to be greater!)
to inflame the CoronaVirus situation, far beyond what the facts would warrant. Surgeon General,
“The risk is low to the average American.” It was not until President Trump’s declaration of a
National Emergency on March 13 (85 FR 15337) that Hannity suddenly referred to the virus as a
“crisis.”
    In spite of these parallels, Fox News coverage frequently diverged from the opinions of the
White House. On March 13, Johns Hopkins recommended social distancing in the US (Pearce,
2020) and, the following day, the CDC recommended cancelling events with more than 50 people
(Kopecki, 2020). Later that week, President Trump explained in a news conference: “Therefore,


                                                 7
my administration is recommending that all Americans, including the young and healthy, work
to engage in schooling from home when possible, avoid gathering in groups of more than 10
people, avoid discretionary travel and avoid eating and drinking at bars, restaurants and public food
courts.” (Ari Shapiro and Richard Harris, 2020). Nevertheless, several Fox News hosts continued
to question the efficacy of social distancing and the reliability of health experts’ recommendations.
Ingraham broadcast “Coronavirus crisis is teaching us a lot about so-called experts,” referring
to scientific predictions of the disease spread as “lame panic-inducing models” (The Ingraham
Angle, 2020a). Even as late as April 30, Ingraham continued to dispute the effectiveness of social
distancing, arguing “Experts don’t like to admit their wrong, do they?” (The Ingraham Angle,
2020b).
   The second-largest US cable news channel, CNN, adopted a more dire tone consistent with
the views and recommendations of health experts. For instance, On February 13, CNN broadcast
an interview with CDC Director Dr. Robert Redfield, who predicted a widespread community
transmission. On February 26, CNN highlighted the following warning from a senior CDC official:
“It’s not a question of if coronavirus will spread, but when.” (Darcy, 2020) On March 2, they
published a story criticizing the Trump administration’s response as being out of step with the CDC
(McLaughlin and Almasy, 2020). CNN also warned about potentially misleading information on
Fox News (Cohen and Merrill, 2020). The third-largest channel, MSNBC, broadcast coverage that
was materially similar to CNN, including early warnings about the severity of COVID-19 (The
Rachel Maddow Show, 2020; Deadline: White House, 2020).
   A persuasive effect of cable news viewership during the pandemic could potentially generate
important health and economic implications. According to the Imperial College COVID-19 Team
(Ferguson et al. (2020), page 1), an optimal mitigation policy “...might reduce peak healthcare
demand by 2/3 and deaths by half.” (Ferguson et al. (2020), page 14). Similarly, Lewnard and Lo
(2020) describe social distancing as “the only strategy against COVID-19” while pharmaceutical
intervention are not available (p. 1).
   A persuasive effect of cable news viewership could also have economic implications:

      “In the near term, public health objectives necessitate people staying home from shop-
      ping and work, especially if they are sick or at risk. So production and spending must
      inevitably decline for a time.” (Bernanke and Yellen, 2020)

Exposure to the virus impacts the economy both through its effect on consumer spending, on the
demand side, and through labor supply, on the supply side. Eichenbaum et al. (2020) demonstrate
how “these [containment] policies exacerbate the recession but raise welfare by reducing the death


                                                 8
toll caused by the epidemic” (p.1). We therefore anticipate that a persuasive effect of cable news
viewership on SD compliance could, in turn, generate both supply and demand-side economic
impacts.


3      Model
The CDC defines social distancing as “keeping space between yourself and other people outside
of your home. To practice social or physical distancing: stay at least 6 feet (2 meters) from other
people, do not gather in groups, stay out of crowded places and avoid mass gatherings” (CDC,
2020b). To enforce social distancing, many state and local governments adopted stay-at-home and
shelter-in-place orders to increase the local propensity to stay at home.9 We focus the remainder
of our analysis on compliance with increased stay-at-home behavior.
     For an individual h in a given market z on day t, the difference in indirect utility from leaving
home versus staying is given by:

                               Uzth = αz +   ∑ βct ratingcz + λz(t) + ξzt + εzth                                      (1)
                                             c∈C

where αz captures local differences in amenities like stores and labor opportunities, λz (t) allows
for potentially differential trends across markets such as seasonality and weather as well as changes
in local economic amenities, ξzt is a (unobserved to the researcher) mean-zero, common shock to
the market, and εzth is a uniformly-distributed idiosyncratic random utility shock. Finally, ratingcz
measures the time-invariant (long term) viewership measure for news channel c ∈ C in market z.
This model is consistent with a dynamic discrete choice version of the framework in Allcott et al.
(2020) where staying at home reflects the inter-temporal trade-offs between leaving home today
(e.g., for consumption and/or labor purposes captured by αz , λz (t) and ξzt ) and the expected, future
health risks to the individual. In that framework, βct ratingcz captures the impact of viewership of
channel c on an individual’s expected future health risks.
     If individuals make decisions to stay at home to maximize utility, then the probability of staying
at home, yzt , in market z on day t is:

                                  yzt = αz +    ∑ βct ratingcz + λz(t) + ξzt ,                                        (2)
                                               c∈C
    9 For  instance, Sonoma County imposed the following measures: “Stay home and only go out for ’essential activ-
ities,’ to work for an ’essential business,’ or for ’essential travel’ as those terms are defined in the Order” (socoemer-
gency.org, 2020).



                                                            9
the linear probability model (Heckman and Snyder, 1997).
    During the base period, before social distancing was relevant in the US, expected stay-at-home
behavior is E(yzτ ). We define this base period as {τ|τ < t} where t denotes the first date during
which compliance with social distancing became relevant. We assume that cable news has no
impact on a household’s propensity to stay at home prior to the COVID-19 outbreak in the US
in 2020: βcτ = 0, ∀τ < t. The market fixed-effect αz already accounts for persistent effects
of viewership on behavior and, thus, βct captures deviations over time in channel c’s impact on
behavior. In our analysis below, we will analyze the timing of the start of social distancing as well
as the potential impact of news on this behavior.
    We then define compliance with social distancing as the change in staying-at-home behavior
after the emergence of COVID-19 in the US relative to a base pre-COVID period τ < t. Formally,
we define compliance, SDzt as follows

                                   SDzt ≡ yzt − E(yzτ |τ < t).                                     (3)

Combining (2) and (3), we obtain our model of SDzt and its determinants:

                                SDzt = βct ratingcz + ∆λz (t) + ξzt                                (4)

where ∆λz (t) is a difference relative to the base period τ < (t) allowing for SD to evolve in response
to differential changes across markets such as the timing and stringency of local stay-at-home and
shelter-in-place orders.
    Our key parameter, βct , measures the daily effect of cable news channel c viewership on SDzt .
Suppose we compare two markets, A and B, where market B has 1 rating point higher viewership
of channel c, rcz . We would expect to observe |βct | percentage points less SDzt on any given day
t in market B than in market A, measured as the change in stay-at-home behavior relative to the
base, pre-COVID period.


4     Data and Descriptive Analysis

4.1    Cable News Viewership
We use Nielsen’s monthly NLTV data to measure viewership of the three leading US cable news
channels – Fox News, CNN and MSNBC. We obtained the 2015 data through a partnership be-
tween Nielsen and the NBER. Since 2015 is the most recent year available through the NBER, we
also purchased the 2020 data directly from Nielsen. Nielsen tracks cable television audience sizes

                                                  10
using a rotating panel of households with meters and diaries recording their television viewing
behavior. We do not have access to the individual-level viewership behavior. The NLTV data we
obtained measure each channel’s viewership as the percentage of panelists who tune in to the chan-
nel for at least five successive minutes during a given quarter-hour time interval of the day. Each
channel’s monthly viewership rating consists of the average cable viewership for each channel
within a market across days and quarter-hour time slots.
    Ideally, we would use viewership from 2020. However, recent changes to Nielsen’s survey
methodology limit the scope of geographic regions for which cable system level or zipcode level
data are available. In 2020, only 44 of the 210 DMAs have zipcode-level data and the panelist
counts are low,10 exacerbating potential classical measurement error in our analyses below. For
instance, we observe zero panelists viewing Fox News in 71.3% of these zipcodes even though Fox
is the most highly-watched cable news channel.
    Instead, we use cable system level, or “headend”11 , data from November 2015, the most recent
period for which we have access to broad geographic coverage spanning 2,536 unique headends,
representing 30,517 zip codes from the 210 DMAs across the US.12 As we demonstrate below,
channel positions change very infrequently within a cable market. So, as long as the relationship
between viewership and position is persistent over time, our use of 2015 viewership data should
provide a reasonable proxy for 2020. We look at the persistent in this relationship in section 5.1
below. Furthermore, since our channel position instrument only affects cable subscribers in a
market, we use viewership data for cable subscribers in the headend. Analogous cable-subscriber
data were also used in previous work measuring viewership effects (Martin and Yurukoglu, 2017).
In 2019, 71% of US households had access to television13 and, according to 2020 NLTV data,
61% of these households subscribed to cable service. Therefore, our viewership data represent
approximately 43% of the population.
    We report descriptive statistics for each channel’s viewership ratings in November 2015 in
Table 1. Fox News stands out in its viewership, with an average monthly rating of 1.32%, higher
than the combined rating of both CNN and MSNBC (0.51% and 0.34% respectively). In other
words, on average, 1.32% of a headend’s viewers tune into Fox News during a given time slot in
a given month. Although not reported in the table, the population-adjusted probability of being
the highest-watched news channel in a headend is 65% for Fox News, 25% for CNN and 10%
  10 Only  7,294 zipcodes have at least one panelist and 94% of these zipcodes have less than 10 panelists.
  11 A  cable television headend is a master facility for receiving television signals for processing and distribution over
a cable television system.
   12 Apppendix A.3 describes how we pre-process the data.
   13 https://nscreenmedia.com/us-pay-tv/




                                                           11
for MSNBC. Therefore, the overwhelming majority of US viewers rely on Fox News as their
primary source for news. For the remainder of our analysis, we will focus on the effect of Fox
News viewership, while controlling for CNN and MSNBC as relevant competitors. In each of
our analyses, we will also look at the effect of the second-ranked channel, CNN, as a basis of
comparison.

                                                [Table 1 about here.]


4.2       Cable Systems’ Assignments of Channel Positions
We purchased Nielsen’s 2015 FOCUS data to determine the channel lineups across headends. As
in Martin and Yurukoglu (2017), we use the channel’s ordinal position (hereafter referred to as
“position”) instead of the exact numeric position to which a cable channel is assigned.14 Ordinal
positions correct for the occasional gaps in the lineups in some headends. We observe very little
change in a channel’s position over time within a market. Pooling each year between 2006 and
2015, we find that headend fixed-effects explain between 81% and 85% of the variation in positions
across headends and years for the three channels, whereas time fixed effects explain less than 2.5%.
In Table A6 in the Appendix A.11, we show that only 4% of the headend-channel positions change
from year to year. In sum, 2015 head-end positions should provide a good proxy for 2020.
    Table 2 presents summary statistics of the channel positions across headends for each chan-
nel. On average, CNN has the most favorable position, 34.8, relative to Fox News and MSNBC,
with respective average positions of 43.2 and 49.6. However, we also observe variation in each
channel’s position across headends, with standard deviations ranging from 17.7 to 23.4 and coef-
ficients of variation ranging from 0.41-0.53. To demonstrate the variation in positions, we present
the distribution of cable news channel positions across headends in Figure 1. On average, the
population-adjusted probability that each channel has the most favorable position in a given mar-
ket is 74% for CNN, versus 14% for MSNBC and 12% for Fox News. As we show in section 5.1
below, this variation in position is uncorrelated with market characteristics that predict viewership
levels.

                                                [Table 2 about here.]

                                               [Figure 1 about here.]
  14 Our   substantive findings do not change if we instead use the numeric positions.




                                                           12
4.3        Stay-at-Home Rates
We base our SD measures on household propensities to stay at home. Besides being more con-
sistent with state and local orders to enforce social distancing, staying at home is also easier to
measure than social distancing which would require monitoring the geographic proximity of indi-
viduals and the density of gatherings of individuals.15
    We use Safegraph data that track the GPS locations from millions of US cellphones to construct
a daily panel of census-block-level aggregate movements measures from January 1 to April 24,
2020.16 Safegraph makes these data available to academic researchers through their SafeGraph
COVID-19 Data Consortium. During this period, we observe an average daily number of 7.75
million devices overall and 265.17 in a given zipcode. We use these device data to construct three
daily measures of staying at home propensity by zipcode: (1) the share of devices that stayed at
home, (2) the share of devices that traveled to work for a part-time day, and (3) the share of devices
that traveled to work for a full-time day. The measures of full-time and part-time work travel are
inferred by Safegraph as follows. Part-time work is the share of devices in a market-day that dwell
in the same away-from-home location between 3 and 6 hours between 8am and 6pm local time.
Full-time work is measured the same way using a minimum of 6 hours of away-from-home dwell
time in the same location.
    Table 3 panel (a) presents summary statistics of within-zipcode means for each of our Safegraph
propensity variables during January 2020. Recall that we will use these means as our baseline stay-
at-home level in each market prior to the COVID-19 outbreak in the US.17 On average, we see that
23% of mobile devices remain at home in January; although we observe a lot of cross-market
heterogeneity. Accordingly, our SD measures account for these heterogeneous baseline behaviors
by looking at the difference in stay-at-home propensity relative to January.

                                            [Table 3 about here.]

    To summarize the evolution of stay-at-home behavior, Figure 2(a) reports the cross-zipcode
daily mean for each of our three Safegraph propensity variables. Surprisingly, we see no evidence
of a change in the overall mean daily stay-at-home propensity before March 13th, the date President
Trump declared a national emergency. On March 13th, the level of stay-at-home propensity lies
within the range observed as far back as January 1, 2020. In fact, several states had already issued
  15 Bursztyn et al. (2020) circumvent this problem using self-reported rates of social distancing with a survey.
  16 For   a detailed description of the data, please visit:                https://docs.safegraph.com/docs/
social-distancing-metrics.
   17 The CDC reports the first US case of COVID-19 on January 22, 2020 (CDC, 2020a). But as we show below, we

find no discernible change in SD behavior until March 2020.

                                                       13
their own emergency declarations much earlier: Washington (February 29), California (March 4),
New York (March 7) and Lousiana (March 11) (Lasry et al., 2020). We do not detect a national
increase in SD (i.e., growth in stay-at-home relative to January) until March 14 for each of our
three measures. By April 1, 2020, the share of devices staying home almost doubles relative to
January, an increase of almost 20 percentage points. We see comparable timing in the pattern of
declines in SD measured through work trips; although the magnitudes are smaller at approximately
5 percentage points.
   For the remainder of our analysis, we use equation (3) to define SD for each of our three
Safegraph measures where January 2020 is our base, per-COVID-19 period:

                                       SDzt = yzt − ȳz,Jan                                      (5)

where ȳz,Jan is the within-market-z mean SD across each of the days in January, 2020. Table 3
presents summary statistics of the daily SD measures across zipcodes between February 1 and July
10, 2020. This period pools days before and after the start of the COVID-19 crisis in the US. On
April 1, 2020, we find that the average SD is 16.5, -7.3 and -4.4 percentage points based on the
share of homebound devices, share of devices at work full time and share of devices at work part
time, respectively. That same day, we observe a positive SD based on homebound devices in more
than 98% of zipcodes. Therefore, by April all zipcodes have experienced at least some compliance
in the sense of higher stay-at-home rates than in January 2020.

                                       [Figure 2 about here.]


4.4   Business Closures and the Supply Side
By reducing consumption, social distancing compliance also generates a demand shock to local
businesses, as well as a potential labor supply shock. We use local US business data from Home-
base,18 a scheduling and timesheet company that tracks the hours worked by the employees of
small businesses. The data track the daily hours worked for 695,782 employees and managers
from 68,307 firms and 78,850 business locations, across 9 industries. The data span 15,783 zip-
codes for the period from January 1, 2020 to July 4th, 2020. The largest industries represented are
food and beverages, retail, and health care and fitness. For each zipcode and day, we compute the
total number of firms reported “still open” (at least one worker checked in) and the total number of
workers that sign into work. We report descriptive statistics in the part (c) of Table 3. The average
zipcode-day has 2.43 open firms and 10.72 signed-in workers.
  18 https://joinhomebase.com/data/



                                                 14
      To analyze the potential impact of COVID-19, we plot the time-series of the cross-zipcode aver-
age daily number firms open and number of workers signed-in in Figure 2, panel (b). As expected,
our two supply-side variables track our three SD variables closely, with a large negative shock on
March 13, the timing of the declaration of a national emergency. We observe a gradual decline
that stabilizes in late March. Prior to March 13, both number of businesses open and number of
workers that sign into work are stable from January until mid March, except for the systematic
day-of-week effects. This coincidence of changes in supply-side and demand-side variables with
the emergency declaration raises a potential concern about the exact interpretation of a persuasive
effect of Fox News Viewership on SD. To the extent that a Fox News effect on SD contributes to
incremental local business closures, our estimates of a Fox News effect on SD might be over-stated
if they also capture an indirect feedback effect through business closures on the supply-side of the
market. We discuss this issue in our analysis of the results in section 5.4 below.


4.5       Consumer Spending
The recent macroeconomic literature analyzing the economic and health trade-offs from COVID-
19 and containment policies recognizes the direct impact of social distancing on consumer demand
and consumption behavior. We use Facteus, a provider of financial data for business analytics,
to obtain measures of consumer spending activity by zipcode. The Facteus debit card transac-
tion panel contains approximately 10 million debit cards issued by “Challenger Banks,”19 payroll
cards,20 and government cards.21 Therefore, the cardholder panelists tend to come from middle
and lower income brackets, a segment of the population that is likely more affected by COVID-19
financially. The transactions are aggregated each day for each of 321 Merchant Category Codes
(MCCs) and 1,484 brand names. Table 3, panel (d), presents descriptive statistics of the number of
observed transactions, debit cards used, and total expenditure.


5       Empirical Results
We analyze the determinants of SD, social distance compliance, and the role of cable news view-
ership. A concern with OLS estimates of equation (4) is the potential endogeneity bias in βct ,
which arises if cable news viewership behavior, ratingcz , is self-selected on aspects of viewers’
preferences that also influence their SD compliance: E(ξzt · ratingcz |Xz ) 6= 0.
    19 Challengerbanks tend to be newer banks that serve underbanked consumers.
    20 Payroll
             cards are employer-issued debit cards for direct debit of wages to employees.
    21 Government cards are primarily issued to alimony recipients to access funds from garnished wages.



                                                         15
   To obtain consistent estimates of βct , we instrument for viewership using the channel line-ups
in local cable systems (Martin and Yurukoglu, 2017). Our key identifying moment condition is

                                    E(ξzt · positioncz |Xz ) = 0 ∀c ∈ C.                                        (6)

   We discuss our instrument and the first stage analysis in the next subsection. We then discuss
our IV and OLS results for the determinants of SD.


5.1    First Stage: Channel Positions and Viewership
We now discuss our position instruments and the first-stage regression results for our IV estima-
tor. We refer the interested reader to Martin and Yurukoglu (2017) for a thorough discussion of
the validity of the moment condition (6). Our first and second stages control for the total num-
ber of channels available in a cable system since markets with more channels are more likely to
assign cable news channels to higher-numbered positions. As supporting evidence of the valid-
ity of our instrument, Appendix Tables A2 and A3 show that, conditional on number of channels
available, the ordinal positions of Fox News and CNN channels are uncorrelated with (i) the socio-
demographic factors that predict SD, (ii) pre-COVID-19 stay-at-home behavior (January 2020),
and (iii) timing of the first COVID-19 case in the county.
   We run the following first-stage regression of ratingscz on the exogenous variables in the model:

                               ratingcz = γc positioncz + ρc Xz + ηcz ∀c ∈ C                                    (7)

where Xz contains market characteristics including the total number of channels in zipcode z and
state fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the headend level. In several specifications, we
weight our observations by the number of panelists in the headend to correct for sampling error in
our viewership variable.
   Tables 4 and A1 (latter in the Appendix) report the results from our first-stage regressions
(7) for Fox and CNN, respectively. Consistent with prior literature, higher-numbered channel
positions are associated with lower viewership, a finding that is robust across specifications. In the
preferred specification that accounts for state fixed effects and weights observations by the number
of panelists (Column 1), we find that increasing a channel’s position by one position in the lineup
is associated with 0.0089 and 0.005 lower rating for Fox and CNN, respectively. Therefore, a
one standard-deviation improvement in channel position would increase viewership by over 0.158
rating points for Fox and over 0.092 rating points for CNN, all else equal.22
  22 The   mean and standard deviation of Fox viewership are 1.32% and 2.6 respectively, and 0.51 and 1.5 for CNN.


                                                         16
   Our instrument seems to work well. The magnitude of Fox’s own-position effect is robust
across specifications and is slightly larger in our preferred specification (column 1) that includes
controls and weights and generates an incremental F-statistic of 14.22. The effect of Fox News
channel position on viewership is robust to including demographic controls (Column 2), with the
magnitude of the effect and precision almost unchanged. We find a similar result for the role of
own-position on CNN viewership with a robust, statistically significant magnitude across specifi-
cation and an incremental F-statistic that varies from 7.4 to 13.2 across specifications.
   We also verify whether 2015 viewership and position data provide a reasonable proxy for 2020.
As we established in section 4.2 above, channel positions change very infrequently over time.
Since we use these stable channel positions as our instrument, then 2015 data will work well as
long as the relationship between viewership and channel position is also stable over time. In a
separate Appendix,23 we use the November 2010 and November 2015 data on viewership to test
for persistence in the first-stage relationship between positions and viewership. We fail to reject the
hypotheses of equal means (i.e., equal expected viewership) and equal slope coefficients for 2010
and 2015. At the 5% significance level, we can rule out that the difference in means is larger in
absolute value than 25% of one standard deviation in the observed 2015 viewership levels. We can
also rule out that the difference in the predicted effect of a 1 standard deviation change in position
on viewership in 2010 differs from that of 2015 by more than 14% of one standard deviation in
the observed 2015 viewership levels. Using the 2020 viewership data for the first stage generates
inconclusive position effects; although we fail to reject that these effects equal those using 2015
data. Finally, as we show below, the IV point estimates of the Fox News effect are qualitatively
similar when we use 2020 and 2015 viewership data, but are too imprecise to be conclusive when
we use 2020. Collectively, these findings confirm that the position-viewership relationship is stable
over time and that 2015 viewership data provide a reasonable proxy for 2020.

                                        [Table 4 about here.]


5.2    Second Stage: The Persuasive Effects of Cable News Viewership on SD
We now report our results for the determinants of SD and the effects of cable news viewership.
Since the exact timing of emergency declarations varies over time and across states and messaging
from the various news channels also varies over time, we let ∆λz (t) from equation (4) include
state-specific time fixed-effects as well as competitor-channel-position time effects. We use the
  23 Available   upon request.



                                                  17
following empirical specification of our SD model:

           SDzt = βct ratingcz + δz +        ∑        φst I{z∈s} +     ∑      ζc0t position0c + ωt Nz + ξzt          (8)
                                           s∈States                  0
                                                                     c ∈C−c

where the dependent variable SDzt is measured as described in equation (3) above. Nz denotes the
number of channels in the cable system, and C−c denotes the set of other news channels (i.e., CNN
and MSNBC when c = Fox) since we include time-specific effects of competitor news channel
positions to control for substitution between news channels.
    We report both OLS and IV estimates of equation (8).24 To facilitate the large number of fixed
effects, we collapse our daily time series into four-day periods so that t indexes the 41 four-day
intervals between February 1, 2020 and July 10th, 2020.25 For identification purposes, we restrict
βc,Feb1 = 0 for the first time period in the sample (February 1, 2020). In placebo regressions, using
only the cross-section of markets on a given date in early February, we systematically find null
effects for βct , typically rejecting values larger than 0.01 (i.e., less than 1 percentage point of SD
propensity). Therefore, we interpret non-zero values of βct later in our sample as actual changes in
compliance in social distancing, and not relative to a base period.

                                               [Table 5 about here.]

    Table 5 summarizes our analysis of variation in the SD measure, based on the share of home-
bound devices, using the panel regression (8).26 Column (1) shows that market characteristics
including demographics, Xz , explain only 7% of the variation in SD. However, several of these
characteristics turn out to have large effects on SD, in particular population density and median
income. These findings could be due to the fact that the outbreak started earlier in urban areas
than in rural areas (Dingel and Neiman, 2020) thereby increasing the incentive to comply with SD
in urban areas, and the fact that income may correlate with professions that are more conducive
to working from home. Column (2) replaces these demographics with the zipcode fixed-effects,
which increase the explained variation to 32%, suggesting substantial additional unexplained per-
sistent heterogeneity across markets. Column (3) adds time-specific state fixed effects to control
for differential timing and stringency of stay-at-home orders, increasing the share of explained
  24 Our  IV estimator includes the interaction effects between our position instruments and two-day time fixed effects.
The first-stage results are the same for each interaction since we use cross-sectional data on Fox News viewership and
channel positions.
   25 Using a daily frequency would quarduple the number of viewership×time interaction coefficients and time effects

for each channel, in addition to the 27, 173 zip code and 2, 009 state by time fixed effects already in the model. The IV
regression would require a very high-dimensional set of instruments, substantially increasing computational costs.
   26 See Appendix A.4 for analogous tables for SD measured using Full-Time and Part-Time Work Travel.




                                                            18
variation in SD to 82%. Columns (4) through (6) report OLS results that include the viewership
effects. Column (4) adds time-varying viewership effects, increasing the explained variation to
85%. Column (5) also includes time-specific position effects for competitor news channels, CNN
and MSNBC, respectively.27 Finally, column (6) controls for zipcode-level differential trends in
SD by including time-specific effects of median income and population density, two factors that
we find (in column 1) to be important drivers of SD. For the remainder of this section, unless we
state otherwise, assume results are based on the specification in column (5).
    Defining SD as the overall share of homebound devices, Figure 3 displays the time-specific
estimates of the effect of viewership on SD, βct , for Fox News and CNN, respectively. We report
both the IV and the OLS estimates along with their respective 95% confidence intervals. Standard
errors are clustered at the headend level.28 The systematically smaller magnitude of the OLS esti-
mates most likely reflects attenuation bias from measurement error in the use of 2015 viewership
levels as noisy proxies for 2020. In Appendix A.12, we use a simulation exercise to show how
we expect the measurement error in our empirical setting to create a larger attenuation bias than
the endogeneity bias. The OLS estimates should be multiplied by a factor of 1/0.0753 or more to
correct for this attenuation bias.
    Even with this attenuation bias, our OLS estimates indicate a significant pattern of Fox News
viewership effects on SD compliance. The IV and OLS point estimates of βct first become negative
and statistically significant on the 4-day window starting February 28, 2020, the day before the
Governor of the State of Washington issued the first emergency declaration in the US.29 These Fox
News viewership results are robust to a “saturated” OLS specification that includes time-specific
effects for a large number of demographic variables that predict SD; although the magnitudes fall
by about 50% (see Figure A4 in Appendix A.7.).

                                             [Figure 3 about here.]

    Before discussing our IV estimates, we first run reduced-form regressions of model (8) using
the channel position instrument in the place of viewership for the specifications corresponding to
column (5) of Table 5. The estimates and confidence intervals for the effect of Fox’s, CNN’s and
MSNBC’s respective positions on share of homebound devices are plotted in Figure A3 in the
Appendix A.6. For Fox News, we find significant position effects that closely track the cross-
time patterns of our IV estimates discussed below. In contrast, our point estimates for CNN and
  27 Although   not reported herein, we find similar results if we use own viewership of CNN or MSNBC instead, and
position of competitors.
   28 Figure A5 in Appendix A.8 shows that our main results are robust to clustering the standard errors at the state

level.
   29 See Proclamation 20-25 (2020).



                                                         19
MSNBC positions, respectively, are not significant. For MSNBC, the magnitudes are also quite
small.
    The interpretation of the IV estimates requires some care. The IV estimate of βFOX,t measures a
local average treatment effect (hereafter “LATE”), which we interpret as the average partial effect
(hereafter “APE”) of Fox News viewership by cable subscribers on overall SD for date t across
markets.30 As we discussed above in section 4, we use viewership for the subset of the population
with cable subscriptions since this is the sub-population affected by our position instrument.
    Turning to our IV estimates of βFOX,t , we observe some interesting dynamics in the viewership
APE on SD compliance that seem too systematic to be driven by chance alone. As anticipated, we
find extremely small and statistically insignificant viewership effects throughout February, prior to
the first emergency declaration. Only after March 1st, the day after the first emergency declaration
in the US as explained above, do the IV estimates become systematically negative and statistically
significant. The magnitudes increase between March 1st and March 13th, after which the point
estimates appear to stabilize. As explained earlier, President Trump declared a national emergency
on March 13th. At least two mechanisms might lead to the evolution in βFOX,t during those two
first two weeks of March. First, the Fox News effect may have become more persuasive over time
early on during the crisis, possibly due to evolving messaging. Alternatively, if the causal effect
of Fox News viewership on SD only activates when local residents perceive a risk, the evolution
in βFOX,t may reflect geographic differences in the timing of a perceived need for SD and/or of
a statewide emergency declaration. We explore the role of emergency declarations and timing in
more detail in section 5.4 below. For most of the analysis below, we will focus on the post-March
13th period when the Fox News effect appears to have stabilized.
    We observe a small point estimate as late as the 4-day window between February 24 and 28:
−3.38 × 10−4 . At the 5% significance level, we can rule out that, on average across markets, a
1 rating point increase in Fox News viewership among cable subscribers would not decrease SD
by more than 1.5 percentage points. However, on February 28, 2020, the average across-market
decrease in SD due to a 1 rating point increase in Fox Viewership among cable subscribers jumps
to 2.1 percentage points, and we cannot rule out a decrease as large as −3.8 percentage points at
the 5% significance level. By March 15th (includes first business day after national emergency
declaration), when the Fox viewership effects have stabilized, our point estimate implies that a
1 rating point increase in Fox News viewership among cable subscribers would decreases SD by
   30 If we assume a homogeneous effect of position on viewership in our first stage, then IV is a consistent estimate of

the average partial effect (e.g., Wooldridge (2008)). This assumption rules out, for instance, that markets with a high
taste for Fox News, including non-cable-subscribers such as satellite, do not have a larger incremental viewership due
to position.


                                                          20
−9.9 percentage points and we can rule out decreases smaller than 4.3 percentage points at the 5%
significance level. The shift in the estimates towards the origin at the start of June coincide with
the Black Lives Matter protests in response to the death of George Floyd.
   As a robustness check, Figure A7 in Appendix A.10 compares the panel IV regression (8)
estimates of βFox,t corresponding to columns (5) and (6) of Table 5. The latter specification controls
for zipcode-level differential trends through time-specific effects of population density and median
income, in addition to our time-specific state fixed effects. These demographic interactions add
82 more parameters to the regression model. As expected, our viewership effects become more
precise; although the point estimates become smaller in magnitude. Our qualitative results are
robust to these controls: for each time period prior to April 24, we fail to reject the equality of each
of our Fox News point estimates under models (5) and (6). In Section 5.5, we report the implied
persuasion rates based on both models.
   As a final robustness check, Figure A6 in Appendix A.9 plots the time-series of IV point
estimates using our 2020 viewership data, which span a more limited set of zipcodes. As expected,
the point estimates are extremely imprecise. However, they follow the same qualitative pattern as
our results using the 2015 viewership data. Besides demonstrating robustness, the persistence in
the point estimates using 2015 and 2020 data may point towards a longer-term mechanism driving
our Fox News effects. While the extant literature has considered persuasive effects through beliefs
and preferences (e.g., DellaVigna and Gentzkow, 2010), the robustness from using either 2015 or
2020 viewership levels may also indicate a longer-term effect of viewership that is not driven by
specific messaging on a given day. For instance, long-term exposure to Fox News may generate
broad distrust in institutions and a taste for defiance.
   In contrast, our results for CNN are mixed at best. Our OLS estimates become positive and
significant shortly after March 1, 2020. These findings could be suggestive of a positive causal
effect of CNN viewership on SD, that reinforces the recommendations of health experts. However,
OLS could be incidentally correlated with SD purely due to self-selected viewership choices. Our
IV estimates are extremely imprecise and inconclusive. While we fail to reject that IV is the same
as OLS, we also fail to reject that IV is zero or even negative.
   In Appendix A.5, we report the analogous results for SD measured as share of people working
full time and share of people working part time, in Figures A1 and A2, respectively. Although
more imprecise, our qualitative findings are consistent with the stay-at-home rates above, with
the point estimates stabilizing around March 15. Our OLS estimates are significant and positive:
Fox News viewership decreases compliance by increasing the propensity to go to work relative to
the (unreported) negative estimated time effects. OLS is again much smaller than IV. On March


                                                   21
15, our APE interpretation of our IV estimates imply that a 1 rating point increase in Fox News
viewership among cable subscribers would increase the share of devices leaving home for work
by 0.4 percentage points for full-time work and 1.7 percentage points for part-time work; although
we fail to reject increases as small as 0 percentage points and 0.7 percentage points for full- and
part-time work respectively at the 5% significance level. These deviations are smaller in magnitude
than the overall stay-at-home effects above, but nevertheless confirm the negative impact of Fox
News viewership on compliance with social distancing.
    The corresponding results for CNN are once again mixed. While our OLS estimates suggest a
positive effect of CNN on social distancing compliance, we fail to reject that our IV estimates have
a zero or even negative effect due to lack of precision.
    Although not reported herein, we also applied the same approach to test for and measure a
Fox News viewership effect on the local number of debit card transactions across 45 categories of
businesses using the Facteus data. Our findings were inconclusive, with statistically insignificant
and imprecise Fox News viewership effects.31


5.3     Media Persuasion vs Political Polarization
We believe our findings above reflect a direct, persuasive effect of Fox News on viewers’ SD be-
havior. However, the strong association between SD and political polarization during the pandemic
(Allcott et al., 2020; Barrios and Hochberg, 2020) combined with the causal effect of Fox News
viewership on republican vote shares during several past presidential elections (Martin and Yu-
rukoglu, 2017) suggest an alternative explanation. Our estimated Fox News effects might reflect,
at least in part, an indirect effect mediated by political polarization.
    We have several reasons to doubt that our findings merely reflect political polarization. Con-
temporaneous survey research finds a positive association between conservative media use and
beliefs that the CDC was exaggerating the seriousness of the virus, even after controlling for po-
litical preferences (Hall Jamieson and Albarracı́n, 2020). While suggestive, our estimated Fox
News effects in Figure 3 stabilize shortly after the national emergency declaration, by which point
the White House endorsed the CDC’s recommendation for SD and partial shut-down.32 President
Trump continued to endorse SD throughout March and April, stating, “Social distancing: That’s
the way you win.”33 Meanwhile, Fox News maintained its stance against the lockdown and SD
  31 Results   available upon request.
  32 https://www.whitehouse.gov/articles/15-days-slow-spread/
  33 https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/remarks-president-trump-vice-president-pence-members-

coronavirus-task-force-press-briefing-14/



                                                       22
and, in April, a “slew of Fox News opinion hosts and anchors [were] pushing back on public health
experts and urging President Donald Trump to abandon its social distancing policies and reopen the
economy” (Relman, 2020). Therefore, our Fox News effects arise and persist throughout a period
when Fox News repeatedly broadcast anti-SD content that was contrary to the recommendations
of the White House.
   In fact, we see no change in the Fox News effect at the start of May, when the White House
switched its stance in favor of the re-opening of social and economic activity as the CDC rec-
ommendations expired (Freking and Colvin, 2020). If we instead use our saturated model with
demographic controls (Figure A7), we observe a reduction in the Fox News effect (towards zero)
which again corroborates the direct persuasion interpretation of the estimates. As expected, the po-
larizing effect of having the Republican party actively recommended against SD crowds out some
of the Fox News effect.
   We conduct an additional suggestive check. We split the zip codes into three groups based
on the terciles of the vote share from the 2016 presidential election outcomes: liberal, neutral
and conservative. We re-run our reduced-form regression (8) separately in each of these groups.
Therefore, we test for Fox News channel position effects on SD using only position variation within
zip codes that are already the most polarized in favor of the Republican party and Democratic
party, respectively. We plot the channel position effects for each group in Figure 4. We find small
and insignificant effects in republican markets, which is consistent with the polarization findings in
(Allcott et al., 2020; Barrios and Hochberg, 2020): residents of these markets are already persuaded
regardless of Fox News. More surprising are the large and significant Fox News channel position
effects in the most Democratic-party-leaning markets, consistent with Fox viewership having a
direct persuasive effect. Therefore, we find a persuasive effect of Fox News even when we do not
pool across our entire cross-section of politically polarized areas.

                                       [Figure 4 about here.]


5.4    Supply vs Demand and the Timing of Response to COVID-19
As explained in section 4.4, we observe an almost simultaneous take-off in cross-market, daily
average SD and supply-side variables (e.g., business closures and worker sign-in rates) on March
13th. This co-movement raises some concerns about the exact interpretation of βFOX,t and a mis-
attribution of the supply side to the persuasive effect of the news. While we cannot fully disentangle
the supply and demand side drivers of SD compliance, we provide some suggestive evidence below
supporting a direct effect of Fox viewership on SD.

                                                 23
   We split the zipcodes into two groups: (1) early-case markets that reported at least one case
according to the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE)
before March 13, 2020; and (2) late-case markets that had not yet reported at least one case by
March 13, 2020. Using overall share of homebound devices, we then compute the daily differ-
ence in the cross-market national average SD between early-case markets and late-case markets.
Using the Homebase data on number of businesses open, we also compute the daily difference in
the cross-market national average number of businesses open between early-case and later-case
markets. Figure 5 displays the time-series for each of these two differences. The difference in SD
between these markets is flat throughout January and February and close to zero. However, only
after February 29th, the date that Washington became the first state to declare an emergency, do
we observe a deviation in the share of people staying at home between the early-case and late-case
markets. The difference grows steadily until just after March 13th, the date of the declaration of a
national emergency, and then stabilizes. In contrast, the difference in number of businesses open
is flat all the way until March 13, after which we see more business closures in early-case than
late-case markets.

                                      [Figure 5 about here.]

   Figure 5 also plots the time-series in our IV estimates of βFox,t . The daily estimates of the
Fox viewership APE closely track the evolution in the difference in SD between early-case and
late-case markets. We see a similar take-off on February 29th, followed by a steady increase until
March 13th, at which point there is a jump and stabilization shortly thereafter. In sum, βFOX,t
appears to have stabilized by the time business closures are beginning. Once again, the evidence is
suggestive of a direct effect of Fox News on SD compliance since business closures on the supply
side of the market do not appear to be driving our estimated Fox News viewership APEs during
the early days of the pandemic.


5.5   The Persuasion Rate of Cable News
The findings in the previous section contribute to a growing literature documenting the persuasive
effects of media communications. Following DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010), we compute the
corresponding persuasion rate for Fox News during the early stages of the COVID-19 outbreak.
To determine the persuasion rate, we use our overall propensity to stay-at-home measures of SD.
Recall that SD is measured relative to the baseline rate of staying at home in January, before the
US outbreak had begun.


                                                24
    For consistency with past research measuring the Fox News persuasion rate, we consider the
binary “treatment” of an additional 30 minutes exposure to Fox News per week (DellaVigna and
Kaplan, 2007).34 Increasing the average household’s viewership by thirty minutes per week (0.298
rating points) corresponds to the change in viewership induced by a two-standard-deviation change
in Fox News’ channel position, or a shift from the 10th to 90th percentile position.35
    Following DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010), we measure the persuasion rate of Fox News on
non-compliance with SD as follows:

                                                           1 E Fox
                                       PFOX,t = 100 ×                                                           (9)
                                                          SFox SPFox

where E Fox measures the effect of 30 minutes of Fox News viewership on SD, SFox measures
the share of the population that watches Fox News, and SPFox measures the expected share of the
population potentially persuadable to cease SD (i.e., SD compliers and would-be SD compliers but
for the treatment of 30 minutes of Fox News viewership).
    Our estimated APE for Fox News corresponds to the sub-population of Fox News viewers
with cable subscriptions, approximately 60% of total television viewership according to the 2020
                                                                                                       βFox,t
NLTV data. Therefore, the Fox News viewership effect on SD for cable viewers is                         0.6 .    If
we also assume that all viewers of Fox News, regardless of the source of their service, have the
same average viewership effect, and consider our treatment of additional 0.298 rating points, then
EtFox = − 0.298
           0.6 βFox,t .
    We do not observe the share of the population exposed to Fox News.36 Therefore, we start
with the assumption that everyone in the US is exposed to Fox News in some way through such
sources as paid television, the internet, or other news sources: SFox = 100%. This assumption is
plausible for at least two reasons. First, Fox News is the most highly-watched news channel in the
US and 49% of US households cite cable news channels as their primary news source (Shearer,
2018). Given that the average Fox News viewership rating is around 1.32% and following Martin
and Yurukoglu (2017)’s conversion rate of viewership points to hours of television, the average
household sees 2.22 hours of Fox News per week. Second, this assumption is conservative in
the sense that the persuasion rate mechanically increases in magnitude if we define the exposed
  34 Martin  and Yurukoglu (2017) report using a “continuous version” of this treatment.
  35 To convert rating points to minutes watched per week, we follow Martin and Yurukoglu (2017) and let 1 rating
point correspond to 1.68 hours per week of Fox News viewership for the average household. A two-standard-deviation
change in Fox News’ channel position, 17.77∗2 = 35.54, induces a viewership change of 0.0089∗35.54 = 0.316 rating
points, or 0.316 ∗ 100.80 = 31.9 minutes per week.
  36 Based on a 2017 survey, Kennedy and Prat (2019) report that 33% of people report getting news from Fox News

Channel in the last 7 days, providing a lower bound on the number of people exposed to Fox news.


                                                       25
population more narrowly. For instance, we could use the alternative, narrower definition based on
the 71% of US households that subscribe to a television service in 2019 and, therefore, had access
to Fox News since it is available in 99% of headends: SFox = 71%.37
      Finally, we need to determine the share of persuadable viewers who would comply with social-
distancing but-for the Fox News effect. We assume the random utility from staying at home, εth
in equation (2), is independent of television viewing behavior so that Fox viewers have the same
expected probability of staying home as the rest of the market. We can measure the expected
                                                                  ¯ t − 0.298 βFOX,t where SD
persuadable share of the population on date t as follows: SFox = SD                         ¯ t is
                                                                  P         0.6
the cross-market average SD in period t.
      The resulting persuasion rate is:
                                                     −0.298
                                                       0.6 βFox,t
                                 PFOX,t = 100 ×                       .                         (10)
                                                   ¯ t − 0.298 βFox,t
                                                  SD      0.6

      We report the time-series of the persuasion rates (10) from March 15, 2020 onwards in Figure
6(a). On March 15, the day President Trump declared a national emergency, our point estimate of
the persuasion rate is 41.9%; although we cannot rule a rate as high as 55.9% and as low as 28%
at the 5% significance level. The persuasion rates fall slightly between mid March and early April
(although most of these differences are statistically insignificant), and remains stable afterwards.
For instance, our lowest point estimate is 20.1% on April 4; although we cannot rule out rates
                                                                                            ¯ t
between 10.8% and 31.1% at the 5% significance level. The decline reflects the increase in SD
between mid March and early April (Figure 2) along with the relative stability of βFOX,t (Figure
3).
      Our average persuasion rate is 28.4% when we use share of homebound devices to measure SD.
If we narrow the viewership population to the 71% of television service subscribers, the average
persuasion rate increases to 40%. Defining SD with homebound devices is quite stringent given
that most social distancing policies allow essential trips, such as grocery shopping. In Figure 6(b),
we also report the persuasion rates using full-time and part-time work travel. As expected, the
average persuasion rate is much lower at 5.7% and 14.5% for part-time and full-time, respectively.
      As a robustness check, we also compute the average persuasion rate using our Fox viewership
effects that control for zipcode level trends, as in column (6) of Table 5 and Figure A7. The
corresponding average persuasion rate between March 15 and July 10 is 9.5%.
      These persuasion rates are larger than the average rate of 9.5% for other communication media
reported in DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010). Recall that our APE does not account for the poten-
  37 https://nscreenmedia.com/us-pay-tv/




                                                   26
tial heterogeneity in Fox viewership effects across markets. Nevertheless, our persuasion rate for
Fox News on social distancing compliance is comparable to the 58%, 27% and 28% persuasion
rates reported in Martin and Yurukoglu (2017)’s analysis of the ability of Fox News viewership
to convert voters from one party to another in the 2000, 2004 and 2008 federal elections. Some
of this work has measured larger persuasion rates, particularly for negative messages: Enikolopov
et al. (2011) find a voter persuasion rate of 66% from an independent television channel broad-
casting against voting for United Russia in the 1999 Russian parliamentary elections; and Adena
et al. (2015) measure a voter persuasion rate of 36.8% from the radio message “do not vote for the
extremist parties” during Germany’s 1930 elections.38
     An important and novel distinction herein is that our persuasion rate arises in spite of the highly-
publicized social-distancing recommendations by leading health experts in the US and globally.
Therefore our findings also contribute to the advice-taking literature which has mostly documented
the “advice discounting” phenomenon in laboratory studies (Bonaccio and Dalal, 2006). Our field
evidence demonstrates how the media can contribute to such advice discounting in a real-world
setting. Our findings also contribute to the growing literature documenting a growing distrust
in scientific experts, especially among conservatives (Gauchat, 2012), and the mediating role of
media in creating this distrust (Hmielowski et al., 2014; Dunlap and McCright, 2010). We cannot
rule out that our Fox News viewership effects reflect political polarization around SD compliance
(Allcott et al., 2020), with long-term viewership primarily polarizing viewers towards Republican
sentiment. That said, the extant literature has found that trust in scientific experts is moderated
more by an individual’s cultural worldviews than by her political orientation (Weaver et al., 2017;
Leiserowitz et al., 2013).

                                             [Figure 6 about here.]


6       Conclusions
We find strong evidence of a Fox New viewership effect on several measures of the incremental
propensity to stay at home during the early stages of the COVID-19 crisis in the US, relative to Jan-
uary 2020 immediately before the outbreak. While comparable in magnitude to the voting context,
the persuasive effect of Fox Viewership on social distancing compliance is quite large, especially
given that it defies the expert recommendations from leaders of the US and global health com-
    38 Our
        findings also align with a literature on negative political advertising (Ansolabehere et al., 1999; Wattenberg
and Brians, 1999).



                                                         27
munities. Interestingly, we fail to find conclusive effects of CNN viewership on social distancing
compliance.
   We do not analyze the implications for the spread of COVID-19 cases or deaths. However,
we believe our findings would be relevant to policies to flatten-the-curve. In particular, news
media appears to be sufficiently persuasive to dissuade many individuals from complying with
containment policies. However, we leave it to health experts to determine whether the magnitude
of these changes in compliance are sufficient to affect health outcomes in a material way.
   We also believe our findings are relevant to the on-going macroeconomic research to study
the economic trade-offs associated with social distancing. However, our exploratory analysis of
consumer transactions data were inconclusive. We believe an important direction for future re-
search would use more detailed expenditure data to determine whether and how social distancing
compliance affects demand and consumption behavior.
   Our data do not permit us to test the exact mechanism through which Fox News viewership
persuades individuals against complying with social distancing. It is likely the effect stems from
the contrarian and allegedly misleading broadcasts starting in early March regarding the risks of
COVID-19 and the effectiveness of distancing. However, we cannot rule out that persistent, long-
term differences in exposure to Fox News across region have generated long-term differences in
trust in governments and institutions. Similarly, we cannot rule out that exposure to Fox News is
changing tastes for defiance of institutions. The qualitative similarities between our point estimates
using 2015 viewership data and 2020 viewership data may be suggestive of such a long-term
effect. Testing between these mechanisms would represent an interesting and important direction
for future research.
   Similarly, we cannot rule out that Fox News viewership effects during the COVID-19 outbreak
reflect public statements by the Republican administration, as opposed to statements by Fox News
anchors. During the 2014 US midterm elections, Campante et al. (2020) show that Republican
candidates’ associations between Ebola virus risks and immigration shifted voter attitudes against
immigration, in spite of the fact that health experts described Ebola risks in the US as very low.
The fact that our findings coincide with a period when the White House endorsed distancing and
lockdown while Fox News’ anchors and hosts maintained their contrarian stance is suggestive
of persuasion, but not conclusive. Similarly, the finding that our Fox News effects appear to be
strongest in the most Democrat-leaning markets is also suggestive of a persuasive effect that is
distinct from polarization. Nevertheless, we see an interesting future research direction that studies
whether news media broadcasts directly influence viewer beliefs or merely serve as a platform to
promote the beliefs of political candidates.


                                                 28
References
Adena, M., Enikolopov, R., Petrova, M., Santarosa, V., and Zhuravskaya, E. (2015). Radio and the
  Rise of the Nazis in Prewar Germany. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4):1885–1939.
  5.5

Akhmetzhanov, A. R., Mizumoto, K., Jung, S.-M., Linton, N. M., Omori, R., and Nishiura, H.
  (2020). Estimation of the actual incidence of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in emergent
  hotspots: The example of Hokkaido, Japan during February-March 2020. 2020, Vol. , Page: 1,
  page 1. 1

Aleem, Z. (2020). A new poll shows a startling partisan divide on the dangers of the coronavirus.
  Vox. 1

Allcott, H., Boxell, L., Conway, J., Gentzkow, M., Thaler, M., and Yang, D. Y. (2020). Polarization
  and Public Health: Partisan Differences in Social Distancing during COVID-19. Available at
  SSRN 3570274. 1, 3, 5.3, 5.5

Allcott, H. and Gentzkow, M. (2017). Social Media and Fake News in the 2016 Election. Journal
  of Economic Perspectives, 31(2):211–236. 3, 4, 1

Allcott, H., Gentzkow, M., and Yu, C. (2019). Trends in the diffusion of misinformation on social
  media. Research & Politics, 6(2). 3, 1

Ansolabehere, S. D., Iyengar, S., and Simon, A. (1999). Replicating experiments using aggre-
  gate and survey data: The case of negative advertising and turnout. American political science
  Review, 93(4):901–909. 38

Ari Shapiro and Richard Harris (2020).        White House Announces New Social Distancing
  Guidelines Around Coronavirus.        https://www.npr.org/2020/03/16/816658125/white-house-
  announces-new-social-distancing-guidelines-around-coronavirus. 2

Ash, E. and Poyker, M. (2019). Conservative News Media and Criminal Justice: Evidence from
  Exposure to Fox News Channel. Columbia Business School Research Paper. 1

Barrera, O., Guriev, S., Henry, E., and Zhuravskaya, E. (2020). Facts, alternative facts, and fact
  checking in times of post-truth politics. Journal of Public Economics, 182:104123. 4




                                                29
Barrios, J. M. and Hochberg, Y. V. (2020). Risk perception through the lens of politics in the time
  of the COVID-19 pandemic. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics
  Working Paper, (2020-32). 1, 5.3

Beauchamp, Z. (2020). The stunning contrast between Biden and Trump on coronavirus. Vox. 1

Bernanke, Y. and Yellen, J. (2020). The Federal Reserve must reduce long-term damage from
  coronavirus. https://www.ft.com/content/01f267a2-686c-11ea-a3c9-1fe6fedcca75. 2

Bonaccio, S. and Dalal, R. S. (2006). Advice taking and decision-making: An integrative literature
  review, and implications for the organizational sciences. Organizational Behavior and Human
  Decision Processes, 101(2):127–151. 1, 5.5

Bursztyn, L., Rao, A., Roth, C., and Yanagizawa-Drott, D. (2020). Misinformation During a
  Pandemic. Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper Series 2020-44, Becker
  Friedman Institute, Chicago, Il. 2, 1, 15

Cagé, J. (2019). Media competition, information provision and political participation: Evidence
  from French local newspapers and elections, 1944–2014. Journal of Public Economics, page
  104077. 1

Campante, F., Depetris-Chauvin, E., and Durante, R. (2020). The Virus of Fear: The Political
  Impact of Ebola in the U.S. Technical Report w26897, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Cambridge, MA. 6

CDC      (2020a).        Cases     of     Coronavirus   Disease   (COVID-19)       in   the   U.S.
  https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cases-updates/cases-in-us.html. 17

CDC       (2020b).               Social       Distancing,     Quarantine,       and      Isolation.
  https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/social-distancing.html.
  1, 3

Chiang, C.-F. and Knight, B. (2011). Media bias and influence: Evidence from newspaper en-
  dorsements. The Review of Economic Studies, 78(3):795–820. 1

Chiou, L. and Tucker, C. (2020). Social distancing, internet access and inequality. Technical
  Report 0898-2937, National Bureau of Economic Research. 1




                                                 30
Cohen, M. and Merrill, C. (2020). Timeline: How Trump was out of step with the CDC dur-
  ing coronavirus response. https://www.cnn.com/interactive/2020/03/politics/coronavirus-trump-
  cdc-timeline. 2

Darcy,      O.    (2020).       How    Fox   News     misled   viewers   about   the   coronavirus.
  https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/12/media/fox-news-coronavirus/index.html. 2

Deadline:        White House (2020).      Officials warn of coronavirus spread in the United
  States.         https://www.msnbc.com/deadline-white-house/watch/officials-warn-of-coronavirus-
  spread-in-the-united-states-79426117558. 2

DellaVigna, S. and Gentzkow, M. (2010). Persuasion: Empirical evidence. Annual Review of
  Economics, Vol 3, 2(1):643–669. 1, 5.2, 5.5, 5.5

DellaVigna, S. and Kaplan, E. (2007). The Fox News effect: Media bias and voting. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 122(3):1187–1234. 1, 5.5

Dingel, J. I. and Neiman, B. (2020). How Many Jobs Can be Done at Home? Working Paper
  26948, National Bureau of Economic Research. 5.2

Dunlap, R. E. and McCright, A. M. (2010). 14 Climate change denial: Sources, actors and strate-
  gies. Routledge handbook of climate change and society, page 240. 5.5

Ecarma, C. (2020). Fox News Is Preparing to Be Sued Over Coronavirus Misinformation. Vanity
  Fair. 1

Egorov, G., Enikolopov, R., Makarin, A., and Petrova, M. (2020). Divided we stay home: Social
  distancing and ethnic diversity. Technical Report 0898-2937, National Bureau of Economic
  Research. 1

Eichenbaum, M. S., Rebelo, S., and Trabandt, M. (2020). The Macroeconomics of Epidemics.
  Working Paper 26882, National Bureau of Economic Research. 2

Enikolopov, R., Petrova, M., and Zhuravskaya, E. (2011). Media and political persuasion: Evi-
  dence from Russia. The American Economic Review, 101(7):3253–3285. 1, 5.5

Farhi, P. and Ellison, S. (2020). On Fox News, suddenly a very different tune about the coronavirus
  - The Washington Post. The Washington Post. 2



                                                 31
Ferguson, N., Laydon, D., Nedjati-Gilani, G., Imai, N., Ainslie, K., Baguelin, M., Bhatia,
  S., Boonyasiri, A., Cucunubá, Z., and Cuomo-Dannenburg, G. (2020).                Impact of non-
  pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality and healthcare demand. Im-
  perial College COVID-19 Response Team. Preprint at Spiral https://doi. org/10.25561/77482.
  1, 2

Flynn, D., Nyhan, B., and Reifler, J. (2017). The nature and origins of misperceptions: Under-
  standing false and unsupported beliefs about politics. Political Psychology, 38:127–150. 3

Freking, K. and Colvin, J. (2020). Trump says he won’t extend social distancing guidelines. Asso-
  ciated Press News. 5.3

Gauchat, G. (2012). Politicization of science in the public sphere: A study of public trust in the
  United States, 1974 to 2010. American sociological review, 77(2):167–187. 1, 5.5

Gentzkow, M. (2006).       Television and voter turnout.    The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  121(3):931–972. 1

Gerber, A. S., Karlan, D., and Bergan, D. (2009). Does the media matter? A field experiment mea-
  suring the effect of newspapers on voting behavior and political opinions. American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 1(2):35–52. 1

Gitmez, A., Sonin, K., and Wright, A. L. (2020). Political Economy of Shelter-in-Place Compli-
  ance. page 43. 6

Gordon, B. R. and Hartmann, W. R. (2016). Advertising competition in presidential elections.
  Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 14(1):1–40. 8

Guess, A., Nyhan, B., and Reifler, J. (2018). Selective exposure to misinformation: Evidence from
  the consumption of fake news during the 2016 US presidential campaign. European Research
  Council, 9. 3, 4, 1

Guiso, L., Sapienza, P., and Zingales, L. (2004). The role of social capital in financial development.
  American economic review, 94(3):526–556. 1

Hall Jamieson, K. and Albarracı́n, D. (2020). The Relation between Media Consumption and
  Misinformation at the Outset of the SARS-CoV-2 Pandemic in the US. Harvard Kennedy School
  Misinformation Review. 5.3



                                                 32
Hartmann, W. and Klapper, D. (2016). Super Bowl Ads. Stanford University Graduate School of
  Business Research Paper No. 15-16, Stanford University. 8

Harvey, N. and Fischer, I. (1997). Taking advice: Accepting help, improving judgment, and sharing
  responsibility. Organizational behavior and human decision processes, 70(2):117–133. 1

Heckman, J. J. and Snyder, J. M. (1997). Linear Probability Models of the Demand for Attributes
  with an Empirical Application to Estimating the Preferences of Legislators. The RAND Journal
  of Economics, 28:S142–S189. 3

Hmielowski, J. D., Feldman, L., Myers, T. A., Leiserowitz, A., and Maibach, E. (2014). An
  attack on science? Media use, trust in scientists, and perceptions of global warming. Public
  Understanding of Science, 23(7):866–883. 1, 5.5

Hortacsu, A., Liu, J., and Schwieg, T. (2020). Estimating the Fraction of Unreported Infections
  in Epidemics with a Known Epicenter: An Application to. Technical Report WP No. 2020-37,
  Becker Friedman Institute, Chicago. 1

Kamenica, E., Naclerio, R., and Malani, A. (2013). Advertisements impact the physiological
  efficacy of a branded drug. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
  States of America, 110(32):12931–12935. 5

Kennedy, P. J. and Prat, A. (2019). Where do people get their news? Economic Policy, 34(97):5–
  47. 36

Kissler, S. M., Tedijanto, C., Goldstein, E., Grad, Y. H., and Lipsitch, M. (2020a). Projecting the
  transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 through the postpandemic period. Science. 1

Kissler, S. M., Tedijanto, C., Lipsitch, M., and Grad, Y. (2020b). Social distancing strategies for
  curbing the COVID-19 epidemic. medRxiv. 1

Kopecki, D. (2020). CDC recommends canceling events with 50 or more people for the next eight
  weeks throughout US. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/16/cdc-recommends-the-cancellation-
  of-events-with-50-or-more-people-for-the-next-eight-weeks-throughout-us.html. 2

Lasry, A., Kidder, D., Hast, M., Poovey, J., Sunshine, G., Winglee, K., Zviedrite, N., Ahmed, F.,
  and Kidder, D. (2020). Timing of Community Mitigation and Changes in Reported COVID-19
  and Community Mobility       Four U.S. Metropolitan Areas, February 26–April 1, 2020. MMWR.
  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69(15):451–457. 4.3

                                                33
Lazer, D. M., Baum, M. A., Benkler, Y., Berinsky, A. J., Greenhill, K. M., Menczer, F., Metzger,
  M. J., Nyhan, B., Pennycook, G., Rothschild, D., et al. (2018). The science of fake news.
  Science, 359(6380):1094–1096. 3

Leiserowitz, A. A., Maibach, E. W., Roser-Renouf, C., Smith, N., and Dawson, E. (2013). Cli-
  mategate, public opinion, and the loss of trust. American behavioral scientist, 57(6):818–837.
  1, 5.5

Lewandowsky, S., Ecker, U. K., and Cook, J. (2017). Beyond misinformation: Understanding
  and coping with the “post-truth” era. Journal of applied research in memory and cognition,
  6(4):353–369. 1

Lewnard, J. A. and Lo, N. C. (2020). Scientific and ethical basis for social-distancing interventions
  against COVID-19. The Lancet. Infectious diseases. 2

Lim, C. S., Snyder Jr, J. M., and Strömberg, D. (2015). The judge, the politician, and the press:
  Newspaper coverage and criminal sentencing across electoral systems. American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics, 7(4):103–35. 1

Long, E., Chen, M. K., and Rohla, R. (2019). Political Storms: Emergent Partisan Skepticism
  of Hurricane Risks. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3339723, Social Science Research Network,
  Rochester, NY. 1

Martin, G. J. and Yurukoglu, A. (2017). Bias in Cable News: Persuasion and Polarization. Ameri-
  can Economic Review, 107(9):2565–2599. 1, 4.1, 4.2, 5, 5.1, 5.3, 5.5, 34, 35, 5.5, A.3

Matrajt, L. and Leung, T. (2020). Evaluating the Effectiveness of Social Distancing Interventions
  to Delay or Flatten the Epidemic Curve of Coronavirus Disease. Emerging Infectious Diseases,
  26(8). 1

McLaughlin, E. and Almasy, S. (2020). CDC official warns Americans it’s not a question of
  if coronavirus will spread, but when. https://www.cnn.com/2020/02/25/health/coronavirus-us-
  american-cases/index.html. 2

MediaMatters (2020). Sean Hannity attempts to minimize the coronavirus concerns by comparing
  it to violence in Chicago. https://www.mediamatters.org/coronavirus-covid-19/sean-hannity-
  attempts-minimize-coronavirus-concerns-comparing-it-violence. 2



                                                 34
Nedelman, M. (2020). World Health Organization declares coronavirus a public health emer-
  gency of international concern - CNN. https://www.cnn.com/2020/01/30/health/coronavirus-
  who-public-health-emergency-international-concern-declaration/index.html. 2

Nishiura, H., Kobayashi, T., Miyama, T., Suzuki, A., Jung, S.-M., Hayashi, K., Kinoshita, R.,
  Yang, Y., Yuan, B., Akhmetzhanov, A. R., and Linton, N. M. (2020). Estimation of the asymp-
  tomatic ratio of novel coronavirus infections (COVID-19). International journal of infectious
  diseases: IJID: official publication of the International Society for Infectious Diseases, 94:154–
  155. 1

Painter, M. and Qiu, T. (2020). Political Beliefs affect Compliance with COVID-19 Social Distanc-
  ing Orders. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3569098, Social Science Research Network, Rochester,
  NY. 1

Pearce, K. (2020). What is Social Distancing and How Can it Slow the Spread of Covid-19.
  https://hub.jhu.edu/2020/03/13/what-is-social-distancing/. 2

PewResearch (2020). Cable TV and Coronavirus: How Americans perceive the outbreak and view
  media coverage differ by main news source. Pew Research Center’s Journalism Project. 1

Proclamation 20-25 (2020). 29

Puhak, J. (2020). Coronavirus: President Trump said US authorities ’shut it down.’ Here’s what
  that means. https://www.foxnews.com/travel/airlines-us-coronavirus-outbreak-travelers-china.
  2

Relman, E. (2020). Coronavirus: Fox News hosts pressure Trump to end lockdowns, reopen econ-
  omy - Business Insider. https://www.businessinsider.com/coronavirus-fox-news-hosts-pressure-
  trump-end-lockdowns-reopen-economy-2020-4. 5.3

Sapienza, P. and Zingales, L. (2012). A Trust Crisis. International Review of Finance, 12(2):123–
  131. 1

Shapiro, B., Hitsch, G. J., and Tuchman, A. (2019). Generalizable and Robust TV Advertising
  Effects. SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3273476, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY.
  8

Shapiro, B. T. (2018). Positive Spillovers and Free Riding in Advertising of Prescription Pharma-
  ceuticals: The Case of Antidepressants. Journal of Political Economy, 126(1):381–437. 8

                                                35
Shapiro, J. M. (2016). Special interests and the media: Theory and an application to climate
  change. Journal of public economics, 144:91–108. 7

Shearer,   E. (2018).       Social media outpaces print newspapers in the U.S. as a
  news source. https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/12/10/social-media-outpaces-print-
  newspapers-in-the-u-s-as-a-news-source. 2, 5.5

Sinkinson, M. and Starc, A. (2019). Ask your doctor? Direct-to-consumer advertising of pharma-
  ceuticals. The Review of Economic Studies, 86(2):836–881. 8

Snyder Jr, J. M. and Strömberg, D. (2010). Press coverage and political accountability. Journal of
  political Economy, 118(2):355–408. 1

socoemergency.org (2020). No. C19-03 Order of the Health Officer of the County of Sonoma:
  Shelter in Place. https://socoemergency.org/order-of-the-health-officer-shelter-in-place/. 9

Spenkuch, J. and Toniatti, D. (2016). Political Advertising and Election Outcomes. CESifo Work-
  ing Paper Series 5780, CESifo. 8

Stephens-Davidowitz, S., Varian, H., and Smith, M. D. (2017). Super returns to Super Bowl ads?
  Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 15(1):1–28. 8

The Ingraham Angle (2020a). The coronavirus crisis is teaching us a lot about the so-called experts.
  http://video.foxnews.com/v/6149181785001/. 2

The   Ingraham     Angle    (2020b).         Experts   don’t    like   to   admit   they’re   wrong.
  http://video.foxnews.com/v/6153322981001/. 2

The Ingraham Angle (2020c).          The pandemic party. Left weaponizing coronavirus fears.
  http://video.foxnews.com/v/6136344806001/. 2

The    Rachel    Maddow      Show      (2020).         Rachel    Maddow      Coronavirus      Special.
  http://www.msnbc.com/transcripts/nav-rachel-maddow-show/2020-02-25. 2

Trump, D. (2020). Declaring a National Emergency Concerning the Novel Coronavirus Disease
  (COVID-19) Outbreak. Federal Register, pages 15337–15338.

Tuchman, A. E., Nair, H. S., and Gardete, P. M. (2018). Television ad-skipping, consumption
  complementarities and the consumer demand for advertising. Quantitative Marketing and Eco-
  nomics, 16(2):111–174. 5

                                                 36
Wattenberg, M. P. and Brians, C. L. (1999). Negative campaign advertising: Demobilizer or
  mobilizer? American political science review, 93(4):891–899. 38

Weaver, S. R., Jazwa, A., Popova, L., Slovic, P., Rothenberg, R. B., and Eriksen, M. P. (2017).
  Worldviews and trust of sources for health information on electronic nicotine delivery systems:
  Effects on risk perceptions and use. SSM-population health, 3:787–794. 1, 5.5

Wooldridge, J. M. (2008). Instrumental variables estimation of the average treatment effect in the
  correlated random coefficient model. Advances in econometrics, 21:93–117. 30

Wright, A. L., Sonin, K., Driscoll, J., and Wilson, J. (2020). Poverty and economic disloca-
  tion reduce compliance with covid-19 shelter-in-place protocols. University of Chicago, Becker
  Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper, (2020-40). 1

Wulfsohn, J. A. (2020). Fox News reaches highest viewership in network’s history, topping
  MSNBC, CNN in 2020. https://www.foxnews.com/media/highest-viewership-network-history-
  msnbc-cnn-2020. 2

Yanagizawa-Drott, D. (2014). Propaganda and conflict: Evidence from the Rwandan genocide.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4):1947–1994. 1

Yaniv, I. (2004). The Benefit of Additional Opinions. Current Directions in Psychological Science,
  13(2):75–78. 1

Yaniv, I. and Kleinberger, E. (2000).    Advice Taking in Decision Making: Egocentric Dis-
  counting and Reputation Formation. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
  83(2):260–281. 1




                                               37
Figure 1: Distribution of channel positions across headends for each of the three news channels
                   0.03




                   0.02
         Density




                   0.01




                   0.00
                          0       50                    100              150
                                             Ordinal Position

                                   Channel   CNN      Fox News   MSNBC




                                               38
                                       Figure 2: Stay-at-home propensity over time

                     50%
                                              State of Emergency
                                                   Announced
                     40%



                     30%
 value




                     20%



                     10%



                     0%
                             Jan                                 Apr                                                Jul
                                                                     Date

                                     Metric   Completely Homebound          Full Time Work   Part Time Work


                                                        (a) Safegraph Data


                                                                                                                          60000
 Number of workers




                     2e+05




                                                                                                                                  Number of firms
                                                                                                                          40000




                     1e+05
                                                                                                                          20000

                                              State of Emergency
                                                   Announced
                     0e+00                                                                                                0
                               Jan                             Apr                                            Jul
                                                               date

                                               Metric      No. Firms        No. Workers


                                                        (b) Homebase Data



The solid lines and the shared regions correspond to the predicted values and confidence regions of the local
polynomial regression, estimated with LOESS method.


                                                               39
                       Figure 3: Effect of channel viewership on share of people at home
                       0.05             State of Emergency
                                             Announced
                       0.00

                      −0.05
            βFox, t



                      −0.10

                      −0.15

                      −0.20

                              Feb       Mar                 Apr         May   Jun           Jul


                                                                   IV   OLS

                                              (a) Fox News effect – βctFox

                       0.6

                                       State of Emergency
                       0.4                  Announced


                       0.2
            βCNN, t




                       0.0


                      −0.2


                              Feb     Mar               Apr             May   Jun           Jul


                                                                  IV    OLS

                                                (b) CNN effect – βctCNN

We allow for flexible state-level trends by including a state by time fixed effects interactions, as well as for
flexible effects of other news channels’ viewership by including an interaction of time fixed effects with
number of channels in cable system and other news channels’ positions.




                                                              40
         Figure 4: Reduced Form Fox News effect by Terciles of Republican 2016 Vote Share



         0.002


                       State of Emergency
ζFox,t




                            Announced
         0.001



         0.000


                 Feb            Mar              Apr              May     Jun          Jul


                       Democratic Zipcodes          Neutral Zipcodes    Republican Zipcodes

                                             (a) Baseline Model




         0.002


                       State of Emergency
ζFox,t




                            Announced
         0.001



         0.000


                 Feb            Mar              Apr              May     Jun          Jul


                       Democratic Zipcodes          Neutral Zipcodes    Republican Zipcodes

                                            (b) With Demograpics




                                                    41
                                      Figure 5: Fox News viewership effects, social distancing compliance and business closures

                                          8
                                              Number of Firms Open
                                              Share of Devices Homebound




                                                                                                                                  Difference in Share of Devices Homebound
 Difference in Number of Firms Open




                                                                      State of Emergency
                                          6                               Washington
                                                                           (Feb 29th)




                                          4

                                                                                           State of Emergency
                                                                                                 National
                                                                                               (March 13th)

                                          2




                                          0

                                               Jan                                                      Apr            Jul


                                       0.00

                                      −0.04
βt,Fox




                                      −0.08

                                      −0.12




                                                                                                       42
                                       Figure 6: Persuasion rates, PFOX,t

                          1.00
Persuasion Rate, PFOX,t




                          0.75




                          0.50




                          0.25




                          0.00
                                 Apr                 May                         Jun   Jul



                                          (a) Share of Homebound Devices

                          1.00
Persuasion Rate, PFOX,t




                          0.75



                          0.50



                          0.25



                          0.00


                                 Apr                 May                         Jun   Jul



                                                  Full Time Work   Part Time Work


                                       (b) Part-Time and Full-Time Work Travel




                                                           43
                         Table 1: Summary statistics for NLTV data
                         Mean     Median     SD     Min      Max     Num Headends
                                                   Ratings
           CNN           0.51      0.17      1.5     0       40.03       2502
           Fox News      1.32      0.49      2.6     0       32.59       2499
           MSNBC         0.34      0.03     1.11     0       17.16       2335
Viewership ratings are average cable viewership for each channel within a market across days and
                                     quarter-hour time slots.




                                              44
                 Table 2: Summary statistics for FOCUS data
                  Mean     Median       SD      Min      Max   Num Headends
                                             Positions
    CNN           34.85       32      18.31      1       163        2502
    Fox News      43.2        41      17.77      1       177        2499
    MSNBC         49.64       46      23.43      3       182        2335
Positions correspond to ordinal positions of channels in local cable system lineups.




                                        45
                         Table 3: Summary statistics of the stay-at-home propensity variables
              Measure                    Mean       Median          SD      Min      Max        Obs     # Zips   # Days
                     (a) Baseline (January Average) Stay-at-Home Propensity in Safegraph Data
Share Homebound Devices                  0.24        0.24          0.04     0.05      0.5               27,173
Share Devices at Work Full Time          0.07        0.07          0.02     0.01     0.18               27,173
Share Devices at Work Part Time          0.11        0.11          0.02     0.03     0.21               27,173
                   (b) Social Distancing Compliance based on Safegraph Data (Feb 1st - July 10th)
SD (Share Homebound Devices)         0.07            0.06          0.09     -0.41    0.69     4,374,628 27,173     161
SD (Share Devices at Work Full Time) -0.03           -0.03         0.03     -0.17    0.35     4,374,628 27,173     161
SD (Share Devices at Work Part Time) -0.04           -0.04         0.04      -0.2    0.37     4,374,628 27,173     161
                                                   (c) Homebase Data
Number of Workers                        10.72         4           18.63     0       523      2,446,365 15,783     155
Number of Firms                          2.43          1            3.58     0        61      2,446,365 15,783     155
                                                    (d) Facteus Data
Number of Cards                          822.94      259          1633.27    0      164547    197,379   21,931      9
Number of Transactions                   1010.63     317          2012.35    0      201769    197,379   21,931      9
Total Spent ($1000)                      30.37       9.11          64.82     0      6773.57   197,379   21,931      9
  Homebound devices are defined as devices that did not leave Geohash-7 of their home. Devices displaying full-time
  (respectively, part-time) work behavior are those that spent more than 6 (respectively, 3-6) hours at Geohash-7 location
  other than their home. The unit of analysis is zipcode-day.




                                                             46
                   Table 4: The effect of channel position on ratings - FOX

                                      Effect of channel position’s on ratings of Fox News
                                        (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)
Ordinal Position of Fox News       −0.0089∗∗∗       −0.0083∗∗∗     −0.0067∗∗∗      −0.0057∗∗
                                    (0.0024)         (0.0023)       (0.0026)        (0.0025)

Demographic Controls                                     x                              x
Intab weights                            x               x
Cable System Controls                    x               x               x              x
State FEs                                x               x               x              x
F (pos variables)                     14.22            13.34           6.86           5.28
Observations                          26,411          22,854          21,234         18,155
Adjusted R2                           0.3040          0.3256          0.2016         0.2172
 a   Stars: ∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors clustered on cable system level.
     Demographic controls include: median zipcode income, share of population with bach-
     elor degree, labor force participation, share of population that is white, share of popula-
     tion below poverty line, median age, log population density and county-level republican
     vote share in 1996 elections. Cable system controls include number of channels in cable
     system and positions of competing news channels.




                                               47
                     Table 5: Summary statistics for panel regressions - FOX
                                     (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
R2                                  0.07       0.32        0.82       0.85        0.86       0.89
N                                 1043570    1043570     1043570    1043570     1043570    1043570
# Clusters                          2253       2253        2253       2253        2253       2253
Demographic controls                 x
Zip FE                                           x          x           x           x          x
State X Time                                                x           x           x          x
FXNC Viewership X Time                                                  x           x          x
Cable System Controls X Time                                                        x          x
Basic Demographics X Time                                                                      x
  Standard errors are clustered on cable system level. Observations are weighted by the number of
  panelists in the NLTV data. Demographic controls include: median income, share of population
  with bachelor degree, labor force participation, share of population that is white, share of popula-
  tion below poverty line, median age, log population density and county-level republican vote share
  in 1996 elections. Cable System Controls include the positions of competing news channels and
  number of channels in a system. Basic Demographics include median income and log population
  density.




                                                48
A     Appendix

A.1    First Stage Regressions for CNN
                                       [Table A1 about here.]


A.2    Instrumental Validity
                                       [Table A2 about here.]

                                       [Table A3 about here.]


A.3    Cleaning and Merging NLTV and FOCUS Data
The data were pre-processed for a universe of channels that are available on local cable systems
in the US and recorded in the NLTV and FOCUS datasets. We merge the November 2015 NLTV
viewership data with the annual 2015 FOCUS data on channel positions by headend number and
station name. Following Martin and Yurukoglu (2017), we convert the numeric positions of chan-
nels to their ordinal positions based on the sequential order of each channel in the lineup. Similar
data are available for each February and November between 2006 and 2015.
    We follow the procedure outlined by Martin and Yurukoglu (2017) to map headends to zip
codes. 52.7% of the zip codes have a single headend in the NLTV/FOCUS data. For zip codes
with 2 or more headends, we use the headend with the largest number of cable subscribers. This as-
signment rule is unlikely to influence our results since the largest headend accounts for at least half
of total subscribers in 97.2% of the zip codes (subscribers are counted as subscribers of headends
present in each zip code).
    For our analysis, we retain the viewership and position information for the three largest ca-
ble news channels: Fox News, CNN, and MSNBC. The data from November 2015 span 2,536
headends, representing 30,517 zip codes from 210 DMAs.


A.4    Additional Tables
                                       [Table A4 about here.]

                                       [Table A5 about here.]




                                                  49
A.5    Other SD Outcomes
                                     [Figure A1 about here.]

                                     [Figure A2 about here.]


A.6    Reduced Form Estimates
                                     [Figure A3 about here.]


A.7    “Saturated” OLS Estimates Controlling for Demographics
                                     [Figure A4 about here.]


A.8    OLS and IV Estimates with State-Level Clustering
                                     [Figure A5 about here.]


A.9    IV Estimates with 2020 Viewership
                                     [Figure A6 about here.]


A.10     IV Estimates with Flexible Demographic Controls
                                     [Figure A7 about here.]


A.11     Channel Position Changes
Using the historical FOCUS data going back to 2006, we count, for each of the three news channels,
the number of headends where (numeric) channel position stays exactly the same from one year to
the next (for those headends which are present in both years). Table A6 reports these results. We
see that for the large majority for headends, (numeric) positions of the three news channels remain
constant.

                                      [Table A6 about here.]




                                                50
A.12     Simulation of the Attenuation Bias
We present a simulation exercise to demonstrate how attenuation bias in the OLS estimates due to
measurement error in Fox New viewership can overwhelm the endogeneity bias, as in Figure 3. To
mimic our setting where we use the 2015 data to proxy for 2020 viewership, we use the empirically
observed correlation in 2010 and 2015 Fox News viewership from the NLTV data. We assume the
2010 and 2015 viewership are drawn from the same data-generating process.
        t
   Let rFOX,z denote the true Fox News viewership in market z in year t. We assume that social
distancing compliance, SDz , is determined by viewership:

                                                2015
                                       SDz = β rFOX,z + εz + µz

                                                      2015 µ ) = 0; but E(r 2015 ε ) 6= 0 as view-
where εz and µz are random disturbances, such that E(rFOX,z z              FOX,z z
ership is endogenous.
                                                            t
   In the data, we observe a noisy measure of viewership, r̃FOX,z    t
                                                                  = rFOX,z + ξz , where ξz is the
                                                       t
sampling error from the NLTV household sample. Using r̃FOX,z as a proxy for viewership in-
troduces classical measurement error, an additional form of endogeneity bias, into our key SDz
regression:
                                             2015
                                   SDz = β r̃FOX,z + εz + µz − β ξz .

Of interest is whether we expect that the magnitude of endogeneity bias from measurement error in
our setting, β ξz , will attenuate the OLS coefficients to an extent that it will offset the endogeneity
bias from εz , leading to OLS estimates that are smaller in magnitude than the IV estimates.
   We run the simulation in five steps:

   1. Compute the correlation between the observed Fox News viewership in 2010 and 2015:
       corr(rating2010          2015
                  FOX,z , ratingFOX,z ) = 0.07535;

   2. Regress the observed 2015 Fox New viewership on channel positions to determine the data-
       generating process:

                              rating2015                              2015
                                    FOX,z = 1.3322 − 0.0056 ∗ positionFOX,z .


   3. Use the data-generating process from (2) to simulate two sets of Fox News viewership ratings
       for 2010 and 2015, respectively:


                              2010
                             rFOX,z = 1.33222 − 0.0056 ∗ position2015
                                                                 FOX,z + εz1 ,


                                                     51
                                 2015
                                rFOX,z = 1.33222 − 0.0056 ∗ position2015
                                                                    FOX,z + εz2 ,
                                                              S
      where εzi ∼ i.i.d.N(0, σ̂ 2 ), i ∈ {1, 2}, and σ̂ 2 = S−corr with S = var(−0.0056∗position2015
                                                                                                FOX,z )
      to maintain the empirical correlation of corr(rating2010          2015
                                                          FOX,z , ratingFOX,z ) = 0.07535.
                                                       2015 ≡ r 2010 = r 2015 + ξ , where ξ is the
      Similar to our empirical application, we treat r̃FOX,z   FOX,z    FOX,z    z         z
      measurement error, ξz = εz1 − εz2 .
           2015 and the IV estimate of β
   4. Use rFOX,z                        FOX,t from column (5) of Table 5 for t = March 16
      (β = −0.089) to simulate 2015 social distancing data:

                                                         2015
                                         SDz = −0.089 ∗ rFOX,z + αεz2 + µz

      where

           • αεz2 is the endogenous component with α moderating the degree of enodgeneity in
             Fox News viewership. We run the simulation separately with α = 0 (no endogeneity)
                             2015 )
                       β sd(rFOX,z
             and α =      sd(εz2 )    (variance in SD arising due to the exposure to Fox News is the same
             as the variance arising due to the endogenous component); and
           • µ ∼ N(0, Σ), where Σ = 0.00405 is the empirical variance of SD on March 16.
                                                            2015 and r 2010 . The OLS estimates
   5. Run two different OLS regressions of simulated SD on rFOX,z     FOX,z
                        2015 viewership should exhibit an upward bias due to the endogeneity of
      using the “true” rFOX,z
      viewership, αε2z , in the absence of measurement error. In contrast, the OLS estimates using
                      2010 viewership could exhibit either an upward or downward bias due to
      the “observed” rFOX,z
      the combination of the endogeneity of viewership, αε2z , and the measurement error, ξz .
                                                           2015 and r 2010 , both using 2015
   6. Run two different IV regressions of simulated SD on rFOX,z     FOX,z
      channel positions as an IV. We expect both IV estimators to produce consistent estimates of
      β.

   We run 1,000 independent replications, computing the OLS and IV estimates based on the
“2015” (correct) and “2010” (with the measurement error) data. Figures A8 and A9 present his-
tograms of the resulting OLS estimates. The attenuation bias is characterized by the difference
between the two distributions. Subfigure (a) compares the OLS estimates when there is no endo-
geneity, α = 0. As expected, the average scale of the attenuation bias across simulations is 0.0753
(biased OLS / true OLS estimates), which matches corr(rating2010          2015
                                                            FOX,z , ratingFOX,z ). Subfigure (b)




                                                      52
                                               2015 )
                                         β sd(rFOX,z
presents results with endogeneity, α =      sd(εz2 ) .   The average scale of the attenuation bias across
simulations is larger, making the ratio of biased and true OLS estimates even smaller, 0.0386.
   Figure A10 plots the estimates of β from the IV regressions. As expected, the regressions based
on the “2010” and “2015” data both generate consistent estimates of β . Now, the measurement
error in the viewership data only affects the variance, as can be seen by the higher variance in the
“2010”results.

                                     [Figure A8 about here.]

                                     [Figure A9 about here.]

                                     [Figure A10 about here.]




                                                   53
Figure A1: Effect of channel viewership on share of people working full time
           0.10
                          State of Emergency
                               Announced

           0.05
βFox, t




           0.00



          −0.05
                  Feb         Mar                 Apr          May      Jun   Jul


                                                          IV   OLS

                                     (a) Fox News effect – βctFox



           0.2
                             State of Emergency
                                  Announced
           0.1
βCNN, t




           0.0


          −0.1
                  Feb        Mar               Apr             May      Jun   Jul


                                                        IV     OLS

                        (b) CNN effect – βctCNN for share of people at home




                                                     54
Figure A2: Effect of channel viewership on share of people working part time
           0.10
                              State of Emergency
                                   Announced

           0.05
βFox, t




           0.00



          −0.05
                  Feb         Mar                 Apr         May       Jun   Jul


                                                         IV   OLS

                                    (a) Fox News effect – βctFox


           0.4
                             State of Emergency
                                  Announced

           0.2
βCNN, t




           0.0



          −0.2
                  Feb        Mar              Apr             May       Jun   Jul


                                                        IV    OLS

                        (b) CNN effect – βctCNN for share of people at home




                                                    55
Figure A3: The effect of channel positions of share of homebound devices
             0.002




             0.001
 ζFox,t




             0.000

                           State of Emergency
                                Announced

            −0.001
                     Feb   Mar             Apr        May   Jun   Jul


                                       (a) Fox News

             0.002

                           State of Emergency
                                Announced

             0.001
 ζCNN,t




             0.000




            −0.001
                     Feb   Mar             Apr        May   Jun   Jul


                                          (b) CNN

             0.002

                           State of Emergency
                                Announced

             0.001
 ζMSNBC,t




             0.000




            −0.001
                     Feb   Mar             Apr        May   Jun   Jul


                                        (c) MSNBC



                                                56
                  Figure A4: OLS estimates controlling for extended demographics
           0.01
                               State of Emergency
                                    Announced
           0.00
βFox, t




          −0.01


          −0.02


          −0.03
                  Feb          Mar             Apr        May         Jun          Jul


                         OLS         With Demographics    With Extended Demographics




                                                     57
                    Figure A5: OLS and IV estimates with state-level clustering
           0.05              State of Emergency
                                  Announced
           0.00

          −0.05
βFox, t




          −0.10

          −0.15

          −0.20

                  Feb        Mar             Apr        May           Jun         Jul


                                                   IV   OLS




                                                   58
                 Figure A6: IV estimates using 2015 and 2020 viewership data

           0.5


           0.0
βFox, t



                                      State of Emergency
          −0.5                             Announced


          −1.0

                  Feb                   Mar                          Apr


                                 IV (2015 Viewership)      IV (2020 Viewership)




                                                59
                          Figure A7: IV with time-varying demographic controls
             0.05               State of Emergency
                                     Announced
             0.00

            −0.05
  βFox, t




            −0.10

            −0.15

            −0.20

                    Feb         Mar             Apr             May             Jun             Jul


                                    Main Model        With Demographic Interactions

Blue points (Main Model) correspond to the results from Figure 3. Green points correspond to the analogous model
  with additional controls for time-specific demographic effects from log population density and median income.




                                                      60
Figure A8: The distribution of the OLS estimates of β using “2010” and “2015” simulated data

                               300




                     Density   200




                               100




                                0


                                     −0.20       −0.15             −0.10               −0.05   0.00
                                                                Coefficient

                                                         Year      2010        2015



                                               (a) No endogeneity (α = 0)



                               300




                               200
                     Density




                               100




                                0


                                     −0.20       −0.15             −0.10               −0.05   0.00
                                                                Coefficient

                                                         Year      2010        2015

                                                                                    2015 )
                                                                              β sd(rFOX,z
                                             (b) Endogeneity ( α =               sd(εz2 ) )




                                                                61
Figure A9: The distribution of the scale of the attenuation bias based on “2010” simulated data
(OLS estimates with 2010 data / OLS estimates with 2015 data)




                                20
                      Density




                                10




                                 0


                                     0.00       0.05           0.10              0.15   0.20
                                                         Attenuation bias


                                              (a) No endogeneity (α = 0)

                                40




                                30
                      Density




                                20




                                10




                                 0


                                     0.00       0.05           0.10              0.15   0.20
                                                         Attenuation bias
                                                                              2015 )
                                                                        β sd(rFOX,z
                                            (b) Endogeneity ( α =          sd(εz2 ) )




                                                           62
Figure A10: The distribution of the IV estimates of β using “2010” and “2015” simulated data



                              75




                              50
                    Density




                              25




                               0


                                   −0.06              −0.08                    −0.10    −0.12
                                                          Coefficient

                                                   Year       2010      2015



                                           (a) No endogeneity (α = 0)
                              80




                              60
                    Density




                              40




                              20




                               0


                                   −0.06              −0.08                    −0.10    −0.12
                                                          Coefficient

                                                   Year       2010      2015

                                                                              2015 )
                                                                        β sd(rFOX,z
                                     (b) Endogeneity ( α =                 sd(εz2 ) )




                                                          63
               Table A1: The effect of channel position on ratings - CNN

                                   Effect of channel position’s on ratings of CNN
                                  (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
Ordinal Position of CNN      −0.0050∗∗∗     −0.0047∗∗∗     −0.0053∗∗∗      −0.0052∗∗∗
                              (0.0018)       (0.0016)       (0.0015)        (0.0014)

Demographic Controls                              x                             x
Intab weights                      x              x
Cable System Controls              x              x              x              x
State FEs                          x              x              x              x
F (pos variables)                7.38           8.89          12.73           13.2
Observations                    26,411         22,854         21,234         18,155
Adjusted R2                     0.2137         0.2292         0.1712         0.1851
 a   Stars: ∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors clustered on cable system
     level. Demographic controls include: median zipcode income, share of population
     with bachelor degree, labor force participation, share of population that is white,
     share of population below poverty line, median age, log population density and
     county-level republican vote share in 1996 elections. Cable system controls include
     number of channels in cable system, and positions of competing news channels.




                                               64
                                                                  Table A2: Correlations between demographic characteristics and position of FOX

                                                                                                                    Characteristic
                                    Log Median Income      % Bachelor Degree      % in Labor Force     Log Density       Jan Avg SAH    1996 Rep Vote Share      Date of First Case   Log Cases (March 15th)
                                            (1)                     (2)                   (3)               (4)               (5)                (6)                    (7)                    (8)
     Ordinal Position of FXNC            0.0011∗                  0.0004                0.0001            0.0054           −0.0350              0.0001                −0.0022                −0.0001
                                         (0.0005)                (0.0003)              (0.0001)          (0.0049)          (0.0389)            (0.0001)               (0.0100)               (0.0007)
     State FEs                               x                       x                     x                 x                 x
     # Channels                              x                       x                     x                 x                 x
     Observations                         26,148                  26,999                27,005            27,093            27,098             6,947                  6,959                  6,959
     Adjusted R2                          0.1961                  0.1491                0.1328            0.2620            0.1001             0.3240                 0.3161                 0.2522
      a   Stars: ∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors clustered on cable system level. Columns 6-8 run the regression using unique headend-county pairs.




65
                                                                 Table A3: Correlations between demographic characteristics and position of CNN

                                                                                                                   Characteristic
                                  Log Median Income       % Bachelor Degree      % in Labor Force     Log Density       Jan Avg SAH    1996 Rep Vote Share     Date of First Case   Log Cases (March 15th)
                                           (1)                    (2)                   (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)                     (7)                  (8)
     Ordinal Position of CNN             0.0007                0.00005               −0.00002           −0.0035          −0.0728∗             0.0001                  0.0162∗               0.0004
                                        (0.0005)               (0.0003)              (0.0001)           (0.0051)         (0.0393)            (0.0001)                 (0.0098)             (0.0007)
     State FEs                              x                      x                     x                  x                 x
     # Channels                             x                      x                     x                  x                 x
     Observations                        26,111                 26,962                26,968             27,056            27,061             6,942                   6,954                6,954
     Adjusted R2                         0.1948                 0.1480                0.1337             0.2599            0.1015             0.3251                  0.3159               0.2482
      a   Stars: ∗ p<0.1; ∗∗ p<0.05; ∗∗∗ p<0.01. Standard errors clustered on cable system level. Columns 6-8 run the regression using unique headend-county pairs.




66
Table A4: Summary statistics for panel regressions - SD based on share of full time work devices
                                     (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
R2                                    0        0.37        0.86       0.88        0.88       0.89
N                                 1043570    1043570     1043570    1043570     1043570    1043570
# Clusters                          2253       2253        2253       2253        2253       2253
Demographic controls                 x
Zip FE                                           x          x           x           x          x
State X Time                                                x           x           x          x
FXNC Viewership X Time                                                  x           x          x
Cable System Controls X Time                                                        x          x
Basic Demographics X Time                                                                      x
  Standard errors are clustered on cable system level. Observations are weighted by the number of
  panelists in the NLTV data. Demographic controls include: median income, share of population
  with bachelor degree, labor force participation, share of population that is white, share of popula-
  tion below poverty line, median age, log population density and county-level republican vote share
  in 1996 elections. Cable System Controls include the positions of competing news channels and
  number of channels in a system. Basic Demographics include median income and log population
  density.




                                                67
Table A5: Summary statistics for panel regressions - SD based on share of part time work devices
                                     (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)        (6)
R2                                  0.01       0.28        0.85       0.87        0.87       0.89
N                                 1043570    1043570     1043570    1043570     1043570    1043570
# Clusters                          2253       2253        2253       2253        2253       2253
Demographic controls                 x
Zip FE                                           x          x           x           x          x
State X Time                                                x           x           x          x
FXNC Viewership X Time                                                  x           x          x
Cable System Controls X Time                                                        x          x
Basic Demographics X Time                                                                      x
  Standard errors are clustered on cable system level. Observations are weighted by the number of
  panelists in the NLTV data. Demographic controls include: median income, share of population
  with bachelor degree, labor force participation, share of population that is white, share of popula-
  tion below poverty line, median age, log population density and county-level republican vote share
  in 2016 elections. Cable System Controls include the positions of competing news channels and
  number of channels in a system. Basic Demographics include median income and log population
  density.




                                                68
Table A6: Persistence of channel positions
                % of headends where
  Years      (numeric) position is retained
              CNN     Fox News     MSNBC
2006-2007     95.3        94.8       94.1
2007-2008     96.0        95.5       93.4
2008-2009     95.0        95.9       94.8
2009-2010     95.1        93.2       93.4
2010-2011     98.0        97.0       96.1
2011-2012     96.6        96.5       96.6
2012-2013     98.0        97.7       97.4
2013-2014     97.1        97.0       96.6
2014-2015     96.9        96.9       95.9




                     69
