                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     FATALISM, BELIEFS, AND BEHAVIORS DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

                                        Jesper Akesson
                                      Sam Ashworth-Hayes
                                         Robert Hahn
                                       Robert D. Metcalfe
                                        Itzhak Rasooly

                                      Working Paper 27245
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27245


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




We would like to thank Simge Andi, Luigi Butera, Rena Conti, Zoe Cullen, Keith Ericson, John
Friedman, Tal Gross, Nikhil Kalyanpur, Rebecca Koomen, John List, Mario Macis, Paulina
Olivia, Jim Rebitzer, Cass Sunstein, Dmitry Taubinsky and Jasmine Theilgaard for helpful
suggestions. We thank Senan Hogan-Hennessey and Manuel Monti-Nussbaum for their valuable
research assistance. Any opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent those of the institutions with which they are affiliated. AEA Registry No.
AEARCTR-0005775. Correspondence: jesper@thebehaviouralist.com. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jesper Akesson, Sam Ashworth-Hayes, Robert Hahn, Robert D. Metcalfe, and Itzhak
Rasooly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fatalism, Beliefs, and Behaviors During the COVID-19 Pandemic
Jesper Akesson, Sam Ashworth-Hayes, Robert Hahn, Robert D. Metcalfe, and Itzhak Rasooly
NBER Working Paper No. 27245
May 2020
JEL No. I0

                                          ABSTRACT

Little is known about individual beliefs concerning the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Still less is known about how these beliefs influence the spread of the virus by determining social
distancing behaviors. To shed light on these questions, we conduct an online experiment (n =
3,610) with participants in the US and UK. Participants are randomly allocated to a control group,
or one of two treatment groups. The treatment groups are shown upper- or lower-bound expert
estimates of the infectiousness of the virus. We present three main empirical findings. First,
individuals dramatically overestimate the infectiousness of COVID-19 relative to expert opinion.
Second, providing people with expert information partially corrects their beliefs about the virus.
Third, the more infectious people believe that COVID-19 is, the less willing they are to take
social distancing measures, a finding we dub the “fatalism effect”. We estimate that small
changes in people's beliefs can generate billions of dollars in mortality benefits. Finally, we
develop a theoretical model that can explain the fatalism effect.

Jesper Akesson                                   Robert D. Metcalfe
The Behavioralist                                Questrom School of Business
United Kingdom                                   Boston University
jesper@thebehaviouralist.com                     595 Commonwealth Avenue
                                                 Boston, MA 02215
Sam Ashworth-Hayes                               and NBER
The Behavioralist                                rdmet@bu.edu
United Kingdom
Sam@TheBehaviouralist.com                        Itzhak Rasooly
                                                 University of Oxford
Robert Hahn                                      United Kingdom
University of Oxford                             itzhakrasooly95@gmail.com
robert.hahn@smithschool.ox.ac.uk




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5775/history/67022
1     Introduction

The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has already exacted a considerable toll, with im-
pacts measurable in lives lost, freedoms curtailed, and reductions in economic welfare (Baker
et al., 2020; Guerrieri et al., 2020; Gormsen and Koijen, 2020; Reis, 2020).1 In the absence
of an effective treatment or vaccine, governmental efforts to contain the outbreak have relied
heavily on behavioral restrictions, including lockdowns where people are largely confined
to their homes, limitations on business operations, and requirements for social distancing.
These measures could remain in place for more than a year (Ferguson et al., 2020).
      The mortality benefits of social distancing are estimated to be worth around $60,000 per
US household (Greenstone and Nigam, 2020). Improving compliance with such behavioral
restrictions could, thus, have large social payoffs. We do not yet know, however, the deter-
minants of individual compliance and how they might change over time (Anderson et al.,
2020; Avery et al., 2020; Briscese et al., 2020; Hsiang et al., 2020; Lewnard and Lo, 2020). In
particular, we do not understand the role of individual beliefs, and whether these beliefs can
be revised in ways that generate greater compliance.
      To shed light on these questions, we conducted an online experiment in the US and UK
with 3,610 participants in late March 2020. Participants are randomly assigned to a control
condition or one of two treatment groups. Those in the first group (i.e., the ‘lower-bound’
condition) are told that those who contract the virus are likely to infect two other people.2
Those in the second group (i.e., the ‘upper-bound’ condition) are told that those who contract
the virus are likely to infect five other people. This estimated range comes from experts and
reflects uncertainties regarding both the characteristics of the virus and people’s behavior
(Liu et al., 2020).
     Our analysis yields three main empirical findings. First, we find that participants over-
estimate the infectiousness and deadliness of COVID-19. For example, participants believe,
on average, that one person will infect 28 others; whereas experts estimate that the figure is
between one and six (Liu et al., 2020). This result is consistent with previous studies that sug-
gest individuals are likely to overestimate risks that are unfamiliar, outside of their control,
inspire feelings of dread, and receive extensive media coverage (see, e.g., Slovic (2000)).
     Second, we show that people update their posterior beliefs about COVID-19 in response
to expert information––at least in the short-run. The modal belief is that one person will

    1 Over 290,000 deaths have been attributed to COVID-19 worldwide as of 13 May 2020 (Roser et al., 2020).
    2 Inother words, they are told that R0 is two. R0 ––the number of people that one infected person is likely to
infect––is a central parameter that determines the evolution of the virus over time. As a result, it is frequently
covered in the media and brought up in public statements by government officials (see, for example, Gallagher
(2020)).

                                                        1
infect two others in the lower-bound group, while the modal belief is that one person will
infect five others in the upper-bound group. However, not all participants fully believe or
understand the information conveyed in the treatments, with 46% and 61% of participants
believing that one person will infect more than six others in the upper- and lower-bound
groups respectively.
      Third, we examine how beliefs causally affect behavior. In general, this is a difficult
task. Randomly providing certain individuals with information can both influence their be-
liefs and the confidence with which these beliefs are held, making it difficult to obtain an
unbiased estimate of the causal impact of beliefs. We are able to overcome this issue by
exploiting variability in expert estimates. While assigning participants to the upper-bound
group (i.e., showing them a high estimate) increases participant assessments of the virus’ in-
fectiousness (relative to the lower-bound group), it should not increase their confidence in
these assessments because participants in both groups are shown an expert estimate. We can,
thus, estimate the causal impact of beliefs on behavior by using the random assignment of
individuals to the upper- or lower-bound groups as an instrument for their beliefs.
      This approach yields our third central finding: exaggerated posterior beliefs about the
infectiousness of COVID-19 actually make individuals less likely to comply with best prac-
tice behaviors, a phenomenon we call the “fatalism effect”. On average, for every additional
person that participants believe someone with COVID-19 will typically infect, they become
0.5 percentage points less likely to say that they would avoid meeting people in high-risk
groups. They also become 0.26 percentage points less likely to say that they would wash their
hands frequently.3
     While others have observed the existence of a fatalism effect (see, e.g., Ferrer and Klein
(2015) or Shapiro and Wu (2011)), we are among the first to demonstrate the existence of
such effects using experimental methods.4 We also develop a basic model that is capable
of explaining the fatalism effect. The model applies not just to this pandemic, but also to
more general situations where people must choose whether to change their behavior to reduce
personal or societal risks.
     The intuition of our model is straightforward. Increasing individual estimates of the
infectiousness of COVID-19 raises their perception of the probability that they will contract
the disease even if they socially distance. This, in turn, reduces the perceived benefit of
   3 This result is largely consistent across the following specifications: (1) re-weighting our sample so that it
matches the UK and US populations in terms of age and gender; (2) removing those from the analysis who
might misinterpret our beliefs questions; and (3) including a second instrument. Further, we do not find any
significant differences in the effects of beliefs on behaviors for participants in the US and UK. These robustness
checks can be found in the appendix.
    4 Kerwin (2018)––who studies HIV and risky sex behavior in Malawi––also finds evidence of fatalism among

certain subgroups of the population he studies.

                                                        2
complying with social distancing measures.5 Consistent with this explanation, we also find
that increasing individual assessments of the infectiousness of the virus leads people to be
less optimistic about their future prospects, suggesting that they interpret information about
infectiousness in the way assumed by our model.
      The fatalism that we document could cause substantial reductions in individual and
societal welfare. For example, by making individuals less likely to regularly wash their hands,
it makes them more vulnerable to respiratory illnesses like COVID-19 (Rabie and Curtis,
2006).6 A conservative back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that if average beliefs about
the infectiousness of COVID-19 increase by eight units (e.g., someone with the virus is likely
to infect 18 rather than 10 people), then we expect to see a mortality loss of $2.7 billion
in the US alone, solely as a result of reduced handwashing (not counting morbidity losses,
spillovers, or further waves of infection).7 Our findings thus suggest that there are dramatic
gains from providing the public with accurate information insofar as this information revises
exaggerated beliefs downwards.
      This paper contributes to a number of areas in economics and psychology. First, we con-
tribute to the literature on risk perception and behavior change, specifically with respect to
the spread of COVID-19, by demonstrating that people misperceive risks and by examining
the implications of such misperceptions.8 Second, the finding that beliefs about the virus
influence people’s optimism has implications for the understanding the macroeconomic im-
pacts of COVID-19.9 Optimism is associated with key economic behaviors such as invest-
ments and savings (see, e.g., Cass and Shell (1983) and Akerlof and Shiller (2010)). Third,
we contribute to the literature on how people update their beliefs in response to new infor-
mation, and how this depends on individual characteristics, by for example showing that the
treatments work less well for those that identify as conservative (see, for example, Eil and
Rao (2011) and Garrett et al. (2018)). Fourth, we contribute to the growing literature on how
policymakers can best respond to the COVID-19 pandemic by showing that it is both possi-
ble, and important, to correct people’s beliefs about the virus (Acemoglu et al., 2020; Alvarez
et al., 2020; Baker et al., 2020; Berger et al., 2020; Brynjolfsson et al., 2020; Cappelen et al.,


   5 Kremer    (1996) and Kerwin (2018) develop similar models in the context of risky sexual decisions. How-
ever, their models view the risky action as a continuous variable so are less suited to the (binary) set-up of our
experiment.
    6 We do not yet know exactly how handwashing reduces the risk of contracting COVID-19. Most guidance

(see, for example, WHO (2020)) is based on past research about other infectious diseases.
    7 The lower-bound treatment reduced average beliefs about the infectiousness of COVID-19 by around eight

units relative to the control group.
    8 See, for example, Brzezinski et al. (2020) and Fetzer et al. (2020) for contemporaneous work on beliefs and

risk perceptions during COVID-19.
    9 See Atkeson (2020); Guerrieri et al. (2020); Eichenbaum et al. (2020); Barro et al. (2020); Jordà et al. (2020);

Krueger et al. (2020) for studies that examine the macroeconomic implications of COVID-19.

                                                          3
2020; Farboodi et al., 2020; Van Bavel et al., 2020).10
      Finally, our paper is related to the general economics literature on the relationship be-
tween beliefs and behavior.11 We contribute to this literature by: (1) providing a novel way
of holding confidence about the information constant when using instrumental variables to
provide an unbiased estimate of the impact of changing beliefs on changing behavior; and (2)
by providing quantitative estimates of the extent to which beliefs shape behavior at a time of
crisis.
     The remainder of the article is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews our experimental
design. Section 3 presents the main empirical results. Section 4 develops a formal model of
the fatalism effect. Finally, Section 5 concludes.



2      Experimental design

We conducted the experiment between March 26 and March 29, 2020.12 Our sample consists
of 3,610 participants (1,859 from the US and 1,751 from the UK). Participants were recruited
via the panel provider Prolific Academic.13 14 All participants were paid for their participa-
tion.15
     Participants are randomly assigned to a control group that receives no intervention or
one of two treatment groups. Those in the first group (the lower-bound treatment) are shown

    10 We also contribute to the literature on perceived self-efficacy (see, for instance, Bernard et al. (2011); Krish-
nan and Krutikova (2013); Tanguy et al. (2014)) by providing a theoretical model that explains when rational
agents may believe that their actions make little difference to their outcomes.
   11 See, for example, Jensen (2010); Dupas (2011); Cruces et al. (2013); Wiswall and Zafar (2015); Liebman

and Luttmer (2015); Armantier et al. (2016); Bergman (2020); Cavallo et al. (2017); Bleemer and Zafar (2018);
Bursztyn et al. (2018); Conlon et al. (2018); Fuster et al. (2018); Dizon-Ross (2019). Two recent papers that use
a similar methodology to the one adopted here are Cullen and Perez-Truglia (2018) and Bursztyn et al. (2019).
Both use instrumental variables to estimate the casual effects of beliefs on behaviors.
   12 Over this period, the total number of confirmed (tested) cases worldwide rose from 468,049 to 656,866

(Roser et al., 2020). In the UK, they almost doubled from 9,529 to 17,089, and in the USA from 69,194 to
124,665. The death toll in the USA rose from 1,050 to 2,191, and in the UK from 463 to 1,019 (ibid). The
UK introduced a full national lockdown two days prior (Holden, 2020), while various US states introduced
restrictions on movement during the experimental period (Gershman, 2020).
   13 More information about Prolific Academic can be found at https://www.prolific.co/. Peer et al. (2017) show

that participants recruited via Prolific Academic are less dishonest, are less likely to fail attention checks, and
produce higher quality data than participants recruited via other comparable online research platforms.
   14 See Appendix D for descriptive statistics. The sample is not nationally representative. In Appendix E, we

re-weight our sample to balance it on gender, age, and geography, and re-run our main statistical analyses.
   15 The survey also asked a range of socio-economic and demographic questions. We also collect data regard-

ing, for example, media consumption, how informed participants are about COVID-19, which COVID-19 ‘best
practices’ they engage in, and whether they know someone that has been infected. A full list of variables can
be found in Appendix D. We use these variables to conduct heterogeneity analyses, which can be found in
Appendix F.

                                                           4
a message explaining that studies show that those who contract COVID-19 will, on average,
infect two other people––see Figure 1. Those in the second group (the upper-bound treat-
ment) are instead told that studies show that those who contract COVID-19 will, on average,
infect five other people. Otherwise, the message they receive is the same.16 The treatment
messages are coupled with graphics illustrating how COVID-19 might spread if the virus is
passed on three times at the respective levels of infectiousness.17
      The statistic that we show participants in the treatments is known as R0 in the epidemi-
ological literature and indicates how many people one infected person is likely to infect. R0
is a key input in, for example, the Susceptible-Infected-Removed (SIR) model (Anderson and
May, 1992).
     After being exposed to the treatments, we measure our key object of interest: partic-
ipants’ beliefs about the infectiousness of COVID-19. More specifically, we ask “On aver-
age, how many people do you think will catch the Coronavirus from one contagious person?
Please only consider cases transmitted by coughing, sneezing, touch or other direct contact
with the contagious person”. Participants are free to enter any integer between 0 and 100.
     Next, we ask participants about two other COVID-19-related beliefs: (1) the probability
of being hospitalized conditional on contracting the virus; and (2) the probability of dying
conditional on being hospitalized for the virus.18 19 We do not to reward correct estimates
with financial incentives since we do not want to encourage individuals to look up the true
numbers online.20




  16 We do not deceive participants when displaying the two treatments.     There is, at the time of the experiment,
substantial uncertainty regarding the true infectiousness of COVID-19. For example, Liu et al. (2020) show that
expert estimates of R0 range from 1 to 6 in a recent review of epidemiological studies.
   17 The randomization is balanced. See Appendix C for a balance table.
   18 By multiplying participants’ beliefs regarding the risk of being hospitalized and the risk of dying condi-

tional on being hospitalized, we obtain their implied beliefs about the Case Fatality Rate (CFR), which is the risk
of dying conditional on contracting COVID-19.
   19 We conducted power calculations prior to launching the experiment, using beliefs about R as our primary
                                                                                                    0
outcome of interest. We assumed that participants would, on average, believe that R0 was 2 in the lower-bound
group, with a standard deviation of 15. We set the minimum detectable effect size to 2. This meant that we
needed around 883 participants per group (i.e., 1,766 in total) in order to achieve 80% statistical power with a
5% significance level when comparing the lower- and the upper-bound groups.
   20 It would not be suitable to incentivize correct answers for the pre-treatment beliefs, as we want to measure

the extent to which they are misinformed. Further, it is also not suitable to incentivize post-treatment beliefs,
as we risk encouraging participants to respond in ways that they think will result in a payoff, rather what
they truly believe. Of course, the current approach also poses potential problems; some participants may, for
example, not feel like it is worth spending enough time and thinking through the question. However, we re-
run our main analyses dropping people who are likely to not have taken an adequate amount of time or who
provided exaggerated answers, and find that our results are largely unchanged.

                                                         5
                                  Figure 1: Treatment messages




Notes. The first image displays the treatment message showed to the lower-bound group. The second image displays
the treatment message showed to the upper-bound group.




                                                       6
     Further, we ask people about their willingness to comply with three COVID-19-related
best practices for 1 week and 2 months. These best practices are: (1) frequent handwash-
ing; (2) working from home; and (3) not meeting people in high-risk groups. We choose
these outcomes because they represent behaviors that are common components of govern-
ments’ COVID-19 mitigation strategies (see, for example, CDC (2020), CO (2020) and WHO
(2020)).21 We only measure stated intentions for future behavior and recognize the limita-
tions of such measures; however, we see no reason to think that these limitations will have
more of an effect on one treatment group than another.22
     Finally, we ask people whether they are optimistic about their future prospects. Opti-
mism and expectations about the future are key drivers of macroeconomic activity.23 Mea-
suring optimism also allows us to verify that our subjects interpret the information provided
about infectiousness in the expected manner.
      One of our objectives is to estimate the effect of beliefs about the infectiousness of
COVID-19 on our outcomes of interest. Beliefs about the infectiousness of COVID-19 are,
however, likely to be endogenous. Fortunately, we generate exogenous variation in peo-
ple’s beliefs about the infectiousness of COVID-19 using assignment to the lower-bound and
upper-bound treatments. We are able to use this variation to conduct instrumental variable
(IV) regressions. The IV regressions provide us with estimates of the Local Average Treatment
Effect (LATE) of beliefs about the infectiousness of COVID-19 for each outcome variable.24
     When analyzing the experimental data, we begin by conducting linear first-stage regres-
sions, estimating the effects of random R0 information assignment on beliefs:

                              R̂i = γ0 + γ1 upperboundi + γ2 controlsi + i                                 (1)

where R̂i represents beliefs about R0 ; upperbound is a dummy variable indicating whether the
participant is randomly assigned to the upper-bound R0 information condition; and controls
represents a vector of socioeconomic and demographic variables (e.g., age and years of educa-

  21 When    recording whether participants are willing to work from home, wash their hands, or avoid seeing
people in high-risk groups, we ask participants: (1) “How likely are you to do the following during the coming
seven days?” and (2) “Assume that the coronavirus outbreak is still ongoing 2 months from today. How likely
would you be to do the following during the average week?” Respondents could answer on a scale from 1 to 5,
with 5 being extreme likely and 1 being extreme unlikely.
   22 Stated behaviors in online experiments have also been shown to be predictive of actual behaviors in a

variety of domains (see, e.g., Mosleh et al. (2020).
   23 See, e.g., Cass and Shell (1983); Akerlof and Shiller (2010); Benhabib et al. (2016); Di Bella and Grigoli

(2019).
   24 We believe that the exclusion restriction is met for two reasons. First, the only difference between the

treatments is information regarding the infectiousness of COVID-19. Secondly, treatment assignment is unlikely
to change how confident people are about the infectiousness of COVID-19 (which might happen if a treatment
message is compared to a pure control), as participants are shown expert estimates in both conditions.

                                                       7
tion). Thus, γ1 represents the average treatment effect on beliefs. We do not use participants
in the control group when conducting this analysis (i.e., those in the lower-bound group are
the "reference group").25
     We then conduct Two-Stage Least Square (2SLS) regressions to estimate the LATE of
beliefs about R0 on people’s optimism and their willingness to socially distance:

                                      yi = β0 + β1 R̂i + β2 controlsi + vi                                    (2)

where yi represents people’s willingness to socially distance or whether they are optimistic
about their future (binary variables); R̂i represents the fitted values obtained using equation
(1); and controls is a vector representing the same set of demographic and socioeconomic
variables. Again, we exclude those in the control group when conducting this analysis to
ensure that the exclusion restriction is met. Our estimate of β1 is the LATE of changing
beliefs about R0 people’s stated behavior and optimism.26



3      Results

In this section we present our analysis of the experimental data. We begin by providing an
overview of participant characteristics. Next, we examine participants’ baseline beliefs about
COVID-19 and what the predictors of those beliefs are. We then investigate how providing
new information about the infectiousness of COVID-19 influences beliefs. In the following
section we estimate the causal effect of beliefs about the infectiousness of COVID-19 on par-
ticipants’ willingness to engage in beneficial behaviors, such as frequent handwashing. Fi-
nally, we study the link between beliefs about the infectiousness of COVID-19 and optimism.




    25 We use a similar specification as the one presented in equation (1) when estimating the Intention to Treat
(ITT). The main difference is that we use people’s stated willingness to socially distance (i.e., work from home,
avoid seeing people in high-risk groups, and frequently wash their hands for seven days and two months, re-
spectively) as the outcomes. We also include participants in the control group when conducting this analysis.
   26 These 2SLS regressions help us understand how beliefs are likely to influence people’s decisions to socially

distance. We also learn how beliefs about R0 influence people’s optimism. While we obtain unbiased estimates
of the effects of beliefs on the aforementioned outcomes, we are unable to measure the extent to which be-
liefs influence action through optimism as an intermediary variable. This is an interesting question for future
research.

                                                        8
3.1 Participant characteristics

Approximately 59% of respondents are female and 75% of respondents are between the ages
of 18 and 44. The monthly average pre-tax household income was $4,461 in 2019.27 28 Six-
teen percent of participants claim to know someone that has contracted COVID-19; 4% claim
to have been in contact with someone that has been diagnosed with COVID-19; 38% of par-
ticipants claim to display one or more of the known symptoms of COVID-19; and 48% of
respondents believe that restrictions will remain in place for more than three months.29


3.2 People have exaggerated prior beliefs about the infectiousness and dangerousness of
COVID-19

We begin by studying the accuracy of subject beliefs concerning the infectiousness (R0 ) and
Case Fatality Rate (CFR) of COVID-19. As shown in in Figure 2, we find that the overwhelm-
ing majority of subject estimates are outside of the bounds of expert consensus.30 On average,
participants believe that the typical person with COVID-19 gives it to 28 others; in contrast,
expert estimates of R0 at the time of the experiment put it in the 1 to 6 range (Liu et al.,
2020). Similarly, participants, on average, believe that the CFR (the share of people who con-
tract COVID-19 that die) is 10.79%; according to the CDC estimates, the case fatality rate in
the US is between 1.8 and 3.4% (CDC, 2020).
     The fact that participants have incorrect prior beliefs about COVID-19 is consistent with
many of the findings from the literature on risk perception. According to this literature, the
public is likely to overestimate risks when they are new or unfamiliar, seen as outside of their
control, inspire feelings of dread, and receive extensive media coverage (see Slovic (2000)
for a review). Clearly, all of these apply to COVID-19; so it is perhaps not surprising that
subjects overestimate the risk and dangerousness of COVID-19. We also note that our finding
is consistent with contemporaneous work by Fetzer et al. (2020) who find similar biases in

  27 Our   sample is not perfectly representative of the general population in the UK or US, and we therefore
provide results from a re-weighted analysis in the appendix, where the sample has been balanced on age, gender,
and location.
   28 The pandemic appears to be having a profound effect on the economic outlook of the survey participants.

For example, 89% believe that unemployment will grow by over 10 percentage points in the next three months,
57% claim to know someone that has become unemployed as a result of the pandemic, and 10% believe that
they are likely to become unemployed as a result of the pandemic. See Appendix D for full descriptive statistics
tables.
   29 The symptoms that we asked about are: (1) high temperature, (2) chest pains, (3) muscle sore-

ness, (4) diarrhea, (5) headache, (6) nausea, (7) a persistent cough, and (8) difficulty breathing. See
https://www.who.int/news-room/q-a-detail/q-a-coronaviruses for more information about the symptoms of
COVID-19.
   30 As can be seen in Figure 2, many individuals estimate that R is 100 (since they are not allowed to provide
                                                                  0
higher estimates). Our estimated effects remain similar after dropping such individuals from the analysis.

                                                       9
subject beliefs.
      We estimate two linear probability models to investigate heterogeneity in subjects’ be-
liefs. As detailed in Appendix D, we find that men, those who are not in a risk group, and
the more educated are significantly less likely to overestimate R0 and the CFR. People in both
the UK and the US are likely to overestimate R0 , but those in the US are 12 and 9.5 percent-
age points more likely than those in the UK to overestimate CFR and R0 respectively (ceteris
paribus). Further, those that consume right-wing news are more likely to overestimate R0 .
These results are consistent with the general finding that different demographic groups can
perceive risks in different ways. It is also consistent with more specific findings from the
literature on risk perception: for example, a large number of papers find, as we do in our
particular context, that men tend to rate risks as smaller than women do.31




  31 Seefor instance Brody (1984); Steger and Witt (1989); Gwartney-Gibbs and Lach (1991); Savage (1993);
DeJoy (1992); Spigner et al. (1993); Finucane et al. (2000).

                                                   10
     Figure 2: Baseline prior beliefs about R0 and the CFR




Notes. The first diagram displays the distribution of beliefs regarding R0 at baseline. The
second displays the distribution of beliefs regarding CFR at baseline. Participants’ per-
ceived CFR is calculated by multiplying their belief regarding the risk of being hospitalized
conditional on contracting COVID-19 by the risk of dying conditional on being hospital-
ized for COVID-19. Participants can enter any integer between 0 and 100 for the aforemen-
tioned risks. Participants can also enter any integer between 0 and 100 when stating their
beliefs about R0 .

                                            11
3.3 Providing information about the infectiousness of COVID-19 corrects beliefs

Table 1 presents the effects of being assigned to the lower- and upper-bound conditions on be-
liefs regarding: (1) R0 and (2) the CFR. In other words, Table 1 reports the difference in mean
beliefs between the treatment and control groups (controlling for demographic variables).32

                      Table 1: Effects of randomly assigned R0 information on beliefs

                                                                                   (1)                             (2)
  VARIABLES                                                                 Beliefs about R0             Beliefs about the CFR
  Assigned to lower-bound (R0 = 2)                                             -7.889***                         -0.425
                                                                                 (1.139)                         (0.720)
  Assigned to upper-bound (R0 = 5)                                              -2.797**                         -0.303
                                                                                 (1.260)                         (0.698)
  Constant                                                                      52.94***                        45.15***
                                                                                 (5.663)                         (3.932)
  Mean in control group                                                          28.671                          10.579
  p-value lower v. upper means                                                    0.000                           0.555
  Observations                                                                    3,577                           3,577
  R2                                                                              0.048                           0.114
 Notes. This table presents results from OLS regressions examining the effects of being assigned to the lower- or upper-bound treatments on
key beliefs (one per column). Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1). All outcomes are measured on a
scale from 0 to 100. Demographic control variables (e.g., age, geography, education, and income) are used in all specifications. Comparisons
are made relative to the group that receives no treatment.


     The table reveals that being shown lower- or upper-bound estimates of R0 decreases
average estimates of R0 from 29 to 21 and 26, respectively (see column 1). We also find that,
on average, being told that R0 is one percent greater prompts respondents to revise their
beliefs upward by 0.16 percent (i.e., the elasticity is 0.16). Further, we obtain an F-statistic
of 16.71 when regressing treatment assignment on beliefs about R0 (excluding the control
group), suggesting that we have an informative instrument (i.e., a strong ‘first stage’) and can
proceed to use treatment assignment as an instrumental variable for beliefs about R0 .3334
       Figure 3 reveals the effect of the treatments on the entire distribution of beliefs about

   32 Although   the treatment assignment is random, we control country of residence, gender, age, years of edu-
cation, living situation (with partner, children, parents, relatives, or flat/housemates), living in an urban, rural
or suburban area, monthly income in 2019, social media use, and whether the survey was completed on a mobile
phone. These control variables are used throughout the results section.
   33 We present a heterogeneity analysis in Appendix F, which, amongst other things, shows that the treatments

are less effective for conservatives. Further, we find that the treatment had a smaller effect on beliefs about R0 if
participants were also asked to state their beliefs about R0 at the start of the survey before the treatments were
administered (we randomly elicited pre-treatment beliefs for 50% of the participants).
   34 Our finding that information updates people’s beliefs about virus is broadly consistent with Bursztyn et al.

(2020). The authors argue that two Fox News personas––Tucker Carlson and Sean Hannity––presented differing
assessments regarding the seriousness of the virus, with Carlson warning viewers and Hannity downplaying the
threat posed by the pandemic. Their analysis suggests that Hannity viewers held incorrect beliefs and changed
behavior later than Carlson viewers, and were subsequently more likely to contract COVID-19.

                                                                    12
R0 . As can be seen, the treatments shift the modal belief in the expected way: these are 5 and
2 in the upper- and lower-bound groups respectively (i.e., the estimates that the respective
groups were presented with). However, not all individuals change their beliefs in line with
the information that they are given, with 46% and 61% of participants still believing that R0
is above 6 in the upper- and lower-bound groups respectively.35
     Since baseline beliefs are measured prior to information provision, it is also possible to
run a before and after comparison. We find that there are substantial differences in pre- and
post-treatment beliefs. Post-treatment beliefs are, for example, more centered around the R0
values that the treatment messages convey, and a greater portion of participants hold beliefs
within the expert estimates (i.e., between 1 and 6).
     Our analysis suggests that expert information about the infectiousness of R0 can update
(and correct) people’s beliefs––at least in the short-term. It also demonstrates that our in-
strument is informative; we thus proceed with the instrumental variable analysis in the next
section.




  35 It  is not immediately clear how risk perceptions and beliefs will update in response to new information.
There are, for example, studies suggesting that individuals fail to update their beliefs when presented with ex-
pert information (see, for example, Nyhan and Reifler (2010)). There is, however, evidence that people are better
at updating their beliefs when subjects are given good news (Eil and Rao, 2011), as is the case here (COVID-19
is not as infectious as people think), or when they are making decisions in a ‘threatening’ environment (Garrett
et al., 2018).

                                                      13
    Figure 3: Effect of treatments on posterior beliefs of R0




Notes. The first diagram displays the distribution of beliefs about R0 in the lower-bound
group pre- (prior) and post-treatment (posterior). The second diagram displays the distri-
bution of beliefs about R0 in the upper-bound group pre- and post-treatment. Participants
can enter any number between 0 and 100 when stating their beliefs about R0 .




                                           14
3.4 Increasing people’s posterior beliefs of the infectiousness of COVID-19 makes them
less willing to engage in best practices

We now examine whether changing beliefs regarding R0 changes participants’ stated willing-
ness to comply with best practice behaviors. We ask participants how willing they would be
to frequently wash their hands, avoid seeing people in high-risk groups, and work from home
assuming that “the Coronavirus outbreak is still ongoing 7 days/2 months from today.” Par-
ticipants provide answers on a five-point scale, with one representing ‘extremely unlikely’
and five representing ‘extremely likely’. In our analysis, we transform this variable into a
binary outcome, defined as one if participants state that they would be ‘extremely likely’ or
‘likely’ to adopt a given behavior and otherwise as zero.36
     Table 2 reveals that the Local Average Treatment Effect (LATE) point estimates are con-
sistently negative, and statistically significant for the willingness to wash hands frequently (2
months) and visiting risk groups (7 days and 2 months). In other words, we find that increas-
ing the perceived infectiousness rate actually makes individuals less willing to engage in best
practice behaviors, a phenomenon we dub the ‘fatalism effect’. We view our point estimates
as surprisingly large. For example, we estimate that decreasing individual estimates of R0 by
one unit makes individuals around 0.5 percentage points more likely to avoid meeting peo-
ple in high-risk groups (see columns two and four in Table 2). Since the individuals in our
sample, on average, overestimate the infectiousness rate by over 20 units, this suggests that
there may be substantial gains from correcting public misconceptions on these and related
issues.




  36 The  vast majority of participants state that they are willing to adhere to best practices. For example, 98%
of participants in the lower-bound group state that they would wash their hands frequently if the pandemic
continues for two months. Further, 94% of participants in the same group state that they would avoid seeing
people in high-risk groups if the pandemic continues for two months. Fewer state that they would be willing
to work from home (47%) if the pandemic continues for two months, largely because they are unable to work
from home. These statistics are important because people’s willingness to engage in ‘best practice’ behaviors are
central parameters in epidemiological models, and we do not yet have a good grasp of how behavior changes
over time (Avery et al., 2020).

                                                      15
Table 2: The effect of posterior beliefs about R0 on willingness to engage in best practices

                                           Willingness to avoid meeting people in high-risk groups
                                        7 days ITT          7 days LATE            2 months ITT            2 months LATE
 Upper-bound condition                   -0.0233**                                     -0.0255**
                                          (0.0111)                                     (0.0109)
 Beliefs about R0                                             -0.00451*                                        -0.00492**
                                                              (0.00232)                                        (0.00232)
 Constant                                 0.909***             1.031***                0.826***                 1.048***
 Lower-bound mean                           0.932                                         0.937
 Controls                                    Yes                   Yes                     Yes                      Yes
 Observations                               2,404                 2,404                   2,405                    2,405
 R2                                         0.021                                         0.023
                                                         Willingness to wash hands frequently
                                        7 days ITT          7 days LATE             2 months ITT           2 months LATE
 Upper-bound condition                    -0.00591                                    -0.0132**
                                         (0.00589)                                    (0.00603)
 Beliefs about R0                                              -0.00114                                        -0.00255**
                                                              (0.00118)                                        (0.00129)
 Constant                                 0.989***             1.080***                1.008***                 1.123***
 Lower-bound mean                           0.981                                         0.984
 Controls                                    Yes                   Yes                     Yes                      Yes
 Observations                               2,404                 2,404                   2,405                    2,405
 R2                                         0.014                                         0.017
                                                              Willingness to work from home
                                        7 days ITT          7 days LATE             2 months ITT           2 months LATE
 Upper-bound condition                     -0.0276                                      -0.0190
                                          (0.0186)                                     (0.0186)
 Beliefs about R0                                              -0.00534                                          -0.00366
                                                              (0.00381)                                         (0.00368)
 Constant                                   -0.293              -0.0535                  -0.264                   -0.0992
 Lower-bound mean                           0.465                                         0.466
 Controls                                    Yes                   Yes                     Yes                      Yes
 Observations                               2,391                 2,391                   2,405                    2,405
 R2                                         0.079                                         0.071
Notes. This table presents results from LPM and 2SLS regressions where assignment to the upper-bound exponential condition acts
as an IV for beliefs regarding R0 . The outcomes of interest are whether participants comply with various behaviors if the pandemic
continued for 7 days/2 months. Demographic control variables are used in all regressions. The control group is not included in this
analysis. The first-stage regression is displayed in Table 1. Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1).


                                                                16
      We now examine the linearity of the relationship between people’s beliefs about R0 and
their willingness to engage in best practices. It is important to do so because the point esti-
mates might depend on our choice of instrument if the true relationship is non-linear (see,
for example, Løken et al. (2012)). To do this, we instrument for beliefs using two binary vari-
ables: a dummy variable representing assignment to the lower bound group, and a dummy
representing assignment to the upper-bound group. Thus, we introduce the control group
into the analysis.37 38
      We then conduct a 2SLS IV estimation where we instrument beliefs about R0 and
squared beliefs about R0 with the two aforementioned treatment dummies. We find that the
estimated effects of beliefs about R0 on people’s willingness to engage in the three behaviors
are similar to those presented in Table 3, and that the point estimates of the squared terms are
smaller than 0.001 (with 95% confidence intervals tightly bound around zero).39 While only
suggestive, this provides some preliminary evidence that the relationship is roughly linear, at
least over the relevant R0 interval.
      The "fatalism effect" that we document could cause substantial losses in welfare. For
example, conducting a highly conservative back-of-the-envelope calculation, we find that if
people in the US, on average, believe that R0 is one unit greater, we expect to see a mor-
tality loss of around $340 million. This suggests that if we revise people’s beliefs about R0
downward by 8 units––which is what the lower-bound treatment accomplished relative to
the control group––we would see a $2.7 billion increase in welfare.40




  37 Using   the control group creates a possible violation of the exclusion restriction insofar as it is possible that
individuals in the control group are less confident in their beliefs that those in the treatment groups. However, it
is implausible that the error term is mean-independent of any of our pre-treatment variables, so introducing the
control group is necessary for the analysis. Note that we do not have this problem in the IV analysis presented
in Table 2, as we drop participants in the control group, and use assignment to the upper-bound condition as
our instrument.
    38 See Table A6 in the Appendix for first-stage regressions on beliefs. We also re-run the regressions displayed

in Table 3 in order to see whether the point estimates differ when including two instruments, rather than one.
We find that the point estimates remain qualitatively similar. See Table A7 in the Appendix.
    39 See Table C3 in the Appendix.
    40 To calculate this number, we assumed that handwashing reduces the risk of contracting the virus by 16%

(see Rabie and Curtis (2006)) and that there will be an additional 150,000 COVID-19 deaths in the US (McAn-
drew, 2020). The figure is the median estimate of experts who were asked to forecast total US deaths up until the
end of 2020. Because it ignores deaths after 2020, it likely understates the true number. As there have already
been around 69,000 deaths, there are around 81,000 potential deaths that changes in handwashing behavior
can affect. We also assumed a value of a statistical life of $10 million (see Viscusi and Aldy (2003) for a review
of such estimates) and ignored any positive spillovers from handwashing. Finally, we assume a linear effect of
beliefs on handwashing behaviors.

                                                         17
3.5 Believing that COVID-19 is more infectious makes individuals less optimistic

Finally, we study the impact of changing people’s beliefs about COVID-19 on their optimism
about the future. We expect people to become less optimistic about the future if they are
told that experts estimate that R0 is greater, as this may imply that the virus is likely to
have a greater impact on the economy (and society in general). This is exactly what we find.
Table 3 shows that when participants are told that R0 is five, as opposed to two, they become
significantly less optimistic. Quantitatively, a one-unit increase in beliefs about R0 leads to a
one percentage point drop in the share of participants that are optimistic about the future.41

                              Table 3: The effect of beliefs about R0 on optimism

                                                                                             (1)                         (2)
                                                                                            ITT                         LATE
   VARIABLES                                                                           Optimism                      Optimism
   Upper-bound condition (R0 = 5)                                                      -0.0534***
                                                                                        (0.0202)
   Beliefs about R0                                                                                                  -0.0103**
                                                                                                                     (0.00461)
   Constant                                                                               0.494**                     0.960***
                                                                                          (0.197)                      (0.354)
   Lower-bound mean                                                                        0.494
   Controls                                                                                 Yes                          Yes
   Observations                                                                            2,405                        2,405
   R2                                                                                      0.032
 Notes. This table presents the results from two regressions. The regression in the first column is run using an LPM, with independent
 variables being assignment to the upper-bound condition in addition to demographic controls (these are listed in Section 3.1). The
 dependent variable is whether respondents feel optimistic about their future (a binary variable). The regression in the second column
 uses 2SLS, where assignment to the upper-bound exponential condition acts as an instrumental variable for beliefs regarding R0 . The
 dependent variable is whether participants are optimistic about their future. Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p < 0.01, **
 p < 0.05, * p < 0.1).



     The results presented in Table 3 are of interest insofar as optimism affects the evolution
of key macroeconomic variables. Further, the result suggests that subjects understand that a
higher rate of infectiousness translates into a more severe impact from the virus in the future.




  41 Table 3 excludes participants in the control group because we cannot be sure that the exclusion restriction
holds this group.

                                                                 18
4      Towards a theory of fatalism

In this section, we propose a model that can explain the fatalism effect that we find in our
experiment. The intuition behind the model is straightforward. If individuals come to believe
that the virus is more infectious, then they revise upwards their assessment of the probability
that they will get the virus even if they socially distance (or follow other best practices such as
washing their hands frequently). But if individuals come to believe that they are likely to get
the virus no matter what they do, then they may decide to ignore social distancing measures:
in other words, we get a rational “fatalism effect”.
      More formally, we consider an individual who must choose between two actions: socially
distancing (denoted A = 0) or instead socializing as usual (denoted A = 1). If they socially
distance, then there is a probability p ∈ [0, 1] that they will contract the virus nonetheless
(e.g. while doing essential shopping). If they socialize as usual, there is a further probability
q ∈ [0, 1] that their friends will give them the virus. Assuming independence of risks for
simplicity, their overall probability of contracting the disease is thus p + q − pq in the A = 1
scenario.42
      If the individual socializes, they receive a psychic benefit B > 0 and their expected utility
is given by U (A = 1) = B−α(p +q −pq) where α > 0 measures the rate at which they are willing
to trade the benefit of socializing off against the risk.43 If they instead socially distance, then
their expected utility is U (A = 0) = −αp. They therefore choose to socialize if and only if

                                   U(A = 1) ≥ U(A = 0) ⇐⇒ q(1 − p) ≤ B0                                           (3)

where we have defined B0 ≡ B/α. To capture variation in the cost of socially distancing within
the population, we will assume that B0 is drawn from some strictly increasing probability
distribution F : [0, 1] → R. Thus,

                                P(A = 1) = P(q(1 − p) ≤ B0 ) = 1 − F(q(1 − p))                                    (4)

and so the probability that the individual socializes is strictly decreasing in q(1 − p). In other
words, the greater the additional risk from socializing, the less likely the individual is to
socialize.
     Finally, note that the subjective probabilities p and q depend on the individual’s estimate
of the infectiousness of the disease, denoted e ∈ R. Accordingly, we will write p = p(e) and
    42 Recall
            that P(A ∨ B) = P(A) + P(B) − P(A)P(B) for any two independent events A, B.
    43 The assumptions of additive utility with fixed α   can be dropped entirely if we are willing to directly assume
that the agent is less likely to socialize if the risk from doing so increases. In this sense, these assumptions are
superfluous.

                                                          19
q = q(e); and we will further assume that p and q are strictly increasing and differentiable
functions.
      We now examine how the individual’s willingness to socialize depends on their estimate
of the infectiousness rate. To this end, it will be convenient to define β(e) ≡ p0 (e)/q0 (e), i.e.
β is the ratio of derivatives of the risk functions. It is also helpful to define fatalism more
formally. We will say that there is a fatalism effect if and only if

                                               dP(A = 1)
                                                         >0                                     (5)
                                                  de

that is, a small increase in the perceived infectiousness rate makes the individual more likely
to socialize. We can then observe the following:44

Proposition 1. There is a fatalism effect if and only if p(e) + β(e)q(e) > 1.

      Proposition 1 sheds some light on when fatalism is likely to arise. First, fatalism is more
likely to arise when the background risk p is high. This is not a surprise: for example, in the
extreme case of p = 1, the individual is certain to contract the disease anyway and therefore
loses nothing from going outdoors. Second, fatalism is more likely to arise when the relative
sensitivity of the background risk to the perceived infection rate is large. This is also not
surprising: if increasing e dramatically increases the risk from staying at home, but only
slightly increases the risk from socializing, then it may induce individuals to socialize. Finally,
a fatalism effect becomes more likely when the socializing risk q becomes larger. While this
effect is more subtle, the intuition can be readily grasped by considering the extreme case of
q = 0: in that case, the individual will socialize with probability 1 (there is no risk in doing
so), so increasing e cannot make them more likely to socialize (i.e. there can be no fatalism
effect).
     While useful, it may be hard to check whether the inequality in Proposition 1 holds in
practice. As a result, we now study the relationship between the possibility of a fatalism effect
and the overall probability that an individual contracts the disease if they socialize p + q − pq.
To this end, let pS ≡ p + q − pq (suppressing the dependence of the probabilities on e for ease
of notation) and define the function g : R+ → [0, 1] as follows:
                                             
                                             (4 − β)/4 if β ∈ (0, 2]
                                             
                                             
                                             
                                      g(β) =                                                   (6)
                                              1/β       if β > 2
                                             
                                             

We then have the following result:

  44 All   proofs appear in Appendix A.

                                                     20
Proposition 2. If there is a fatalism effect, then pS ≥ g(β). Conversely, if pS > g(β), then there
must exist probabilities p ∈ [0, 1] and q ∈ [0, 1] that are consistent with pS and generate a fatalism
effect.

      Proposition 2 provides an easily checked inequality that determines the possibility of a
fatalism effect. For example, suppose that β = 1 (i.e. both probabilities are equally sensitive
to the estimated infectiousness rate e). Then g(β) = 3/4, so fatalism is possible only if the
individual thinks that they have at least a 75% chance of getting the disease if they socialize.
Conversely, if the individual thinks that they have at least a 75% chance of getting the disease
if they socialize, then we can always find probabilities p and q that generate a fatalism effect
(e.g., if pH = 0.75, then p = q = 0.5 will work). Note that, in general, the probability pS need
not be as high as 75% to generate fatalism. Indeed, given that g(∞) = 0, fatalism is consistent
with an arbitrarily low probability pS provided that the ratio of derivatives β is sufficiently
large.
     In summary, our model demonstrates that fatalism is possible under a range of condi-
tions; and that a fatalism effect is more likely to arise if the probabilities p, q and the ratio
of derivatives β is large. Importantly, our model can also be reinterpreted in various ways.
For example, while we described the action A = 1 as ‘socializing as usual’, it could also be in-
terpreted as ‘not regularly washing one’s hands frequently’ or ‘refusing to work from home’,
allowing the model to explain the fatalism effect we also observe for these outcome variables.
Similarly, the risks could be re-interpreted as not risks to oneself but rather as risks to others,
allowing the model to explain why one might become fatalistic when (for example) deciding
whether to visit an elderly relative.
     As shown in the appendix, it is possible to extend the basic model in various ways. For
example, it is possible to relax the assumption that the risks are independent; and it is also
possible to allow for the conjunction of selfish and altruistic motives for social distancing
behavior. These extensions slightly complicate the formulae above but do not change the
main insights of the model. A more interesting extension is to recognize that the probabilities
of contracting the disease p and q actually depend on the fraction who socially distance,
which in turn depends on the probabilities p and q. It is thus possible to find ‘equilibrium’
probabilities and level of social distancing: i.e., probabilities p and q that induce a level of
social distancing that is then consistent with p and q.
     Finally, we recognize that, while the model provides one explanation for the observed




                                                 21
effect, it is not the only plausible explanation. For example, it might be that increasing indi-
vidual assessments of the infectiousness of disease makes them think that many others will
likely get the virus anyway, thereby diminishing the perceived social value of efforts to de-
press R0 .45 While this explanation is logically distinct from ours, it is similar in spirit insofar
as both explanations stress the damaging effect of high R0 assessments on individuals’ moti-
vation to combat the virus.46



5      Conclusion

This paper describes three key results of an online experiment that studies individual beliefs
and behaviors during the COVID-19 pandemic. First, individuals overestimate both the in-
fectiousness and dangerousnes of COVID-19 relative to expert opinion, a result that is in line
with findings from the risk perception literature. Second, messages conveying expert esti-
mates of R0 partially correct people’s beliefs about the infectiousness of COVID-19. Third,
individuals who believe that COVID-19 is more infectious are less willing to comply with
social distancing measures, a finding we dub the “fatalism effect”.
      We are not the first to uncover a fatalism effect in the context of decision-making under
uncertainty. Earlier observational studies suggest that higher risk perceptions make anxious
individuals less likely to engage in exercise, less likely to meet fruit and vegetable consump-
tion guidelines and less willing to quit smoking (Ferrer and Klein (2015)). We contribute to
this literature by demonstrating the existence of a fatalism effect using experimental methods
and by providing evidence of such an effect in the context of a pandemic. We also develop a
model that that is capable of explaining the fatalism effect.
      Our study has several limitations. For example, we consider the impact on stated behav-
iors; we do not measure the long-run impact of beliefs on behavior; and there is a possibility
that our results may not generalize to those who do not complete online experiments. These
limitations could, perhaps, be overcome by conducting long-term and large-scale natural field

    45 Forexample, in the classic SIR model it can be shown (see, e.g., Weiss (2013)) that the maximum fraction
of the population infected is
                                                          1 + ln R0
                                                      1−
                                                             R0
                                                 √
which is strictly concave on the domain R0 > e. If individuals believe that R0 individuals determines the max-
imum infection rate in this way, then they will believe that the effect of slightly depressing R0 on the maximum
infection rate is small is they believe that R0 is large. For example, if they believe that R0 is 26 (the mean assess-
ment of participants in the upper-bound group), then the derivative of the maximum infection rate with respect
to R0 is just 0.5 percentage points.
   46 Another interesting area of study is the possibility of boundedly rational fatalism, and whether people are

"selectively fatalistic" (Sunstein, 1998).

                                                         22
experiments.
      These limitations notwithstanding, our findings may have important implications for
policy in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular, they suggest substantial gains
from providing the public with accurate information, insofar as this information revises pub-
lic assessments of the virus’ infectiousness downwards. To get a sense of the magnitude of this
effect, we perform a conservative benefit calculation, and find that revising individual assess-
ments of R0 downwards by just 8 units could create at least $2.7 billion in social benefits in
the US simply by getting people to wash their hands more frequently. It might also be worth-
while for governments to track how people’s beliefs and sentiments change over the course of
the pandemic, as this would inform the need for––and help target––policy interventions.
      More generally, our study has implications for how policymakers can best mobilize pop-
ulations in the face of a crisis. In particular, we show that policymakers need to tread a fine
line, communicating in ways that convey the seriousness of the crisis, but without triggering
a fatalism effect. Understanding how exactly to tread that line is an important task for future
research.




                                              23
References
Daron Acemoglu, Victor Chernozhukov, Ivan Werning, and Michael D. Whinston. A multi-
 risk SIR model with optimally targeted lockdown. NBER Working Papers, page No 27102,
 2020.

George A. Akerlof and Robert J. Shiller. Animal spirits: How human psychology drives the
 economy, and why it matters for global capitalism. 2010.

Fernando E. Alvarez, David Argente, and Francesco Lippi. A simple planning problem for
  covid-19 lockdown. NBER Working Papers, 2020.

Roy M. Anderson and Robert M. May. Infectious diseases of humans: dynamics and control.
  1992.

Roy M. Anderson, Hans Heesterbeek, Don Klinkenberg, and T. Deidre Hollingsworth. How
  will country-based mitigation measures influence the course of the covid-19 epidemic? The
  Lancet, pages 931–934, 2020.

Oliver Armantier, Scott Nelson, Giorgio Topa, Wilbert van der Klaauw, and Basit Zafar. The
  price is right: Updating inflation expectations in a randomized price information experi-
  ment. Review of Economics and Statistics, pages 503–523, 2016.

Andrew Atkeson. What will be the economic impact of covid-19 in the US? rough estimates
 of disease scenarios. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.

Christopher Avery, William Bossert, Adam Clark, Glenn Ellison, and Sara Fisher Ellison. Pol-
 icy implications of models of the spread of coronavirus: Perspectives and opportunities for
 economists. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.

Scott R Baker, Nicholas Bloom, Steven J Davis, Kyle J Kost, Marco C Sammon, and Tasaneeya
  Viratyosin. The unprecedented stock market impact of covid-19. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.

Robert J Barro, José F Ursúa, and Joanna Weng. The coronavirus and the great influenza pan-
  demic: Lessons from the “Spanish flu” for the coronavirus’s potential effects on mortality
  and economic activity. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.

Jess Benhabib, Xuewen Liu, and Pengfei Wang. Sentiments, financial markets, and macroeco-
  nomic fluctuations. Journal of Financial Economics, 120(2):420–443, 2016.




                                            24
David W Berger, Kyle F Herkenhoff, and Simon Mongey. An SEIR infectious disease model
 with testing and conditional quarantine. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
 Research, 2020.

Peter Bergman. Parent-child information frictions and human capital investment: Evidence
  from a field experiment investment. Journal of Political Economy, 2020.

Tanguy Bernard, Stefan Dercon, and Alemayehu Seyoum Taffesse. Beyond fatalism: an em-
  pirical exploration of self-efficacy and aspirations failure in Ethiopia. 2011.

Zachary Bleemer and Basit Zafar. Intended college attendance: Evidence from an experiment
  on college returns and costs. Journal of Public Economics, 157:184–211, 2018.

Guglielmo Briscese, Nicola Lacetera, Mario Macis, and Mirco Tonin. Compliance with covid-
 19 social-distancing measures in italy: the role of expectations and duration. Technical
 report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.

Charles J Brody. Differences by sex in support for nuclear power. Social forces, 63(1):209–228,
 1984.

Erik Brynjolfsson, John Horton, Adam Ozimek, Daniel Rock, Garima Sharma, and Hong Yi Tu
  Ye. Covid-19 and remote work: An early look at us data. Technical report, Working paper,
  2020.

Adam Brzezinski, Valentin Kecht, David Van Dijcke, and Austin L Wright. Belief in science
 influences physical distancing in response to covid-19 lockdown policies. University of
 Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper, (2020-56), 2020.

Leonardo Bursztyn, Alessandra L González, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. Misperceived so-
  cial norms: Female labor force participation in saudi arabia. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

Leonardo Bursztyn, Davide Cantoni, David Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Jane Zhang. Per-
  sistent political engagement: Social interactions and the dynamics of protest movements.
  Technical report, Working Paper, 2019.

Leonardo Bursztyn, Aakaash Rao, Christopher Roth, and David Yanagizawa-Drott. Misinfor-
  mation during a pandemic. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics
  Working Paper, (2020-44), 2020.

Alexander W Cappelen, Ranveig Falch, Erik Ø Sørensen, and Bertil Tungodden. Solidarity
  and fairness in times of crisis. NHH Dept. of Economics Discussion Paper, (06), 2020.


                                              25
David Cass and Karl Shell. Do sunspots matter? Journal of Political Economy, 91(2):193–227,
 1983.

Alberto Cavallo, Guillermo Cruces, and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. Inflation expectations, learn-
  ing, and supermarket prices: Evidence from survey experiments. American Economic Jour-
  nal: Macroeconomics, 9(3):1–35, 2017.

CDC. Severe outcomes among patients with coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) — united
 states, february 12–march 16, 2020. 2020.

CO. Coronavirus action plan: a guide to what you can expect across the UK. 2020.

John J Conlon, Laura Pilossoph, Matthew Wiswall, and Basit Zafar. Labor market search
  with imperfect information and learning. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, 2018.

Guillermo Cruces, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, and Martin Tetaz. Biased perceptions of income
 distribution and preferences for redistribution: Evidence from a survey experiment. Journal
 of Public Economics, 98:100–112, 2013.

Zoë Cullen and Ricardo Perez-Truglia. How much does your boss make? the effects of salary
  comparisons. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

David M DeJoy. An examination of gender differences in traffic accident risk perception.
 Accident Analysis & Prevention, 24(3):237–246, 1992.

Gabriel Di Bella and Francesco Grigoli. Optimism, pessimism, and short-term fluctuations.
 Journal of Macroeconomics, 60:79–96, 2019.

Rebecca Dizon-Ross. Parents’ beliefs about their children’s academic ability: Implications for
  educational investments. American Economic Review, 109(8):2728–65, 2019.

Pascaline Dupas. Do teenagers respond to hiv risk information? evidence from a field exper-
  iment in kenya. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3(1):1–34, 2011.

Martin S Eichenbaum, Sergio Rebelo, and Mathias Trabandt. The macroeconomics of epi-
 demics. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.

David Eil and Justin M Rao. The good news-bad news effect: asymmetric processing of objec-
 tive information about yourself. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 3(2):114–38,
 2011.

Maryam Farboodi, Gregor Jarosch, and Robert Shimer. Internal and external effects of social
 distancing in a pandemic. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.

                                             26
Neil Ferguson, Daniel Laydon, Gemma Nedjati Gilani, Natsuko Imai, Kylie Ainslie, Marc
 Baguelin, Sangeeta Bhatia, Adhiratha Boonyasiri, ZULMA Cucunuba Perez, Gina Cuomo-
 Dannenburg, et al. Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce
 covid19 mortality and healthcare demand. 2020.

Rebecca A Ferrer and William MP Klein. Risk perceptions and health behavior. Current
  opinion in psychology, 5:85–89, 2015.

Thiemo Fetzer, Lukas Hensel, Johannes Hermle, and Chris Roth. Coronavirus perceptions
  and economic anxiety. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.03848, 2020.

Melissa L Finucane, Paul Slovic, Chris K Mertz, James Flynn, and Theresa A Satterfield. Gen-
 der, race, and perceived risk: The ’white male’ effect. Health, risk & society, 2(2):159–172,
 2000.

Andreas Fuster, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Mirko Wiederholt, and Basit Zafar. Expectations with
 endogenous information acquisition: An experimental investigation. Technical report, Na-
 tional Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

J. Gallagher. Coronavirus r: Is this the crucial number? BBC, 2020.

Neil Garrett, Ana María González-Garzón, Lucy Foulkes, Liat Levita, and Tali Sharot. Updat-
 ing beliefs under perceived threat. Journal of Neuroscience, 38(36):7901–7911, 2018.

J. Gershman. A guide to state coronavirus lockdowns. The Wall Street Journal, 2020.

Niels Joachim Gormsen and Ralph SJ Koijen. Coronavirus: Impact on stock prices and growth
  expectations. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper,
  (2020-22), 2020.

Michael Greenstone and Vishan Nigam. Does social distancing matter? University of Chicago,
 Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper, (2020-26), 2020.

Veronica Guerrieri, Guido Lorenzoni, Ludwig Straub, and Iván Werning. Macroeconomic
  implications of covid-19: Can negative supply shocks cause demand shortages? Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.

Patricia A Gwartney-Gibbs and Denise H Lach. Sex differences in attitudes toward nuclear
  war. Journal of Peace Research, 28(2):161–174, 1991.

M. Holden. Uk lockdown put in place to protect the nhs during covid-19. World Economic
 Forum, 2020.



                                             27
Solomon Hsiang, Daniel Allen, Sebastien Annan-Phan, Kendon Bell, Ian Bolliger, Trinetta
  Chong, Hannah Druckenmiller, Andrew Hultgren, Luna Yue Huang, Emma Krasovich,
  et al. The effect of large-scale anti-contagion policies on the coronavirus (covid-19) pan-
  demic. MedRxiv, 2020.

Robert Jensen. The (perceived) returns to education and the demand for schooling. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 125(2):515–548, 2010.

Òscar Jordà, Sanjay R Singh, and Alan M Taylor. Longer-run economic consequences of pan-
 demics. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.

Jason T Kerwin. Scared straight or scared to death? the effect of risk beliefs on risky behaviors.
  2018.

Michael Kremer. Integrating behavioral choice into epidemiological models of aids. Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, 111(2):549–573, 1996.

Pramila Krishnan and Sofya Krutikova. Non-cognitive skill formation in poor neighbour-
  hoods of urban india. Labour Economics, 24:68–85, 2013.

Dirk Krueger, Harald Uhlig, and Taojun Xie. Macroeconomic dynamics and reallocation in
  an epidemic. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.

Joseph A Lewnard and Nathan C Lo. Scientific and ethical basis for social-distancing inter-
  ventions against covid-19. The Lancet. Infectious Diseases, 2020.

Jeffrey B Liebman and Erzo FP Luttmer. Would people behave differently if they better un-
   derstood social security? evidence from a field experiment. American Economic Journal:
   Economic Policy, 7(1):275–99, 2015.

Ying Liu, Albert A Gayle, Annelies Wilder-Smith, and Joacim Rocklöv. The reproductive
  number of covid-19 is higher compared to sars coronavirus. Journal of Travel Medicine,
  2020.

Katrine V Løken, Magne Mogstad, and Matthew Wiswall. What linear estimators miss: The
  effects of family income on child outcomes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  4(2):1–35, 2012.

T. McAndrew. Covid-19-survey10. 2020.

Mohsen Mosleh, Gordon Pennycook, and David G Rand. Self-reported willingness to share
 political news articles in online surveys correlates with actual sharing on twitter. Plos one,
 15(2):e0228882, 2020.

                                               28
Brendan Nyhan and Jason Reifler. When corrections fail: The persistence of political misper-
  ceptions. Political Behavior, 32(2):303–330, 2010.

Eyal Peer, Laura Brandimarte, Sonam Samat, and Alessandro Acquisti. Beyond the turk:
  Alternative platforms for crowdsourcing behavioral research. Journal of Experimental Social
  Psychology, 70:153–163, 2017.

Tamer Rabie and Valerie Curtis. Handwashing and risk of respiratory infections: a quantita-
  tive systematic review. Tropical medicine & international health, 11(3):258–267, 2006.

R. Reis. How do countries differ in their response to the coronavirus economic crisis? The
  Guardian, 2020.

M. Roser, H. Ritchie, E. Ortiz-Ospina, and J. Hasell. Coronavirus disease (covid-19. Our World
 in Data, 2020.

Ian Savage. Demographic influences on risk perceptions. Risk Analysis, 13(4):413–420, 1993.

Joel Shapiro and Stephen Wu. Fatalism and savings. Journal of Socio-Economics, 40(5):645–
  651, 2011.

Paul Ed Slovic. The perception of risk. Earthscan publications, 2000.

Clarence Spigner, Wesley E Hawkins, and Wendy Loren. Gender differences in perception of
  risk associated with alcohol and drug use among college students. Women & health, 20(1):
  87–97, 1993.

Mary Ann E Steger and Stephanie L Witt. Gender differences in environmental orientations:
 A comparison of publics and activists in canada and the us. Western Political Quarterly, 42
 (4):627–649, 1989.

Cass R Sunstein. Selective fatalism. Journal of Legal Studies, 27(S2):799–823, 1998.

Bernard Tanguy, Stefan Dercon, Kate Orkin, and Alemayehu Seyoum Taffesse. The future in
  mind: Aspirations and forward-looking behaviour in rural ethiopia. 2014.

Jay J Van Bavel, Katherine Baicker, Paulo S Boggio, Valerio Capraro, Aleksandra Cichocka,
  Mina Cikara, Molly J Crockett, Alia J Crum, Karen M Douglas, James N Druckman, et al.
  Using social and behavioural science to support covid-19 pandemic response. Nature Hu-
  man Behaviour, pages 1–12, 2020.

W Kip Viscusi and Joseph E Aldy. The value of a statistical life: a critical review of market
 estimates throughout the world. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 27(1):5–76, 2003.


                                              29
Howard Howie Weiss. The sir model and the foundations of public health. Materials matem-
 atics, pages 0001–17, 2013.

WHO. Covid-19 strategy update - 14 april 2020. 2020.

Matthew Wiswall and Basit Zafar. Determinants of college major choice: Identification using
 an information experiment. Review of Economic Studies, 82(2):791–824, 2015.




                                            30
A      Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1. From (4), we see that

                     dP(A = 1)
                               = −F0 (q(e)[1 − p(e)])[q0 (e) − q0 (e)p(e) − p0 (e)q(e)]        (7)
                        de

Since F0 (q(e)[1 − p(e)]) > 0, it follows that

                         dP(A = 1)
                                   > 0 ⇐⇒ q0 (e) − q0 (e)p(e) − p0 (e)q(e) < 0
                            de
                                                  p0 (e)
                                       ⇐⇒ p(e) + 0 q(e) > 1                                    (8)
                                                  q (e)

which is precisely our result.

Proof of Proposition 2. To prove the first claim, assume that there is a fatalism effect. Then
p + qβ > 1 (by Proposition 1) and so p + qβ ≥ 1. To find a lower bound on the probability pS ,
consider the problem

                                      minp,q     pS = p + q − pq
                                          s.t. p + qβ ≥ 1                                      (9)
                                                 p ∈ [0, 1], q ∈ [0, 1]

When β > 2, the solution is p∗ = 0 and q∗ = 1/β at which point pS = 1/β. We thus conclude that
pS ≥ 1/β in the case of β > 2. Meanwhile, when β ∈ (0, 2], we have the (interior) solution of
p∗ = (2 − β)/2 and q∗ = 1/2 at which point pS = (2 − β)/4. We thus conclude that pS ≥ (2 − β)/4
in the case of β ∈ (0, 2]. Either way, then, a fatalism effect implies that pS ≥ g(β).
      To prove the second claim, consider the pair of probabilities (p, q) defined by p + q − pq =
pS ,p = (2 − β)/2 if β ∈ (0, 2], and otherwise p = 0 (if β > 2). Clearly, these probabilities are
consistent with pS . Moreover, if pS = g(β), then (p, q) = (p∗ , q∗ ) and so p + βq = 1. Hence, if
pS > g(β), it must be that q > q∗ and so p + βq > 1, i.e. the probabilities generate a fatalism
effect.



B      Dependent risks and altruistic concerns

In this section, we show how the basic set-up can be extended to allow for (1) altruistic con-
cerns and (2) dependent risks. To allow from (1), we will assume (for simplicity) that socializ-
ing as usual involves meeting just one friend whom the agent may accidentally infect. Let pF

                                                    31
denote the probability that the friend who contract the virus even if they socially distance and
let qF denote the probability that the agent transmits the virus to their friend if they meet (so
pF and qF are defined analogously to p and q). To allow for (2), let qp denote the (conditional)
probability that the agent contracts the virus from their friend given that they would have
done so anyway; and define qpF analogously.
     In this more general setting, the chance that the agent contracts the virus in the A = 1
scenario is p+q−pqp ; and so socializing increases their risk by p+q−pqp −p = q−pqp . Similarly,
socializing increases their friend’s risk by qF − pF qpF . Since the agent cares about both of these,
the cost of meeting becomes

                                     γ(q − pqp ) + (1 − γ)(qF − pF qpF )                        (10)

If γ = 1 (pure selfishness) and qp = q (independence), then we return to the baseline model.
     As before, we have a fatalism effect if and only if

                                d h                                    i
                                    γ(q − pqp ) + (1 − γ)(qF − pF qpF ) < 0                     (11)
                                de

or equivalently

                                                                                  dqpF 
                                                                                       
                                 dqF              dqp                F dpF
                                                      !
                    dq                      dp                                  F
                  γ    + (1 − γ)     < γ qp    +p       + (1 − γ) qp      +p               (12)
                    de           de         de    de                      de      de 

As in Proposition 1, then, fatalism is more likely when the probabilities p, qp , pF , qpF are high
or when the baseline risks p and pF are very responsive to e. Moreover, if we assume that both
the agent and their friend have the same risk functions (i.e. p(e) = pF (e) and q(e) = qF (e) for
all e), then this inequality reduces to

                                           dq      dp    dqp
                                              < qp    +p                                        (13)
                                           de      de    de

which is the same condition one would obtain by setting γ = 1. In this case, then, introducing
altruistic concerns makes no difference to the analysis.




                                                     32
C      Balance table

                                                  Table A1: Balance table

                                                     Control          Lower-bound             Upper-bound             p-value
      Country = UK                                   0.482                0.485                   0.488               0.957
      Gender = male                                  0.434                0.411                   0.397               0.175
      Ages 18-44                                     0.782                0.737                   0.758               0.035
      Ages 45-54                                     0.117                0.121                   0.132               0.511
      Ages 55-64                                     0.076                0.098                   0.077               0.080
      Ages 65-74                                     0.020                0.041                   0.033               0.013
      Ages 75-84                                     0.005                0.003                   0.001               0.172
      Years of education                             14.611               14.585                  14.611              0.943
      Live with a partner                            0.534                0.543                   0.523               0.596
      Live with children                             0.327                0.317                   0.324               0.864
      Live with flat or housemates                   0.100                0.086                   0.087               0.384
      Live with parents                              0.239                0.208                   0.234               0.157
      Live with relatives                            0.120                0.089                   0.105               0.045
      Live alone                                     0.118                0.142                   0.140               0.146
      Lives in a rural rea                           0.111                0.105                   0.101               0.736
      Lives in a city                                0.327                0.343                   0.294               0.032
      Lives in a suburban area                       0.276                0.278                   0.296               0.486
      Lives in a village                             0.078                0.060                   0.076               0.180
      Monthly income 2019 ($)                       4536.483             4224.130                4487.000             0.042
      Use social media                               0.931                0.919                   0.912               0.226
      Took survey on mobile                          0.297                0.292                   0.303               0.820
      n                                                1197                 1200                    1213
    Notes. All variables listed in this table are binary, with the exception of ‘years of education’ which is measured in full year
    increments. We use these variables as controls when conducting our statistical analyses. The final column reports the p-value
    from a joint orthogonality test of equality of means between the three treatment groups.




                                                                 33
D     Descriptive analysis

                                 Table A2: Pre-treatment variables

    VARIABLES                                                  n     Mean    Min   Max
    Gender = male                                                             0     1
                                                             3,579   0.414
    Age = 18 to 44                                                            0     1
                                                             3,610   0.759
    Age = 45 to 54                                                            0     1
                                                             3,610   0.123
    Age = 55 to 64                                                            0     1
                                                             3,610   0.084
    Age = 65 to 74                                                            0     1
                                                             3,610   0.031
    Age = 75 to 84                                                            0     1
                                                             3,610   0.003
    Years of education                                                        6    18
                                                             3,610   14.60
    Politics = liberal                                                        0     1
                                                             3,610   0.544
    Politics = conservative                                                   0     1
                                                             3,610   0.219
    Lives with partner                                                        0     1
                                                             3,610   0.533
    Lives with children                                                       0     1
                                                             3,610   0.322
    Lives with flat/housemates                                                0     1
                                                             3,610   0.091
    Lives with parents                                                        0     1
                                                             3,610   0.227
    Lives with other relatives                                                0     1
                                                             3,610   0.105
    Lives alone                                                               0     1
                                                             3,610   0.134
    Lives in rural area                                                       0     1
                                                             3,610   0.106


                                                34
Lives in city/urban area                                         0       1
                                               3,610   0.321
Lives in sub-urban area                                          0       1
                                               3,610   0.283
Lives in village                                                 0       1
                                               3,610   0.071
Monthly pre-tax income in 2019 ($)
                                               3,608   4,416   1,000   14,634
Know anyone with COVID-19                                        0        1
                                               3,610   0.158
Know anyone lost job due to pandemic                             0       1
                                               3,610   0.569
Been in contact with an infected person                          0       1
                                               2,468   0.046
Currently employed                                               0       1
                                               3,610   0.658
Took survey on mobile                                            0       1
                                               3,610   0.298
Furloughed                                                       0       1
                                               3,610   0.051
Consumes right-wing news                                         0       1
                                               3,610   0.307
Has symptom: high temperature                                    0       1
                                               3,610   0.016
Has symptom: chest pain                                          0       1
                                               3,610   0.033
Has symptom: muscle soreness                                     0       1
                                               3,610   0.100
Has symptom: diarrhea                                            0       1
                                               3,610   0.043
Has symptom: headache                                            0       1
                                               3,610   0.211
Has symptom: nausea                                              0       1
                                               3,610   0.024
Has symptom: persistent cough                                    0       1
                                               3,610   0.153


                                          35
Has symptom: difficulty breathing                                        0   1
                                                         3,610   0.042
Number of symptoms                                                       0   8
                                                         3,610   0.622
Has no COVID-19 symptoms                                                 0   1
                                                         3,610   0.624
Likely to become unemployed                                              0   1
                                                         3,610   0.112
 Believes unemployment will rise by 10 p.p. by Au-                       0   1
gust                                                     3,610   0.889
Believes economy will shrink by August                                   0   1
                                                         3,610   0.094
Likely to experience food insecurity                                     0   1
                                                         3,610   0.273
Believes restrictions will last for more than 3 months                   0   1
                                                         3,610   0.482
Country = UK (0 = US)                                                    0   1
                                                         3,610   0.485
Uses social media                                                        0   1
                                                         3,610   0.920
Misinformed about cures for COVID-19                                     0   1
                                                         3,610   0.264
Correct beliefs about ETA for vaccine                                    0   1
                                                         3,610   0.512




                                           36
                           Table A3: Post-treatment variables

VARIABLES                                                        n      Mean    Min   Max
Perceived risk of hospitalization after contracting COVID-19    2,428   31.74    0    100
Perceived risk of dying if hospitalized for COVID-19            2,428   20.26    0    100
Beliefs about R0                                                2,428   23.58    0    100
Optimistic about future prospects                               2,428   0.466    0     1
Willing to work from home for seven days                        2,414   0.671    0     1
Willing to work from home for 2 months                          2,428   0.674    0     1
Willing to avoid meeting people in risk groups for 7 days       2,427   0.920    0     1
Willing to avoid meeting people in risk groups for 2 months     2,428   0.925    0     1
Willing to frequently wash hands for 7 days                     2,427   0.978    0     1
Willing to frequently wash hands for 2 months                   2,428   0.978    0     1




                                          37
          Table A4: Predictors baseline CFR and R0 beliefs

VARIABLES                       Overestimate CFR     Overestimate R0
In high-risk group                     0.114***           0.0469*
No COVID-19 symptoms                   -0.0180            -0.0129
Consumes right-wing news                0.0312            0.0452*
Currently employed                      0.0132             0.0154
Conservative                           0.00594             0.0114
Country = UK                          -0.125***         -0.0954***
Gender = male                         -0.174***          -0.133***
Over 55 years of age                   0.243***           -0.0500
Years of education                   -0.0207***         -0.0269***
Lives with partner                      0.0150             0.0345
Lives with children                   0.0748***            0.0307
Lives with flat/house mates            -0.0701            0.00319
Lives with parents                    -0.00481            0.0589*
Lives with relatives                  -0.00953            -0.0199
Lives alone                             0.0833             0.0484
Lives in rural area                    -0.0456            -0.0371
Lives in city                         -0.00122             0.0381
Lives in suburban area                -0.0821*            -0.0251
Lives in village                       -0.0493            -0.0661
Monthly income in 2019 (US $)         1.04e-06           4.45e-06
Uses social media                       0.0693             0.0583
Took survey using mobile                0.0137            0.00899
Constant                               0.754***           1.062***
Observations                            1,793              1,793
R2                                       0.095              0.048




                                38
                                 Table A5: Treatment effects on beliefs about R0

  VARIABLES                                                             % overestimate R0               Change in R0 beliefs
  Assigned to lower-bound condition (R0 = 2)                                   -0.118***                         -10.61***
                                                                                (0.0191)                          (1.035)
  Assigned to upper-bound condition (R0 = 5)                                   -0.269***                         -4.564***
                                                                                (0.0192)                          (1.374)
  Constant                                                                     1.076***                            -6.356
                                                                                (0.0877)                          (6.723)
  Control mean                                                                   0.728                              0.216
  Controls                                                                         Yes                               Yes
  Observations                                                                   3,577                              1,793
  R2                                                                             0.073                              0.046
Notes. This table presents the results from two regressions. The regressions presented in column 1 uses an LPM and the outcome is binary
(whether someone overestimates R0 post-treatment). The regression presented in column 2 uses OLS and the outcome is continuous (the
difference in pre- and post R0 beliefs). The sample is smaller for the second regression because we randomly elicit beliefs pre-treatment
for half of the population. Robust standard errors in parentheses (*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1).




                                                                  39
E   Robustness checks and alternative specifications

            Table A6: The effects of treatment assignment on beliefs about R0

        VARIABLES                                Beliefs about R0            Beliefs about R0 squared
        Assigned to lower-bound                       -7.889***                         -571.1***
                                                        (1.139)                           (108.7)
        Assigned to upper-bound                        -2.797**                            50.80
                                                        (1.260)                           (123.6)
        Constant                                       52.94***                          3,734***
                                                        (5.663)                           (558.0)
        F-statistic                                      23.1                              18.25
        Controls                                          Yes                               Yes
        Observations                                     3,577                             3,577
        R2                                               0.048                             0.044
      Notes. This table presents two OLS regressions. The outcome in column 1 is beliefs about R0 , and the outcome
      in column 2 is squared beliefs about R0 . Demographic control variables are used in both regressions.




                                                          40
                                   Table A7: Estimation with two instruments

                                              Willingness to avoid meeting people in high-risk groups
                                          7 days ITT           7 days LATE            2 months ITT             2 months LATE
  Upper-bound condition                    -0.00740                                      0.0131
  Lower-bound condition                     0.0169                                      0.0389***
  Beliefs about R0                                               -0.00247*                                        -0.00495***
  Constant                                  0.909***              1.031***                0.826***                   1.048***
  Control mean                               0.918                                         0.901
  R2                                         0.023                                         0.029
                                                            Willingness to wash hands frequently
                                          7 days ITT           7 days LATE            2 months ITT             2 months LATE
  Upper-bound condition                    -0.00105                                     -0.00401
  Lower-bound condition                     0.00485                                      0.00917
  Beliefs about R0                                               -0.000682                                          -0.00134*
  Constant                                  0.989***              1.080***                1.008***                   1.123***
  Control mean                               0.977                                         0.975
  R2                                         0.013                                         0.014
                                                                Willingness to work from home
                                          7 days ITT           7 days LATE            2 months ITT             2 months LATE
  Upper-bound condition                      -0.0165                                      -0.00315
  Lower-bound condition                       0.0113                                       0.0165
  Beliefs about R0                                                -0.00193                                          -0.00231
  Constant                                    -0.293               -0.0535                  -0.264                   -0.0992
  Control mean                                 0.683                                         0.674
  R2                                           0.079                                         0.071
Notes. This table presents results from instrumental variable regressions (2SLS) where assignment to the lower-bound or upper-bound
conditions act as instrumental variables for beliefs regarding R0 . The outcomes of interest are whether participants comply with various
behaviors if the pandemic continued for 7 days or 2 months. We use robust standard errors (*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1). In all
regressions, the sample size is 3, 577 and demographic control variables are used.




                                                                  41
                                      Table A8: Testing for linear causal effects

                                               Willingness to avoid meeting people in high-risk groups
  VARIABLES                                  7 days ITT 7 days LATE 2 months ITT 2 months LATE
  Assigned to upper-bound                      -0.00740                                      0.0131
  Assigned to lower-bound                       0.0169                                      0.0389***
  Beliefs about R0                                                   0.00168                                           -0.00474
  Beliefs about R0 squared                                          -5.29e-05                                          -2.66e-06
  Constant                                     0.852***              0.871***                0.838***                   1.004***
  R2                                            0.023                                         0.029
                                                               Willingness to wash hands frequently
                                             7 days ITT           7 days LATE            2 months ITT             2 months LATE
  Assigned to upper-bound                     -0.00105                                     -0.00401
  Assigned to lower-bound                      0.00485                                      0.00917
  Beliefs about R0                                                  0.000177                                           0.000913
  Beliefs about R0 squared                                          -1.09e-05                                          -2.87e-05
  Constant                                     0.962***              1.015***                0.971***                   1.027***
  R2                                            0.013                                         0.014
                                                                   Willingness to work from home
                                             7 days ITT           7 days LATE            2 months ITT             2 months LATE
  Assigned to upper-bound                     -0.0165                                      -0.00315
  Assigned to lower-bound                      0.0113                                       0.0165
  Beliefs about R0                                                   0.00442                                           0.000482
  Beliefs about R0 squared                                          -8.09e-05                                          -3.56e-05
  Constant                                     -0.189**              -0.398**                  -0.124                    -0.317
  R2                                            0.079                                           0.071
Notes. This table presents ITT and LATE estimates for the effects of beliefs about R0 (and squared beliefs about R0 ) on participants’ will-
ingness to engage in best practice behaviors. Two instruments are used in the 2SLS estimation: assignment to the upper-bound condition
and assignment to the lower-bound condition.




                                                                    42
                Table A9: The effect of treatment assignment on beliefs (re-weighted)

  VARIABLES                                                                Beliefs about R0             Beliefs about the CFR
  Assigned to lower-bound (R0 = 2)                                         -6.092***                    2.410*
                                                                           (1.422)                      (1.435)
  Assigned to upper-bound (R0 = 5)                                         0.912                        0.0574
                                                                           (1.732)                      (1.388)
  Constant                                                                 53.63***                     39.88***
                                                                           (7.002)                      (5.819)
  Controls                                                                 Yes                          Yes
  Observations                                                             3,577                        3,577
  R2                                                                       0.051                        0.190
Notes. This table presents results from OLS regressions examining the effects of being assigned to the lower- or upper-bound treatments
on key beliefs (one per column). We use robust standard errors (*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1). All outcomes are measured on a scale
from 0 to 100. Demographic control variables (e.g., age, geography, education, and income) are used in all specifications. Comparisons
are made relative to the group that receives no treatment. All regressions use weights that adjust for age, gender, and location.




                                                                    43
  Table A10: Effects of R0 beliefs on willingness to engage in best practices (re-weighted)

                                              Willingness to avoid meeting people in high-risk groups
                                           7 days ITT          7 days LATE             2 months ITT             2 months LATE
  Upper-bound condition                     -0.0238                                      -0.0380*
  Beliefs about R0                                                -0.00334                                           -0.00535
  Constant                                  0.734***              0.901***                 0.803***                  1.070***
  R2                                         0.034                                          0.037
                                                            Willingness to wash hands frequently
                                           7 days ITT          7 days LATE             2 months ITT             2 months LATE
  Upper-bound condition                     -0.0159                                      -0.0220**
  Beliefs about R0                                                -0.00224                                          -0.00309*
  Constant                                  1.052***              0.933***                 1.088***                  1.088***
  R2                                         0.019                                          0.020
                                                                 Willingness to work from home
                                           7 days ITT          7 days LATE             2 months ITT             2 months LATE
  Upper-bound condition                     -0.0464                                       -0.0419
  Beliefs about R0                                                -0.00653                                           -0.00588
  Constant                                    -0.162                0.164                  -0.0708                     0.223
  R2                                          0.083                                         0.067
Notes. This table presents results from instrumental variable regressions (2SLS) where assignment to the upper-bound exponential
condition acts as an instrumental variable for beliefs regarding R0 . The outcomes of interest are whether participants comply with
various behaviors if the pandemic continued for 7 days or 2 months. The sample sizes differ slightly between regression due to (as good
as randomly allocated) missing values in the dependent variable. We use robust standard errors (*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1). The
control group is not included in this analysis. The sample is re-weighted in terms of age, gender, and location.




                                                                   44
Table A11: Effects of beliefs about R0 on optimism (re-weighted)

                                                               ITT                LATE
   VARIABLES                                              Optimism            Optimism
   Assigned upper-bound condition                           -0.0368
                                                            (0.0310)
   Beliefs about R0                                                            -0.00517
                                                                               (0.00466)
   Constant                                                  0.427*             0.686**
                                                             (0.236)            (0.344)
   Controls                                                    Yes                 Yes
   Observations                                               2,391               2,391
   R2                                                         0.040
 Notes. This table presents the results from two regressions. The regression in the first column
 is run using an LPM, with independent variables being assignment to the upper-bound con-
 dition in addition to demographic controls (these are listed in Section 3.1). The dependent
 variable is whether respondents feel optimistic about their future (a binary variable). The re-
 gression in the second column uses 2SLS, where assignment to the upper-bound exponential
 condition acts as an instrumental variable for beliefs regarding R0 . The dependent variable is
 whether participants are optimistic about their future. Robust standard errors in parentheses
 (*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1). We drop the control group in these analyses. The sample
 is re-weighted in terms of age, gender, and location.




                                              45
Table A12: Effects of R0 beliefs on willingness to engage in best practices (dropping out-
liers)

                                             Willingness to avoid meeting people in high-risk groups
                                         7 days ITT           7 days LATE            2 months ITT             2 months LATE
  Assigned upper-bound
 condition                                -0.0240**                                     -0.0246**
  Beliefs about R0                                             -0.00443**                                         -0.00453**
  Constant                                 0.843***             1.041***                 0.822***                  1.023***
  R2                                        0.020                                         0.021
                                                           Willingness to wash hands frequently
                                         7 days ITT           7 days LATE            2 months ITT             2 months LATE
  Assigned upper-bound
 condition                                 -0.00602                                     -0.0134**
  Beliefs about R0                                               -0.00111                                         -0.00246**
  Constant                                 1.028***              1.077***                1.008***                  1.117***
  R2                                        0.014                                         0.017
                                                               Willingness to work from home
                                         7 days ITT           7 days LATE            2 months ITT             2 months LATE
  Assigned upper-bound
 condition                                  -0.0288                                       -0.0190
  Beliefs about R0                                               -0.00531                                          -0.00351
  Constant                                  -0.305                -0.0684                  -0.286                   -0.130
  R2                                         0.081                                          0.073
Notes. This table presents results from instrumental variable regressions (2SLS) where assignment to the upper-bound exponential
condition acts as an instrumental variable for beliefs regarding R0 . The outcomes of interest are whether participants comply with
various behaviors if the pandemic continued for 7 days or 2 months. The sample sizes differ slightly between regression due to (as good
as randomly allocated) missing values in the dependent variable. We use robust standard errors (*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1).
Demographic control variables are used in all regressions. The control group is not included in this analysis. We drop participants that
believe that R0 is 100 at baseline, as they may have misunderstood the question.




                                                                  46
F     Heterogeneity analysis

                            Table A13: Heterogenous treatment effects on beliefs

    VARIABLES                                       (1)                (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)
    Assigned to lower-bound                    -7.526***          -7.569***         -8.702***         -8.063***          -7.153***
    Assigned to upper-bound                     -3.304**            -1.795            -2.603          -4.086***           -3.592**
    Over 55                                      -3.422
    Lower * Over 55                               0.334
    Upper * Over 55                               6.134
    Right-wing news                                                4.018**
    Lower * Right-wing news                                         0.333
    Upper * Right-wing news                                        -2.580
    Gender = male                                                                   -6.480***
    Lower * Gender = male                                                              2.240
    Upper * Gender = male                                                             -0.474
    Conservative                                                                                         1.118
    Lower * Conservative                                                                                 2.218
    Upper * Conservative                                                                                6.402**
    In high-risk group                                                                                                     0.841
    Lower * In high-risk group                                                                                            -1.966
    Upper * In high-risk group                                                                                             4.090
    Constant                                    29.02***          27.37***           31.51***          28.42***          28.46***
    Controls                                       No                 No                No                No                 No
    Observations                                  3,610              3,610             3,579             3,610              3,610
    R2                                            0.012              0.014             0.021             0.016              0.013
Notes. This table presents five OLS regressions, where treatment assignment is interacted with participant characteristics. We use robust
standard errors (*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1). Demographic control variables are used in all regressions.




                                                                  47
          Table A14: Effect of eliciting pre-treatment R0 beliefs on post-treatment R0 beliefs

  VARIABLES                                                                      (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
  Upper-bound condition                                                                                         -5.051***          6.463***
  Asked pre-treatment                                                         2.390**           -1.697            -1.697           5.950***
  Upper-bound * Asked pre-treatment                                                                               4.884*            -2.762
  Lower-bound condition                                                                                         -11.51***
  Lower-bound * Asked pre-treatment                                                                              7.647***
  Upper- or lower-bound condition                                                             -8.178***
  Upper- or lower-bound * Asked pre-treatment                                                  6.121***
  Constant                                                                   24.05***         29.52***           29.52***          18.00***
  Controls                                                                      No                No                No                No
  Observations                                                                 3,610             3,610             3,610             2,413
  R2                                                                           0.002             0.010             0.016             0.013
Notes. This table presents four OLS regressions. The outcome is, in each case, post-treatment beliefs about R0 . The first column shows the
effect of eliciting pre-treatment beliefs about R0 on post-treatment beliefs about R0 and the regression includes the entire sample. The second
column shows the interactive effect of eliciting pre-treatment beliefs and being assigned to one of the two treatment conditions on post-treatment
beliefs about R0 and includes the entire sample. The third column shows the interactive effect of being assigned to the upper- and lower-bound
condition and eliciting pre-treatment beliefs and uses the entire sample. The final column shows the interactive effect of being assigned to
the upper-bound condition and eliciting pre-treatment beliefs, with the lower-bound condition as the reference group (the control group is
dropped). We use robust standard errors (*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1).




                                                                    48
G     Survey questions

G.1    Overview and sampling

We conducted two surveys, one for UK residents and one for US residents. The questions
administered to UK residents are listed below. Some questions were adjusted slightly for the
US audience (e.g., spelling, currencies, and the names of education qualifications). The sur-
vey took around ten minutes to complete, participants were recruited via Prolific Academic,
and the survey was conducted using the Qualtrics platform. No screening or eligibility cri-
teria were applied. We dropped participants who did not complete the full survey from our
analysis sample (there were few dropouts, and there was no differential attrition). We paid
participants the equivalent of $7.50 an hour in exchange for completing the survey. The order
of questions and the response options within questions were randomized when appropriate.
     Participants were debriefed at the end of the survey, and we recommended that they visit
the CDC or NHS websites (depending on country of residence) for more information about
COVID-19.


G.2    Survey introduction

Welcome and thanks for participating!
This is a study about the recent Coronavirus pandemic. In this study, you will be asked a set
of questions about yourself, your beliefs, and your habits.
The survey should take around 10 minutes to complete.
By clicking the button below, you acknowledge that your participation in the study is vol-
untary, that you are at least 18 years of age, and that you are aware that you can end your
participation in the study at any time and for any reason.
Your data will be kept strictly confidential and will not be shared with any third party. Your
data will only be used for research purposes.


G.3    Pre-treatment questions

Q1. What do you think the risk is that someone your age is hospitalised if they contract the
Coronavirus?
      Slider from 0-100%



                                             49
Q2. What do you think the risk is that someone your age would die, if they are hospitalised
as a result of the Coronavirus?
     Slider from 0-100%
Q3. On average, how many people do you think will catch the Coronavirus from one conta-
gious person? Please only consider cases transmitted by coughing, sneezing, touch or other
direct contact with the first contagious person.
     Slider from 0-100


Half of the sample was randomly asked to answer questions 1–3, the other began the survey by
answering question 4.


Q4. Please select your gender.
     (1) Male (2) Female (3) Other
Q5. Please select your age range.
     (1) 18-44 (2) 45-54 (3) 55-64 (4) 65-74 (5) 75-84 (6) 85+
Q6. What is the highest level of education you have completed?
     (1) Primary school
     (2) Secondary school (GCSE, I-level, AS level, or equivalent)
     (3) Secondary school (A-level, BTEC, or equivalent)
     (4) University diploma
     (5) Undergraduate degree
     (6) Postgraduate degree (e.g., MSc or PhD)
Q7. Do you live with any of the following? Please select all that apply.
     (1) Partner (2) Children (3) Flat or house mates (4) Parents (5) Other relatives
Q8. What type of area do you live in?
     (1) City (2) Town (3) Village (4) Rural
Q9. What was your monthly household income in 2019 (pre-tax)?
     (1) £0-1999 (2) £2000-3999 (3) £4000-5999 (4) £6000-7999 (5) £8000-9999
     (6) £10,000-11,999 (7) £12,000+
Q10. Do you have any of the following health conditions? Please select all that apply.
     (1) Cardiovascular disease (2) Diabetes (3) Chronic respiratory disease (4) Hypertension


                                               50
     (5) Asthma (5) Other serious condition (such as cancer) (6) None of the above
Q11. Have you had any of these symptoms within the last 48 hours? Please select all that
apply.
     (1) High temperature (2) Cough (3) Difficulty breathing or breathlessness (4) Chest pains
     (5) Headache (6) Muscle soreness (7) Nausea or vomiting (8) Diarrhea (9) None of the
     above
Q12. Do you personally know someone that has contracted Coronavirus?
     (1) Yes (2) No
Q13. Do you personally know someone who has become unemployed because of how the
Coronavirus has affected the economy?
Q14. Which political party do your views most align with?
     (1) Conservative (2) Labour (3) Liberal Democrats (4) Other (please specify) (5) No
     political party
Q15. Do you use any of the following news sources (online or in person) on a weekly basis?
Please select all that apply.
     (1) The Sun (2) The Daily Mail (3) The Telegraph (4) The Guardian (5) The Times (6)
     The Financial Times (7) The Mirror (8) The Express (9) The Independent (10) The Star
     (11) BBC (12) ITV (13) Sky News (14) Metro Online (15) Huffington Post (16) Buzzfeed
     (17) The Canary (18) Westmonster (19) Another Angry Voice (20) Breitbart (21) None of
     the above
Q16. Do you use any of the following social media platforms? Please select all that apply.
     (1) Facebook (2) Twitter (3) Instagram (4) LinkedIn (5) TikTok (6) Snapchat
Q17. Please identify the symptoms of the Coronavirus. Select all that apply.
     (1) Fever (2) Dry cough (3) Wet cough (4) Sneezing (5) Rash (6) Chest pains (7) Fatigue
     (8) Stomach pain (9) Blindness (10) Shortness of breath (11) None of the above
Q18. In the last week, have you or a person who lives with you been in contact with someone
who has the Coronavirus?
     (1) Yes (2) No (3) Don’t know
Q19. For how long do you believe that Coronavirus-related restrictions on behaviour and free
movement are likely to last for in the UK?
     (1) One month or less (2) One to three months (3) Three to six months (4) Six months to
     a year (5) Over a year

                                             51
Q20. What do you expect the general economic situation in this country to be in August 2020
(compared to January 2020)?
      Slider from 1–7 (1 = a lot worse, 4 = the same, 7 = a lot better)
Q21. How likely is it that unemployment will increase by at least 10 percentage points in the
next three months?
      Slider from 1–7 (1 = extremely unlikely, 4 = neither likely nor unlikely, 7 = extremely
      likely)
Q22. In how many months do you think a vaccine against the Coronavirus will be made
available for the public in the UK? Please select 48 if you believe that it will take more than
48 months.
      Slider from 0–48
Q23. Are any of the following effective treatments for the Coronavirus? Please select "Effec-
tive treatment", "Not an effective treatment", or "Not sure" for each option.
      (1) Drinking water every 15 minutes and keeping your mouth moist (2) Avoiding eating
      ice cream (3) Exposing yourself to sunshine (4) Gargling warm water with salt or vinegar
      (5) Using a hairdryer to blow hot hair toward your face (6) Ingesting colloidal silver (7)
      Taking C vitamins
Q24. Are you currently employed?
      (1) Yes (2) No (3) No, recently laid off (4) Yes, furloughed
(If response is (1) or (4) to Q24): Q25. How likely is it that you will become unemployed as a
result of the Coronavirus pandemic?
      Slider from 1–7 (1 = extremely unlikely, 4 = neither likely nor unlikely, 7 = extremely
      likely)


G.4     Treatments

One third of the participants are randomly allocated to the control group. One third of the
participants are randomly allocated to the upper-bound group. One third of the participants
are randomly allocated to the lower-bound group. Please see Figure 1 for the treatment im-
ages. Prior to administering the treatments, we say "We will now show you a poster about
the Coronavirus pandemic. Please have a careful look at the poster and then press next to
continue." Participants are required to stay on the page with the treatment for fifteen seconds
before being allowed to proceed.


                                                52
G.5     Post-treatment questions

Q25. What do you think the risk is that someone your age is hospitalised if they contract the
Coronavirus?
      Slider from 0-100%
Q26. What do you think the risk is that someone your age would die, if they are hospitalised
as a result of the Coronavirus?
      Slider from 0-100%
Q27. On average, how many people do you think will catch the Coronavirus from one con-
tagious person? Please only consider cases transmitted by coughing, sneezing, touch or other
direct contact with the first contagious person.
      Slider from 0-100
Q28. How likely are you to do the following during the coming seven days? (Answer 1–5, 1
= extremely unlikely, 3 = neither likely nor unlikely, 5 = extremely likely).
      (1) Work from home (2) Avoid people at high risk (i.e., those that are either at least 70
      years of age, pregnant, have a long-term condition, or a weakened immune system) (3)
      Wash your hands with water and soap several times a day
Q29. Assume that the Coronavirus outbreak is still ongoing 2 months from now. How likely
would you be to do the following during the average week? (Answer 1–5, 1 = extremely
unlikely, 3 = neither likely nor unlikely, 5 = extremely likely).
      (1) Work from home (2) Avoid people at high risk (i.e., those that are either at least 70
      years of age, pregnant, have a long-term condition, or a weakened immune system) (3)
      Wash your hands with water and soap several times a day
Q30. How optimistic are you about your future?
      Slider from 1–7 (1 = very pessimistic, 4 = neither optimistic nor pessimistic, 7 = very
      optimistic)


G.6     Debriefing

Thank you for completing our survey.
The Coronavirus pandemic is ongoing and we are still developing our understanding of the
risks that it poses to society. As such, the information that you were presented with in this
survey may be incorrect.


                                              53
Please refer to nhs.uk/conditions/coronavirus-covid-19/ for the latest up-to-date informa-
tion about the Coronavirus pandemic.




                                           54
