                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  FISCAL DEFICITS AND RELATIVE PRICES IN A
                            GROWING WORLD ECONOMY




                              Maurice Obatfeld




                           Working Paper No. 2725




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetta Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                October 1988




I am grateful for comments from Peter Neary, Bruce Smith, and Philippe Weil;
from participanta in the Rochester-Weatern Ontario Conference on exchange-
rate volatility; and from aeminar participants at the NBER 1987 Summer
Institute, Columbia University, Johns Hopkins University, the Bank of
Finland, and the Federal Reserve Board's International Finance Division. All
errors are my responsibility. Financial support from the National Science
Foundation, the NBER Olin visiting scholar program, and the Alfred P. Sloan
Foundation is acknowledged with thanks. This research is part of NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those
of the suthor not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                  NBER Working Paper #2725
                                  October 1988


  FISCAL DEFICITS AND RELATIVE PRICES IN A GROWING WORLD ECONOMY


                             ABSTRACT



     This paper studies the transmission of fiscal disturbances

between countries, and the effect of those disturbances on

worldwide capital intensity, in a context of growth.     The model

developed to address these issues allows for the production of

both nontradable and relatively capital-intensive tradable goods;

a central finding is that factor markets can be a major channel

for the communication of fiscal policy shocks to world interest

rates, to private saving decisions, and, ultimately, to global

asset supplies and their distribution among countries.

     Particular predictions of the model illustrate how changes in

public debt ratios and shifts in government spending patterns

affect resource allocation and welfare. For example, an increase

in a small country's per capita public debt leads to long-run

crowding-in of capital and the impoverishment of future
generations; a similar policy shift by a large country crowds out

capital on a global scale,         impoverishes   future domestic

generations, and has ambiguous effects abroad.




                                  Maurice Obstfeld
                                  National Bureau of Economic Research
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
1.   Introduction

     This paper studies the longer-term dynamic effects of national fiscal

policies in a context of economic growth. Particular attention is given to

the transmission of fiscal disturbances between countries and to the effect

of those disturbances on worldwide capital intensity. The model employed

allows for the production of both nontradable and relatively capital-

intensive tradable goods. A central finding of the analysis is that factor

markets can be a major channel for the transmission of fiscal policy shocks

to interest rates, to private saving decisions, and, ultimately, to global

asset supplies and their distribution among countriea.1

     The framework underlying the model is one in which the Ricardo-Barro

equivalence of public debt issue and taxation [see Barro (1974)] does not

hold. Nonequivalence arises from a factor first examined by Weil (1985):

economic growth is fueled by the birth of new households that are

unconnected with the existing households that hold the public debt.

Because current debt holders do not value the consumption of unborn

taxpayers, a fraction of the public debt proportional to the growth rate of

the population represents net wealth to existing households.

     A number of authora have examined international aspects of fiacal

policiea in models where agents' intertemporal objectives and constraints

are explicitly modelled. The present effort is complementary and explores

queations of fiscal policy from a aomewhat different perspective. Frenkel

and Razin (1986a) develop a global version of Blanchard's (1985) uncertain-

lifetime setup in which the labor force and supplies of tradable and

nontradable gooda are fixed. Giovannini (1988) and Buiter (1986) use

similar modela and incorporate capital accumulation; but neither

Giovannini'a comparative steady-state analyaia nor Buiter's simulation

methodology provides an analyticalcharacterization of the world economy'a
                                      2

dynamics. Greenwood and Kimbrough (1985) focus on croas-border fiscal

transmission in the presence of capital controls.

     The study that comes closest to the present one is by Persson (1985),

who uses Buiter's (1981) open-economy extension of Diamond's (1965) life-

cycle growth model to conduct a careful welfare analysis of debt policies

in a global setting. The dynamic methods used in the present paper differ

significantly from Persaon's, however, and lead to a useful alternative

perspective from which to analyze certain disturbances, in addition, the

Suiter-Persson assumption of a single good abstracts from demand-side

effects on interest rates that play a key role below. Fried and Howitt

(1988) examine a model similar to Persson's, but with capital in fixed

supply.

     Some main results of my analysis illustrate the important role of

factor markets in a world economy producing nontradables as well as

tradables:

     1. Lona-run crowdina in. in the long run, a small economy that

increases its steady-state ratio of real public debt to population suffers

a fall in per capita expenditure but a 1j,g in its per capita capital

stock. External debt rises, however, by more than the increase in capital.

Under the above-mentioned assumption that tradables are the capital-

intensive good, the increase in capital per worker is inevitable if the

economy's production of tradables is to cover its increased debt-servicing

requirements.

     2. Global crowdina out. The preceding result may be reversed when

debt expansion is undertaken by a large country capable of affecting the

world interest rate. The reason is that a rise in any country's long-run

public-debt ratio crowds out capital globally.
                                      3


     3.   Government nurchases of tradables and nontradables. Government

purchaaea of nontradablea are likely to result ultimately in a lower world

capital stock and lower average world consumption than equivalent purchases

of tradsbles.

     The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes a small-

country model and section 3 uses thst model to analyze unanticipated and

anticipated fiscal policy moves. This partial-equilibrium model is useful

for developing the intuition behind the general-equilibrium global model

set out in section 4. Section 5 studies the consequences of various fiscal

policies in a global setting. Section 6 discusses possible extensions of

the paper's analysis.



2. Model structure: Consumption and production

     This section describes a small open economy with a growing population

of infinitely-lived households. Population and labor force are, by

assumption, the same. The economy's firms combine capital and labor to

produce both internationally traded goods and nontraded goods. Although

the economy's lsbor suppLy is given at any point in time (there is no

cross-border labor migration), capital is internationally mobile [as in

Mundell (1957)1. The domestic capital stock therefore can be augmented

instantaneously and without adjustment cost by external borrowing.



A. Households

     At time t, a household that came into existence on date v   t

(its vintaze) maximizes



          U(v,t) —
                     CcT(v,s),cN(v,s)jexp6(st)]ds.
                                        4

where & > 0 is the subjective time-preference rate, cT (cN) is consumption

of traded (nontraded) goods, and



           u(cT,cN) =   [(cT)M(cN)]l/(lR)       (R > 0).



      Since the small economy will later be embedded in a trading world

economy, it is natural to choose traded goods as the numeraire for

measuring asset stocks and factor rewards. Total household consumption

expenditure, measured in terms of traded goods, is denoted c(v,t). If q(t)

is the price of traded goods in terms of nontraded goods,



           c(v,t)   cT(v,t) + cN(v,t)/q(t).



      The household holds financial assets a(v,t), supplies its unit

labor endowment inelastically at the wage rate w(t), and, at each moment t,

receives net transfers r(t) from the government. The assumption that these

lump-sum transfers are iia vintage-specific is reflected in the notation,

and is crucial in generating the non-Ricardian debt effects studied below.

If r(t) is the interest rate in terms of traded goods, the household

intertemporal budget constraint is



(1)
          Cc(v,s)exp[-f5r(z)dzjds



                           a(v,t) + f[w(s) + r(s)]exp[-j'r(z)dz]ds.



      Let h(t) denote household human wealth,
                                              5


(2)         h(t)     f[w(s) + r(s)]exp[-5r(z)dz]ds,



which is assumed to be positive at each moment. Then the spending plan

that maximizes lifetime welfare U(v,t) subject to (1) (assuming existence)




(3)         c(v,t)     £(t)[a(v,t) + h(t)].



where



(4)         l/U(t) rexp(5[r(z)+(lv)(z)]dz)eXp[-6(st)/RIdS


and A denotes a percentage change. In the log case (R =          1),   £(t) =   5.

        Expenditure is divided between the two consumption goods according

to the rule




(5)         cT(v,t) =   vc(v,t),cN(v,t)   —   (l-i)q(t)c(v,t).

The expenditure shares given by (5) yield the following interpretation of

the consumption function defined by (3) and (4). Consumption spending is a

proportion of total (nonhuman plus human) wealth that depends on the

expected future path of the          interest rate r(t) + (l-v)(t), that is,

the rate of interest in terms of the domestic consumption basket [see

Obstfeld (1985)1. The effect of this real interest rate on spending

depends on whether R < 1 (so that substitution effects dominate) or R > 1

(so that income effects dominate).
                                               6

B. Relative prices

      Traded and nontraded goods are produced with capital and labor under

neoclassical conditions, including constant returns to scale.

Nonspecialization in production is assumed. Production technologies are

described by the per capita production functions FT(kT,nT) and

where kT (kN) is the amount of capital, per unit labor force, employed in

producing traded (nontraded) goods, and nT CnN) is the corresponding per

capita labor input. Because the above outputs and inputs are divided by

the economy's total labor force, nT ÷ nN             1

      One unit of the traded good can be transformed into one unit of

installed capital with no time lag. Thus, in a small economy for which the

interest rate in terms of traded goods is given, a unique domestic wage is

determined by the zero-profit condition in tradables production.

      At a world interest rate of r, the optimal capital-labor ratio in the

traded sector, xT(r), is found by equalizing the marginal product of

capital and the interest rate,




           F[xT(r),l] =     r


(so that xTt(r) —
                       l/Fk[xT(r)J   C   0).   The domestic wage in terms of

tradables, w, must then lie on the factor-price frontier,



(6)       w —   w(r)
                          TT
                       — F [x (r),ll —     rxT(r).


This locus has a negative slope equal to _xT(r).

      The capital-labor ratio in nontradables, xN(qr), is the solution to
                                        7

            _N N
            tk[x (qr),l] =   qr.


Since r determines the wage w, however, the usual Stolper-Samuelson

reasoning implies that q can be written as a function of r alone,



(7)         q =   q(r).


(In a sense, factor mobility is a substitute for commodity trade in this

model, because countries that are nonspecialized in the same outputs, and

that have the same production functions, will have the same relative price
                                                                              -
of nontraded goods if they face a common world interest rate.) The

direction   of influence of r on q depends on sectoral factor intensities.

The most natural assumption, an important one for the analysis to follow,

is that nontradables are relatively labor intensive. This factor-intensity

assumption implies that a rise in r (which lowers the wage measured in

traded goods) causes the relative price of tradables, q, to rise:



(8)         q'(r) >   0.


The capital-labor ratio in nontradables, xN[q(r)r], is a decreasing

function of r.2



C. Factor supplies and production

      The number of households 1-1(t) in the economy grows at rate p >   0,       50

that if H(0) is taken to be 1, H(t) =   exp(pt).   The implied labor supply of

H(t), together with consumer demand, determines the level of the capital

stock and the allocation of factors between sectors.
                                            8

       Equation (5) shows that household V's demand for nontradables is

cN(v,t)     (l-)q(t)c(v,t). Aggregate per capita consumption spending in

the economy is defined by



(9)         c(t)    [c(0,t) + fexp(pv)c(v,t)dv]/H(t),



which is assumed to be positive for all t.       Thus, the per capita demand for

nontradables is cN(t) =    (l-')q(t)c(t).
       Figure 1 illustrates the economy's production side. Let gN be per

capita government demand for nontradables. The market for nontraded goods

clears when per capita supply equals per capita demand, that is, when



(10)        (l-v)q(r)c ÷ gN = nN      FN(xN[q(r)rJ,l).



The NN schedule in the figure shows combinations of r and        such that the

nontraded-goods market clears for given values of aggregate per capita

consumption c and government demand gN• Because a rise in r both raises

the demand for nontradables (by raising q) and lowers the capital-labor

ratio in production, employment in nontradables must expand as r rises to

maintain equilibrium. The NN schedule therefore has the positive slope

shown.

       The KR schedule in the lower panel of figure 1 shows how the economy's

capital stock is determined. The per capita supply of capital, k, is



(11)       k =   (l_nN)xT(r)   + nNxN[q(r)rI.
             NI


 r --    —




     N
C                 I,",..



             K
14




     K7
                                              9

KK's slope in figure 1 reflects the assumption that nontraded goods are

relatively labor intensive. (A movement downward from the origin is a rise

in k.) Notice that a rise in the interest rate, by reducing capital-labor

ratios in both sectors, shifts KK upward.



3. Equilibrium: Deficits and dynamics

       The economy's dynamic equilibrium can be described by a pair of

differential equations that govern the evolutions of aggregate consumption

and the economy's outside asset holdings. To derive these equations,

however, it is first necessary to examine the behavior of the domestic

government.



A. Government spending and finance

       An infinitely-lived government consumes both types of good, financing

its purchases by levying taxes and issuing debt. If d denotes the

government's per capita debt (measured in tradables) and gT its per capita

consumption of tradables, then government debt follows the equation



(12)        (t) =   [r(t)   -
                                p]d(t)   + gT(t) + g()/q() + r(t).



       Assume that for all t, r(t) > p; this condition rules out dynamic

inefficiency in a world economy growing at rate p. Then the assumption



(13)        limexp(-J[r(z)-p]dz)d(s) = 0



confines the government within its intertemporal budget constraint; that

is, (13) restricts the present discounted value of purchases plus net
                                                          10

-   transfers   to be no greater than initial public-sector assets. Evidence

    presented by Abel et al. (1986) supports a stochastic analogue of the

    dynamic efficiency assumption for the United States economy post-1929.



    B. Private asset accumulation

         The household budget constraint (1) implies the law of motion for

    household financial assets



                (v,t) =       r(t)a(v,t)       +   w(t)   +   r(t)   —   c(v,t).

    The implied law of motion for aggregate per capita assets, a(t), is



                (t)   —
                          [r(t)   —   p]a(t)       +   w(t)   +   r(t) — c(t).


    Equstion (14) follows from the assumption that newly-born households are

    not altruistically linked to existing ones, so that financial assets at

    birth, a(t,t), are always zero.

         The law of motion for c(t) follows from definition (9) and from the

    behavior of individual households. Each individual household in cohort v

    arranges for its total consumption spending c(v,t) to rise at the rate




                (v,t)     =    r(t)    —   6
                                               +       (1 —   R)(l — v) q /
                                                                        A
                                                                                   =
                                                                                   —
                c(v,t)                R                        R



    [see equations (3) and (4)]. Differentiation of (9) therefore leads to



                (t) = vj(t)c(t) +          p[c(t,t)       —   c(t)I.
                                            11

The time derivative of per capita consumption is explained by the two term

on the right-hand side above. The first term results from the fact that

the consumption of all preexisting households rises at rate r(t). The

second term arises because the consumption of new households, which are

born without financial wealth, differs from the economy-wide average.

Since average consumption is easily calculated [from (3) and (9)] to be

l(t) [a(t) + h(t)] ,   while   the consumption of a new household is (2(t)h(t),

per capita consumption evolves according to



(16)        (t) = ,7(t)c(t) — 142(t)a(t).


       If the economy consisted of a single dynasty that equalized the

consumption of all its constituent households, "marginal" and "average"

consumption would be the same and the latter would therefore grow at rate

        as in the standard optimal growth literature [for example, Koopmans

(1967)]. Because the newborn are endowed at birth only with human wealth,

however, the present model implies different dynamics and, as pointed Out

by Well (1985), the possibility that Ricardo-Barro equivalence breaks down.



C. Aggregate dynamics

       To simplify notation, I assume that the stocks of government debt and

capital are owned entirely by domestic residents. (Agents could always

borrow abroad to bring about this portfolio allocation without disturbing

equilibrium.) Remaining national wealth consists of net claims on

foreigners, with a per capita level denoted by f(t). Asset stock a(t) thu5

equals k(t) + f(t) + d(t), so that equation (16) becomes
                                                    12


              (t) =    ,7(t)c(t)   —   pQ(t)[k(t)       + f(t)] —   pfl(t)d(t).


When combined, the government finance constraint (12) and the private

finance constraint (14) imply




                                                                             c(t)   — gT(t)
(18)          (t) + ht) =      [r(t)      -   p}[k(t)    + f(t)] + w(t) -

                               — gN(t)/q(t)


Equations (17) and (18) determine the evolution of average consumption and

the economy's average "outside" assets, k(t) ÷ f(t). Notice that while the

latter sum is predetermined, its two components are not: it is always

possible, for example, to borrow a discrete lump of tradables abroad and

install it instantly as capital. That is why (11) always holds even though

r is fixed. Equation (18) limits the economy's accumulation of new outside

assets, however, to its overall net saving.

       Under the simplifying assumption that the world interest rate is

constant at level r, q =           q(r)   and w —   w(r)    are also constant; thus, 0(t) —

r+     (6 —   r)/R,   and q(t) —    (r — 6)/R.       (The condition 0 > 0, which is

necessary for the existence of an individual optimum, is assumed.) The

sign of ,      determines,   by (17), whether the private sector has a positive or

negative average financial-asset level in steady state.

        Equations (17) and (18) now reduce to a system of nonautonomous

equations with constant coefficients. Which solution for this system is

the economically relevant one? To answer this question, note that equation

(12) implies
                                          13


             5r(s)exp[—r(s—t)]ds — —d(t) +                  — g(s)]exp[—r(s—t)Jds.
 (19)
                                                   C[d(s)

where g(t) is total per capita government consumption measured in traded

goods.3 Expression (19) can be used to compute per capita human wealth and

thus per capita consumption c(t), which is given by




 (20)        c(t)   (r +     )(k(t) + f(t)     +


                    + j"[pd(s)   — g(s)Jexp[—r(s—t)}ds).




It can be verified, however, that (20) is the consumption level implied by

the saddlepath solution to (17) and (18) when the two roots of that system,

r and —p + (r—6)/R, are, respectively, positive and negative. If

consumption c(t) and human wealth h(t) are positive in a steady state,

however, —p + (r—6)/R < 0, and saddlepath stability is therefore assured.4

Positive human wealth clearly requires also that government spending not be

"too large" relative to the aggregate wage bill.

        Equation (20) shows that consumption responds positively to current

and prospective increases in the per capita national debt, with a

responsiveness that disappears as the growth rate • 0.             Accordingly,

increased deficits stimulate private consumption, other things (in

particular government consumption) equal. Equation (19) shows the reason

for this failure of Ricardo-Barro equivalence. The current per capita

public debt d(t) contributes an equal negative cc:onent to each living

individual's expected future transfers. However, this future tax burden is

partially offset by the fact that some of the taxes will be levied on other
                                      14

households that are not yet alive.5 Clearly debt issue, other things

equal, benefits existing generations at the expense of future generations.



D. A digression on the Barro-Feldstein exchange

     A good illustration of the effect operating in (20) comes from

reconsidering the exchange between Barro (1976) and Feldstein (1976) over

the Ricardian equivalence proposition of Barro (1974). Feldstein argued

that in a dynamically efficient economy growing at a positive rate p, part

of the government's interest bill can be financed by issuing the new debt

needed to maintain a constant per capita debt level. Barro countered by

showing that even under this financing scheme, the present value of future

taxes on an initial debt issue of D(0) is still




          C(r—,A)D(s)exp(—rs)ds — (r—p)D(0)jtexp[—(r—P)s]ds —   D(0),


and not (r—p)D(0)/r, the value suggested by Feldstein. In essence, the

present value of the new debt issued at rate p is offset by the present

value of the implied additional interest payments. Barro concluded (1976,

p. 344) that "the presence of growth in the economy (at a rate below r)

leaves unchanged the conclusion that government bonds are not net wealth."

     While Barro's conclusion that government bonds are not net wealth

holds in his own model, it need not hold in the present economy, where

households do not internalize taxes levied on unborn households. When

future taxes are to be spread smong a larger set of unconnected households,

each existing household computes its own discounted tax bill under

Feldstein's scheme as the product of exp(—pt) (the reciprocal of

population) and
                                                     15




            5(r—p)D(s)exp(—ps)exp(—rs)ds — D(O) —
                                                  jsfD(O)exp(—rs)ds
                                         = (r—p)D(O)/r.



Thus, a fraction p/r of the initial per capita debt d(O) is per capita net

wealth. This expression, however, is the same as the one implied by (19)

for the case of a constant per capita debt. The present value of the taxes

that service D(O) is of course D(O) (as Barro observed), but the fraction

of these taxes to be paid by households alive at time 0 is only



E. Diagrammatic analysis

       Under further assumptions that d(t) and g(t) are constant at levels d0

and g0, the dynamics implied by equations (17) and (18) can be summarized

in a useful diagram (see figures 2a and 2b). The steady-state per capita

levels of consumption and outside assets, c0 and (k +
                                                                             f)0,   are given by



                   p[(1—R)r —     6][w(r)   —
                                                g0
                                                     —     (r — p)d0]
(21)        c0 =
                                  Rr[—z + (r—6)/R]



                           (6 —   r)[w(r) —            —
                                                  p[(l—R)r              —
(22)        (k +
                   o   =                    g0]
                                   Rr[—p + (r—6)/R]
                                                                            6Jd0




       The two configurations shown represent the cases r < 6 (figure 2a) and

r > 6 (figure 2b). When r — 6, consumption is stationary along a vertical

locus. The previous results imply that the economy travels to the steady

state along the saddlepath SS.
  C




         S
         L



     C




C.



                 r
             &1: (r
                                            16

4. Fiscal policies in a small open economy

     The framework developed so far can be used to analyze a variety of

fiscal policies. Below, the diagram introduced in the last section is

applied to changes in the per capita public debt and in government

purchases.



A. Current and anticipated changes in public debt

     Equation (19) offers a full account of how changes in the per capita

public debt affect consumption. The main intuition can be derived,

however, from using figures 2a and 2b to analyze one-time changes in a
                                                           -

constant per capita debt level.

     Consider, for example, a permanent unanticipated rise in debt per
capita, from d0 to d1. This change should be visualized as a gift Ad =

— d0 of government bonds to the public [as in Barro (1974)] ,        accompanied by
a permanent rise (r —      p)Ad/r   in the present value of each household's tax

bill. The fiscal policy is associated with a permanent increase in the

government budget deficit because the flow of new debt must rise to keep

per capita debt at a higher level.

     Equations (20) and (21) show that the policy shift lowers the steady-

state value of per capita consumption (to c1) and lowers long-run outside

assets [to (k +
                  f)1].7    Since the qualitative affects of the adjustment do

not depend on the sign of r —       8, only the case r >   6 is illustrated (in

figure 3).

     Consumption rises sharply (and saving thus falls) as the economy jumps

from its initial equilibrium at point A to point B on the new ssddlepath.

The issue of a new debt thus has an initially expansionary impact.

Consumption falls and outside assets are run down, however, as the economy
     C
                         0



                       / /
                             S



C0
          C
Cl

              /
         (z.4-+l




                   3
                                         17

moves to its new long-run equilibrium (point C). Ultimately, the debt

expansion crowds out productive assets and the economy's long-run

consumption per household is correspondingly lower.

         Figure 4 illustrates the implications of this adjustment process for

the product and factor markets. The rise in private consumption initially

shifts the NN schedule rightward, increasing employment in nontradables

from nAN to n8.
             N          .      .            .
                At given relative output prices, the resulting expansion in

nontradables can occur only if capital leaves the economy (the Rybczynski

effect). There is therefore an instantaneous fall in the capital stock

(from kA to k) as machines are dismantled and sold for foreign assets.

Since the fall in capital also reduces output of tradables, the economy,

after its initial acquisition of foreign assets, has a current account

deficit.

     These effects are reversed in the long run as consumption falls below

its starting level. Employment in nontradables drops to n and the capital

stock therefore rises to kC. Because the economy's overall outside assets

end up being lower, however, the economy must experience a cumulative

current-account deficit in the transition from point A to point C.

Surprisingly, the debt expansion crowds in capital in the long run. This

additional capital is, however, working for foreigners: the economy must

have a higher capital-labor ratio in the long run if it is to produce

enough tradables to service its higher per capita foreign debt. Notice

also that the economy's current-account deficit is higher in the new steady

state.

     An anticipated future increase in the per capita public debt is

analyzed in figure 5. When the future policy is announced, there is an

immediate upward jump in consumption (from point A to point B).
                         )r)( I€rCVt rtt
                                                           NA




                                       NI!,
                     0             I            I.   1.



                                                          1< h
                 kg




(k   creiui,   4')


                         s-(+ c1-
                                              ilL
      C.




                    /
C-.

Cl
              //
           //
           (k+ç)1
                                       18

Consumption rises further until the policy is implemented (point C), after

which consumption declines to its new long-run level (point 0). The

details of this adjustment can be understood with the help of the arguments

applied to the previous case.8



B.   Effects of government purchases

     The repercussions of changes in government demand depend on the

relation between the domestic time preference rate and the world interest

rate. Consider first a permanent, unanticipated rise in per capita

government demand (measured in tradablea), from g0 to g1 — g0 + Ag.

Because the spending ahift is assumed not to affect the per capita public

debt, it is matched by an equal rise in per capita taxes and ia thua a

balanced-budget policy change. For the moment, there is no need to specify

whether this additional demand falls on traded or nontraded goods.

      Figure 6a illuatrates the economy's behavior when r <   6, figure 6b its

behavior when r > 6.   In the first case, national saving rises as

consumption drops from point A to point B: a rise in government spending

causes an even greater drop in private spending, and the economy ends up

(at point C) with a higher stock of outside assets but permanently lower

private consumption. In the second case, however, the initial drop in

private spending falla abort of Ag, so the external surplus shrinks.

Private conaumption declines steadily as the economy makes its transition

to a new steady state at C with lower net national wealth. Only when r and

6 are exactly equal doea government spending crowd out private spending on

a one-for-one basis. When the     — 0 locus is vertical, the economy moves

immediately to its new steady state with no fall in its long-run outside

assets
C




                  g.e




C.


Cl




     (ks0 (k')j




          '4
C'




Cl
                                               19

         The dynamics that follow even permanent public spending shifts can be

understood by examining the consumption function. According to equation

(20), a permanent increase g in per capita government spending causes per

capita consumption to change by the (negative) amount



                 =   —[1 +   (8 —   r)/RrJg,

which is algebraically less than —g if r < 6 and algebraically greater

than —g if r >       6.   Looked at another way, the effect of the fiscal change

on saving depends on the size of the marginal propensity to consume out of

wealth relative to the real interest rate in terms of tradables. The

economic rationale for this result is straightforward. According to

equation (15), each household's consumption is falling over time when r <          6

and rising over time when r > 6.           In the former case, a permanent balanced-

budget spending increase has a greater proportional impact on future

consumption than on present consumption if private saving does not adjust.

Private saving must therefore jump upward immediately to ensure that the

marginal utility of private consumption rises over the future at the rate S

—   r.    Run in reverse, the same argument shows why private saving falls

immediately when household consumption is rising over time. (The next

section shows that while the case r > 6 is likely to be the relevant one in

a general-equilibrium context, either of the patterns just described can

arise.)

         When the increased government spending fails entirely on traded goods,

the contraction of private consumption implies an immediate fall in

nontraded-sector employment and a rise in the home capital supply.
                                        20

Qualitatively, these effects persist in the long run, so capital is again

crowded in.

  -
      When incremental government spending falls on nontraded goods, the

initial increase in the capital stock is reduced and ia likely to be

reversed. When r <   &   the long run fall in private consumption is less than

Ag [equation (21)], so capital is definitely crowded out in the long run

and the foreign asset stock is higher. When r >     &   the long-run capital

stock is also likely to fall, but need not. Increased government spending

on nontradables clearly leads to greater long-run crowding out of capital

than increaaed government spending on tradables.

      The case of an anticipated future increase in government spending can

be analyzed as before. Figure 7 shows how consumption falls initially

(from point A to point B), and how outside assets rise thereafter, until

the fiscal change is implemented (point C). In the case shown in the

figure, private consumption starts by rising from point B but then falls as

the increase in public spending -- and the accompanying rise in taxes --

approaches.   Point 0 is the economy's final position.



5. Global effects of fiscal policies

      In this section, the preceding small-country analysis is extended to a

global setting. The resulting model shows how fiscal policies in a large

country affect the world interest rate, relative prices, industrial

structurea, and the world capital stock.



A. A two-country world economy

      The model studied in previous sections is now modified by the addition

of a second country, identical to the first in technology, population, and
      C.




C,

C.,




                        c.D

           (k.p0 (k),

                  7
                                                    21

in the preferences of its householdsJ0 The world economy is assumed to

consist of the two similar economies, referred co as Alpha and Beta,

respectively. An additional condition determining the world interest rate

closes the model.

       The world interest rate is determined by the equilibrium of the world

capital market. Equation (11) determines the per capita demand for capital

in Alpha and an identical equation determines the per capita demand for

capital in Beta. The world capital market clears when the sum of these per

capita demands equals the sum of the per capita supplies, k° +                    k:

               +   k — [2 —         (nNm   +    n)]xT(r)   +   (nN   +   n)xN[q(r)rJ.

Equation (10), however, allows the elimination of nNQ and n from the

aboveequation, so that




(23)        k°+k—
            2xT(r) +      (xN[q(r)r]       —    xTrn   [(l_v)q(r)(cC+c$) + gNO +
                               FN{x [q(r)r] 1)



       The market-clearing condition (23) shows that the equilibrium world

interest rate can be written as a function of the capital and consumption

aggregates, k° +     k        and ctm +    c,   and of the overall government demand for

nontradablea, g
                   Na
                        + gNll



(24)        r —    r(ca   +    c,   k° +   k,    gN + gN$)
                                       22

Government purchases of traded soods do not appear in equation (24)

because given privste consumption, changes in such purchases csn be

accommodated through equal opposite changes in the rate of capital

accumulation, with no instantaneous effect on factor markets. The form of

(24) is thus entirely dependent on the assumption that only traded goods

can be transformed into capital.

     The appendix reports the partial derivatives of the world interest

rate function (24), but its properties can be understood intuitively.

     An increase in world consumption. By increasing world demand for

labor-intensive nontradables, a rise in consumption leads to an excess

supply of capital relative to labor at a given interest rate. A fii       in
the interest rate restores equilibrium by raising the relative price of

nontradables, thereby lowering demand for them, and by encouraging both

sectors to adopt labor-saving production techniques. The rise in

consumption naturally raises demand for traded as well as nontraded goods,

but, once again, the additional demand for tradables can be satisfied out

of a fall in world capital accumulation.

     An increase in world capital. A rise in the world ratio of capital t

labor occasions en initial excess supply of capital. A fall in the world

interest rate, however, induces both the tradable and nontradeble sectors

to adopt more capital-intensive techniques. Because q declines when r

declines, demand shifts away from the labor-intensive nontradables sector.

This shift reinforces the equilibration process by reducing the excess

supply of capital relative to labor.

     An increase in government demand for nontredables. Again, this

disturbance causes the world interest rate and the relative price of

trsdables to fall.
                                                23

       Definek*ak°+k, c*ac°+c, gN*agNm+ g. Then the
preceding discussion is summarized by the following partial derivatives:



(25)        rc* < 0, r C 0,              C 0.



B. Aggregate dynamics

       Since f° = — f$, equations (17) and (18), which apply to both Alpha

and Beta, can be combined to yield laws of motion for world consumption,

c*, and world capital, k*. The analysis is now restricted to the case of

logarithmic consumers (R =      1),     so that the resulting equations are:




(26)           a   [r(c*,k*J*)      —   5]c*   — pS[k* +         d*],


(27)           =   [r(c*,k*,g   ) —            + 2w[r(c*,k*,g j — c* — g*,


where d* a dm +    d and g* a g° +        l2
       The matrix of partial derivatives of this system is



                                                                          (—)
                                         c*r+ +      r   —   &          c*rk* —
         3*/3c*     3c*/Ok*
                                a
         3*/3c*    3*/3k*
                                         r*(kLxT)            — 1        (r—p) +
                                                                                  rk+(k*2x)

the same   sign pattern as in the small-country case.13 The assumption that
the    matrix above has one positive and one negative root is insufficient to

ensure local saddlepath stability for the world economy: the disaggregated

underlying system consists of                  differential        equations involving two

predetermined variables. The roots of the linearized four-equation system
                                        28

capital can rise or fall in the long run. Reinforcing the direct negative

effect of higher taxes on consumption is the negative effect of the world

interest rate. The interest rate rises when the policy is implemented, am

it also rises in the long run. The rise in the steady-state interest rate

is obvious in figure llb, where c* and k* both fall in the long run [recaL

(25)]. In figure lla, however, world consumption would be declining at C

if the move from A to C left the interest rate constant [see equation

(26)]. So the long-run interest rate must rise in the case illustrated

there, as well. Notice, though, that in figure lla the interest rate

"overshoots" its eventual level in the short run.

     This interest-rate behavior has implications for the international

transmission of expenditure shocks. In the short run private consumption

falls in both countries (recall the assumption that human wealth is

positive). In the likely case that world capital is eventually crowded

out, Alpha's outside assets fall in the long run; its private consumption,

measured in tradables, always falls. (Symmetric initial fiscal positions

are still assumed.) As before, Beta's private consumption and outside

assets can rise or fall in the long run.

     Because long-run consumption and outside assets fall by relatively

less in Beta, that country has a relatively smaller share of the world's

capital in the final equilibrium and thus a larger stock of claims on

Alpha. The latter country's external debt ultimately must increase.

     The analysis of an increase in public consumption of nontradables ia

somewhat more complicated because the latter variable has a direct effect

on the world interest rate. In particular, the i* — 0 locus now shifts

along with the fc* —   0 locus. Figures l2a and l2b show possible adjustment

processes. A useful way to think of this disturbance is as a combination
=0

           =0




 0




           r

     I'0
                                          25

considered are small enough that a saddlepath equilibrium still exists

after they occur.

     In interpreting the model, it is important to remember that the

dynamics portrayed do not fully capture the underlying evolution of asset

stocks in Alpha and Beta. Imagine, for example, that the world economy is

at its steady state and that both Alpha and Beta are individually in steady

states with constant ratios of external assets to population. A transfer

of external assets from Alpha to Beta will lead to an increased current

account deficit for Beta and an increased surplus for Alpha; but average

world consumption will not change and the world interest rate will not

change. Each country will adjust as in the small-country case --       that   is,

at a constant interest rate   - - until   both simultaneously regain external

balance. The world-average dynamics shown in figures 8a and 8b mask the

possibility that adjustment of this sort is going on at the country level.



C. Changes in public debt

     A rise in either country's long-run debt ratio raises the

corresponding world magnitude, d*, and thus shifts the         — 0 schedule to

the left. Figure 9 shows how this change affects the world economy.

Average world consumption rises initially (from point A to B) and world

investment falls. In the new steady state (point C), however, the world

capital stock is smaller relative to the labor force than at the original

steady state, and average world consumption is correspondingly lower. Debt

expansion anywhere crowds out capital on a global scale.

     An interesting aspect of the adjustment process is that the world

interest rate fgjJ, when consumption initially rises. This fall preserves

capital-market equilibrium in the face of a worldwide increase in the
     0




C6


Cl
         I—
              /
         "1
                                               26

demand for labor-intensive nontradables. Of course, the relative price of

nontradables also rises initially in both countries. In the long run,

however, the interest rate ends up above its original level (since both c*

and k* are lower) and the relative price of nontradablea therefore is below

its original level.

     Together with the information that the long-run world interest rate

rises, equations (21) and (22) (for the present case R —          I)   can be used to

deduce the long-run effects of the public debt shock on Alpha and Beta

individually. (This use relies on a aaddlepath condition, —p +             r — 5 < 0.)
Assume that the shock originates in Alpha, and that fiscal parameters are

initially       gj in the two countries. Equation (21) then implies that

steady-state consumption falls by more in Alpha than in Beta, so that ca

must fall in the long run (while c may fall or rise))5

     Equation (22), by a similar argument, implies that the steady-state

value of (k +   f)°   must fall; (k +   f)fl   falls by less, may rise in the long

run, and must rise if c rises. Since c rises relative to ctm, consumption

of nontradables in Beta rises relative to such consumption in Alpha,

leading to a long-run decline in k relative to k°. k therefore falls

absolutely as well, and ffl must rise, implying an equal fall in fa• If ffi

did not rise, Alpha's outside assets would have to rise relative to Beta's,

a contradiction.




0. Long-run welfare analysis of changes in public debt

     Figures lOs and lOb illustrate the steady-state welfare implications

of a higher domestic public debt ratio for an average Alpha consumer. Both

figures assume that Alpha's net foreign claims are initially zero. Each

production possibilities curve shows how different efficient allocations of
4464




                      /2

                                  I4
            ,Ot ( riçj"



       'N
                 UA
                                  ji4l


                       i Lc,St4


            /o
                                         27

labor and a given capital stock alter per capita output of nontradables an

per capita output of tradables less the investment per worker needed to

maintain a fixed economy-wide capital-labor ratio.

     Figure lOa depicts the case in which Alpha's long-run capital stock

per worker is higher after the disturbance. In the absence of an increase

in the world price of tradables in terms of nontradables, production would

move from point A, downward along the Rybczynski line, to the outer

production possibilities curve. Since tradables are more expensive in the

long run, however, actual production is at B and the economy's income

expansion path is steeper than the initial, broken path. Long-run

equilibrium is at C, where the nontradables market clears. Welfare, shown

by the indifference curve U1J, is below its original level, indicated by

UAUA. An income transfer from future to present generations is implied.

     A similar long-run welfare loss occurs in the case shown in figure

lOb, in which Alpha's long-run capital-labor ratio falls. Now, production

shifts from A to B and consumption from A to C. Notice that consumption

point C must always lie to the left of production point B because Alpha hag

become a net debtor to Beta and r > p.




E. Changes in government purchases

     The di-stinction between government purchases of traded and nontraded

goods raises takes on additional importance in a global context. Figures

lla and llb show the effects of a permanent balanced-budget increase in

public consumption of tradahles for two alternative configurations of long

run equilibrium.

    As in the small-country case, private consumption can fall on impact

by more or by less than the increase in government consumption, so world
      Ct




               -I



           /




                    .
                    ,. —o

11*
                                        28

capital can rise or fall in the long run. Reinforcing the direct negative

effect of higher taxes on consumption is the negative effect of the world

interest rate. The interest rate rises when the policy is implemented, am

it also rises in the long run. The rise in the steady-state interest rate

is obvious in figure llb, where c* and k* both fall in the long run [recaL

(25)]. In figure lla, however, world consumption would be declining at C

if the move from A to C left the interest rate constant [see equation

(26)]. So the long-run interest rate must rise in the case illustrated

there, as well. Notice, though, that in figure lla the interest rate

"overshoots" its eventual level in the short run.

     This interest-rate behavior has implications for the international

transmission of expenditure shocks. In the short run private consumption

falls in both countries (recall the assumption that human wealth is

positive). In the likely case that world capital is eventually crowded

out, Alpha's outside assets fall in the long run; its private consumption,

measured in tradables, always falls. (Symmetric initial fiscal positions

are still assumed.) As before, Beta's private consumption and outside

assets can rise or fall in the long run.

     Because long-run consumption and outside assets fall by relatively

less in Beta, that country has a relatively smaller share of the world's

capital in the final equilibrium and thus a larger stock of claims on

Alpha. The latter country's external debt ultimately must increase.

     The analysis of an increase in public consumption of nontradables ia

somewhat more complicated because the latter variable has a direct effect

on the world interest rate. In particular, the i* — 0 locus now shifts

along with the fc* —   0 locus. Figures l2a and l2b show possible adjustment

processes. A useful way to think of this disturbance is as a combination
                                              0
C




C4
 1.   -;



                        12-a'.




                           \
                                 \
                                          0

                I
                                     \\
           I,
                    C




                         2-L
                                              29

of (i) a rise in government demsnd for nontradables coupled with a private

demand shift away from nontradables such that the two changes together

leave the interest rate (and q) the same for all c* and k*,             (ii) a

reversal of the private demand shift. Change (i) is roughly equivalent

(for small changes) to a rise in government purchases of tradables equal in

value (at the initial relative price) to the rise in purchases of

nontradables. Direct calculation shows that change (ii) alone is likely to

depress c* and k* in the long run. In this sense, an increase in gN* --

(i)   plus (ii) -   - is   likely to have a greater crowding-out effect than an

equivalent increase in gT* --        that   is, (i) alone.



6. Conclusion

      A model of growing world economy peopled by infinitely-lived

households that are not altruistically linked yields some sharp predictions

about how national debt and public spending policies affect global

consumption/production patterns and capital intensity. The results hinge

strongly on the two-sector production structure assumed and on some

additional simplifying assumptions.

      Perhaps the most unrealistic of these assumptions is that capital can

be instantaneously shifted between sectors within a country and, indeed,

between countries. The introduction of temporary sector-specificity of

productive factors would alter the model's short-run behavior considerably

and would probably necessitate numerical solution procedures. Most longer-

run predictions of the model would, however, remain qualitatively

unchanged, which is why the model is best viewed as describing medium- to

long-term adjustment. It would also be desirable to allow increased real

exchange rate variation by relaxing the assumption that all tradables,
                                           30

    wherever produced, are perfect substitutes in consumption. This extension,

    like the introduction of factor-movement frictions, may be most relevant to

    the model's short-run behavior.16

         Also crucial to the simplicity of the model's solution was the

-   assumption of two absolutely identical countries. Such strict symmetry,
    while consistent with the Fleclcscher-Ohlin-Samuelson tradition in

    international trade theory, prevents the analysis of at least some issues

    related to the transfer problem. Another realistic modification would

    allow new capital to be produced from existing capital and labor according

    to a neoclassical production function [see, for example, Samuelson (1965)].

    This change would allow for a more complicated interplay among celative

    factor intensities, aggregate demand fluctuations, and investment.

         There are at least three other directions in which the present work

    could be extended. First, a more detailed welfare analysis of fiscal

    policies, perhsps along the lines sketched by Calvo and Obstfeld (1988),

    could be a useful component of a normative theory of international fiscal

    policy coordination. Romer (1988) has carried out such an analysis for a

    small economy, and his results indicate that the welfare effects of fiscal

    deficits can be significant even when deviations from Ricardian equivalence

    are small (as is possibly true above). Second, the model could be applied

    to simulate- the long-run global effects of growing per capita public-debt

    levels, as in Tobin (1986). Such simulations would be relevant in

    evaluating the economic implications of a political process that fails to

    stabilize the ratio of debt to national income. A third extension,

    following Frenkel and Razin (l986b), would explore the effects of

    alternative budgetary policies when taxation is distortionary.
                                     31

                                 Footnotes



1. For related models, generally of small economies, see Engel and Kletzer
(1987), Guidotti (1987), Neary and Purvis (1983), and Razin (1984).

2. International evidence generally supports the assumption that nontraded
goods, taken as an aggregate, are labor intensive relative to tradables.
See, for example, Kravis and Lipsey (1983).

3. To derive this equation, integrate by parts and invoke the condition
lim5, exp[—r(s—t)]d(s) — 0, which follows from (13).

4. Given dynamic efficiency (r > js), the inequality —p + (r—6)/R C 0
implies another inequality that was assumed earlier, Cl =r  + (6—r)/R > 0.
To see the link between the first inequality and the signs of aggregate
consumption and human wealth, observe that in a steady state, (17) implies
that
                            6—r
          h(t)/c(t) — (p + —    )/pO > 0
                            R

5. For further discussion, see Weil (1985), Abel (1987), and Buiter
(1988). A two-country version of Blanchard's (1985) model would give
results similar to those found below. Weil's framework seems preferable,
however, for two reasons. First, it is simpler, in that is dispenses with
the analytically inessentiel assumption that death occurs. Second, it
allows discussion of some growth-related questions.

6. Notice that Feldstein's (1976) financing scheme is consistent with
intertemporal budget balance even in a static economy: his suggestion makes
no essential use of the fact of real economic growth, and requires only
that the per capita public debt grow over time at a rate below the interest
rate. For a formal demonstration that this growth pattern of the debt is
consistent with public solvency, see McCallum (1984).

7. Recall that —p + (r—6)/R and (l—R)r — 6 must be negative (as discussed
in footnote 4).

8. When r < 6 (as in figure 2a), consumption falls after its initial
upward jump.

9. For similar results with R—l, see Puumanen (1986, pp. 63-64).

10. Aoki (1981) has stressed the usefulness of such symmetry assumptions
in analyzing dynamic multi-country models.

11. To be exact, each of these aggregates equals twice the world per
capita level.
                                    32



12. Notice that the market for tradables always clears as a result of
Walras's law. Because the nontradables markets in Alpha and Beta clear
[equation (10)], constraint (2]) implies equilibrium in the world
tradables market.

13. Only the assertion that the southwest entry is negative requires some
justification. To see why 2k*/3c* < 0, start by taking the expressions in
the appendix for the Leontief case (xTI = x5' = 0) , use the equation
displayed just above (23) to eliminate k*, and invoke a standard result of
the two—sector model, that (r/q)(dq/dr)     r(xT — x5)/(rx5 + w). Now
notice that variability of the production technique only reduces
3k*/Bc*, because world production can shift away from tradables when r and
q fall on account of a rise in c*. Strictly speaking, the argument just
given requires that gH*    0. This is an artifact of the (somewhat
unsatisfactory) way equation (2]) is specified. With gN* and g* hoth
given and nonzero, the fall in q caused by a rise in c* automatically
implies a. £.ii in gT*; thus, world investment could, conceivably, rise.
This possibility is empirically remote enough that it can safely be
ignored.

14. The proof proceeds by writing out the linear approximation to the
four—equation system and using elementary row and column operations to
simplify the associated determinant, which is the product of the system's
characteristic roots.

15. Notice that, r(p+&—r) is decreasing in r (because r>p and r>6 at the
initial equilibrium).

16. See Obstfeld (1988) for a sketch of a model incorporating a variable
real exchange rate.
                                            33

Appendix: Partial derivatives of r(c*,k*,g

    Equation (23) giving the equilibrium interest rate r can be written as

            —    — 0.     Then if nN* —    nN     +



             — (2 —     r?*)xT —   cxT —   xN)(l      —


             + n*(rq +      q)xN   [I +    txT —      xN)rq/I(xN,l)]   < 0,



                —(l —   v)(xT — xN)/l(xN,l)           C 0,




           gN* — _(xT —    xt5/(xt'T,l)    C 0.




Thus, r+              < 0; rk —    1'r C 0; and              =
                                                                 gN*r     < 0.
                                        34

                                   References       -




Abel,    Andrew B., 1987, Birth, death, and taxes, mimeo, Wharton School,
        University of Pennsylvsnia.

Abel, Andrew B. at sl. 1986, Assessing dynamic efficiency: Theory and
     evidence, mimeo, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.

Aoki, Masanao, 1981, Dynamic analysis of open economies. New York:
     Academic Press.

Barro, Robert J., 1974, Are government bonds net wealth?, Journal of
     Political Economy 82, 1095-111?.

_________      1976, Reply to Feldstein and Buchanan, Journal of Political
        Economy 84, 343-349.

Blanchard, Olivier J. , 1985, Debt, deficits, and finite horizons, Journal
        of Political Economy 93, 223-247.

Buiter, Willem H. , 1981, Time preference and international lending and
        borrowing in an overlapping-generations model, Journal of Political
        Economy 89, 769-79?.

__________ 1986, Fiacal policy in open, interdependent economies, in:
     Economic policy in theory and practice, Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka,
     eda. London: Macmillan.

__________     1988, Death, birth, productivity growth and debt neutrality,
        Economic Journal 98, 279-293.

Caivo, Guillermo A. and Maurice Obatfeld, 1988, Optimal time-conaiatent
     fiscal policy with finite lifetimes, Econometrica 56, 411-432.

Diamond, Peter A., 1965, National debt in a neoclassical growth model,
     American Economic Review 55, 1126-1150.

Engel, Charles and Kenneth Kletzer, 198?, Saving and investment in an open
     economy with non-traded goods, mimeo, University of Virginia.

Feidatein, Martin S., 1976, Perceived wealth in bonds and social security:
     A comment, Journal of Political Economy 84, 331-336.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Asaaf Razin, 1986a, The international tranamiaaion
     and effects of fiscal policies, American Economic Review Papers and
     Proceedings 76, 330-335.

Frenkel, Jacob A. and Assaf Razin, l986b, Deficits with diatortionary
     taxes: International dimensions, NBER Working Paper no. 2080.

Fried, Joel and Peter Howitt, 1988, Fiscal deficits, international trade
     and welfare, Journal of International Economica 24, 1-22.
                                      35

Giovannini, Alberto, 1988, The real exchange rate, the capital stock, and
     fiscal policy, European Economic Review, forthcoming.

Greenwood, Jeremy and Kent P. Kimbrough, 1985, Capital controls and fiscal
     policy in the world economy, Canadian Journal of Economics 18, 743-
     765.

Guidotti, Pablo, E. 1987, Optimal adjustment to international debt service
     requirements, mimeo, University of Colorado, Boulder.

Koopmans, Tjalling C., 1967, Intertemporal distribution and 'optimal'
     aggregate economic growth, in: Ten economic studies in the tradition
     of Irving Fisher. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Kravis, Irving B. and Robert E. Lipsey, 1983, Toward an explanation of
     national price levels, Princeton Studies in International Finance no.
     52, November.

McCallum, Bennett T., 1984, Are bond-financed deficits inflationary? A
     Ricardian analysis, Journal of Political Economy 92, 123-135.

Mundell, Robert A. , 1957, International trade and factor mobility, American
      Economic Review 47, 321-335.

Neary, J. Peter and Douglas D. Purvis, 1983, Real adjustment and exchange
     rate dynamics, in: Exchange Rates and international macroeconomics,
     Jacob A. Frenkel, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Obstfeld, Maurice, 1985, The capital inflows problem revisited: A stylized
     model of Southern Cone disinflation, Review of Economic Studies 52,
     605-625.

__________ 1988, Comment (on William H. Branson, Sources of misalignment
     in the l980s), in: Misalignment of exchange rates: Effects on trade
     and industry, Richard C. Marston, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago
     Press.

Persson, Torsten, 1985, Deficits and intergenerational welfare in open
     economies, Journal of International Economics 19, 67-84.

Puumanen, Kari, 1986, Three essays on money, wealth and the exchange rate.
     Helsinki: Bank of Finland.

Razin, Assaf, 1984 Capital movements, intersectoral resource shifts and the
     trade balance, European Economic Review 26, 135-152.

Romer, David H., 1988, What are the costs of excessive deficits?, in: NEER
     Macroeconomics Annual 3, Stanley Fischer, ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT
     Press.

Samuelson, Paul A., 1965, Equalization by trade of the interest rate along
     with the real wage, in: Trade, growth and the balance of payments:
     Essays in honor of Gottfried Harberler. Chicago: Rand McNally &
     Company.
                                      36


Tobin, James, 1986, The monetary-fiscal mix: Long-run implications,
     American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 76, 213-218.

Weil, Philippe, 1985, Overlapping families of infinitely-_lived agents,
     mimeo, Harvard University.
