                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               TRADE DEPENDENCY, BARGAINING AND EXTERNAL DEBT




                              Joshua   Aizeninan




                          Working Paper No. 2726




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                October 1988




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                               NBER Working Paper *2726
                                               October 1988


                     TRADE DEPENDENCY,   BANCALNING AND EXTERNAL DEBT


                                          ABSTRACT




This paper analyzes the factors determining the effective payment on outstanding debt
in the presence of partial defaults, and the feasibility of renewed investment. We show
that the bargaining outcome, which determines the repayment, is dictated by the trade
dependency, as measured by the substitutability of domestic and foreign products. A
higher relative size of sectors with lower substitutability between domestic and foreign
products will increase the trade dependency of the nation, reducing its bargaining
power arid thereby increasing the resource transfer ceiling. The resultant increase in
the ceiling makes the nation less risky, increasing the willingness of creditors to lend.
Thus, while a strategy of outward growth has the cost of increasing trade dependency,
it has the benefit of increasing the availability of external finance. Even with a partial
default, investment in highly trade dependent sectors with high productivity may be
warranted. This investment can be implemented by a marginal relief of the present
debt service, in exchange for investment in the proper sector. Following such a scheme
may require a detailed conditionality as well as careful monitoring. A way to partially
overcome some of   the monitoring problemsis through direct investment.




                                                Joshua Aizenman
                                                Economics Department
                                                The klebrewUniversity
                                                Jerusalem, 91905,
                                                ISRAEL
                              INTRODUCTIONAND SUMMARY

      The international credit market is presently characterized by the partial default
of several Latin American nations and other developing countries. The partial default

has triggered rounds of bargaining regarding the effective repayment called for. This
bargaining has yielded refinancing packages that come with certain conditionalities
attached to them. Recently much attention has been given to the viability of various
smart financing schemes to deal with these problems, as well as to the incentive
problems generated by the partial default. Such literature has taken the view that the
obstacle to complete default is the presence of default costs stemming from potential
embargos on temporal and intertemporal trade (i.e., embargos on trade in goods and
trade in assets)1

      Most of this literature assumes  that the default costs are exogenous. While such
an assumption is justified in the short run, in the intermediate run the costs of defaults
are endogenously determined by a nations trade dependency. This, in turn, is influenced
by the investment policies of the country. The purpose of this paper is to focus on the
lrnkages between trade dependencyand investment policy. We wish to investigate the
consequence of investment policy on the bargaining power of each party, and tO study
the role of conditonalty attached to renewed credit. Specifically, we would like to
identify conditions under which renewed marginal resource transfer would be beneficial



      1.    For   an analysis of country risk see Harberger (1976), Kharas (1981), Eaton
and Gersovitz (1981), Sachs (1984), Kletzer (1984), Dornbusch (1984), Krugman (1985),
Smith and Cuddington (1985), Edwards (1985), Folkerst-Landau (1985), Diwan and
Donnenfeld (1986), Dooley (1986), Aizenman (1986), Bulow and Rogoff (1987), Calvo
(1987), Helpman (1987), Aizenman and Borensztein (1987), Cole and English (1987), and
Alesina and Tabellini (1987).
for both parties, and to understand the role of conditionality and direct investment in
generating more favorablegrowth prospects for the developing nations.
      We consider an asymmetric world economy composed of two blocks of nations,
the developing and the developed countries. The developed nations are characterized by
a relative abundance of capital, implying that the return on capital in these developed
countries tends to be lower than that in developing countries. Consequently, country
risk considerations aside, developing countries offer more attractive investment
opportunities. Another important characteristic of the developed natons is lower trade
dependency (relative to that of the developing).
      A minimal model that allows the derivation of endogenous trade dependency is a

multi sectors, two periods model, in which the credit market behaves competitively in
the absence of default. However, a large initial debt overhang may motivate a partial
default by the developing countries. The partial default will then initiate negotiations
between the two blocks of nations over the effective repayment. The threat associated
with such bargaining is that in the absence of an agreement no international trade will
occur. We apply this threat to derive the bargaining outcome by using the Nash fixed
threat bargaining framework. Therefore, the bargaining outcome over the effective
repayment is determined by the trade dependency of the nations involved. We
investigate the factors determining the bargaining outcome, and identify conditions
under which there exist opportunitiesfor Pareto imprOving investment, whose return
will be paid in the second period. In order to focus on the endogenous determination of
the trade dependency of the developing nations, we assume that such nations can
produce their final output using several technologies with different degrees of
substitutability between foreign and domestic intermediate products. Thus, the trade
dependencyof developing nations is endogenously determined by the investment in the
various sectors.
     The bargaining outcome defines the resource transfer ceiling and therefore
determines under which conditions we will switch from a competitive to a bargaining
                                          -3-
equilibrium. The resultant rule is simple: if the resource transfer due to initial debt
exceeds the resource transfer supported by the bargaining outcome, the country will
choose to default partially, switching from the competitive to the bargaining allocation.
      We demonstrate that the bargaining outcome is determined by the relative size of
the various sectors. A higher relative size of the sector with lower substitutability
between foreign and domestic intermediate products will increase the trade dependency
of the nation, reducing its bargaining power and thereby increasing the resource

transfer ceiling. The resultant increase in the ceiling makes the nation less risky,
increasing the willingness of creditors to lend. Thus, although a strategy of outward
growth has the cost of increasing trade dependency, it has the benefit of increasing the
availability of external finance.
      With substantial initial debt overhang we will observe partial defaults and the
elimination of voluntary resource transfers from the developed to the developing
countries. We analyze the conditions under which renewed marginal resource transfer
to the developing countries may occur. If there are no ways to commit the developing
nations to follow a specified investment plan, no new marginal resource transfer will
occur. The reason for this is that as long as we operate in the bargaining region, the
repayment is dictated by the bargaining outcome. From the point of view of the
developing nations it will be advantageous to apply any investment towards reducing
their trade dependency. Such an investment will be beneficial for the developed
countries for two reasons: first, the developing nations will reap the standard
productivity gains; second, the drop in trade dependency will allow them to cut the
resources transferred to the developed nations. Obviously, the interests of the developed
nations will be served by minimin rig investment in projects that reduce the trade
dependency.
     Under plausible conditions it may be beneficial for both blocks of nations to renew
marginal resource transfers, under the condition of targeting the investment in projects
that will increase the trade dependency of the developing countries. Such an
investment    will have the consequences of increasing the future resource transfer
supported by   the bargaining outcome, allowing higher repayment in the future.
      We show that a strategy of reducing the resource transfer from the developing
nations today, in exchange for an equivalent increase in investment in the sectors that
are highly trade dependent, and the return in the future to the bargaining repayment,
will benefit the developing countries. Nevertheless, this strategy is only the second best
one  the developing nations may choose, since their interests are best served by
targeting the investment to sectors that are less trade dependent, and thereby reducing
their trade dependency. Hence, the fact that the developing nations will benefit from
investment n trade dependent sectors does not negate the need to impose conditionality
to ensure the proper investment.
      From   the eyes of the developed nations, they are trading off the marginal drop     of

repayment today against the increase in repayment tomorrow. If the increase n future
repayment is large enough, the developed nations will be better off. If the marginal
productivity of capital in the developing nations is high enough, the beneficial effect
associated with the increase in future repayment generated by the investment in the
trade dependent sector will justify a renewed resource transfer (subject to the
appropriate conditionality).
      A way to alleviate the monitoring problems associated with the conditionality,is
to execute the renewed resource transfer through a direct investment. Such an
investment will be targeted to the proper sectors. Consequently, the move to a
bargaining regime brought about by a partial default emphasizes the importance of
direct investment as one of the few remaining channels for external finance of new
investments. In this respect, it is interesting to trace the path of net direct private
investment in recent years. Findings indicate that the volume of private direct
investment in the seven major borrowers2 remains significant even in recent years,


      2.     Argentina, Brazil, Indonesia, Korea, Mexico, the Philippines and Venezuela.
                                             -5-
and the partial default of these countries did not deter marginal investment3.
Obviously, the relative importance of direct investment as a channel for external
finance has increased drastically due to the reduction of all other channels. Thus, even
in the presence of partial defaults, selective direct investment may be advantageous for
both parties.
      This paper suggests       that greater attention should be given to     policies   that
encourage selective direct investment as a way to overcome the incentive problems
generated by partial defaults. These incentive problems leave few options for the
renewal of external finance for investment. The developing countries can choose either
to accept detailed conditionality attached to the finance of new investments, or to
tolerate direct private investment. In the first case, the conditionality provides the
framework for monitoring. In the latter, the private investor does the monitoring
himself, by choosing the investment projects. While none of these options may be
enthusiastically endorsed by the developing nations, they represent the few remaining
channels for external finance for renewed investment.
      Defore turning to the paper it is constructive to place it in its proper context in
the existing literature. The incentive problems facing new investment in the presence of
partial defaults have been analyzed by Krugman (1987), Froot (1988) and other. The
bargaining process determining the repayment on external debt is the topic of the
Bulow and Rogoffs 1987 contribution. The present paper addresses the strategic role of
conditionality and the incentive problems facing new investment in a multi-goods




      3.        The   net direct private investment in these countries during 1979—1986 (in
             was 3.5, 4.4, 6.2, 4.3, 2.3, 2.5, 3.3, and 2.5. This information draws on
billion dollar)

World Development Reports (1981-1988). For a useful discussion regarding the role and
the experience with direct private investment in developing countries see Goidsbrough
(1985).
                                             -6-
economy, where      the choice between inward versus outward growth strategies           is

relevant.


1. THE MODEL
      We describe   the model by reviewing the production side, the preferences and the
budget constraints.

1.1   PRODUCTION
      International trade is trade in intermediate products, whose assembly to the final
good is location specific. Consequently, final goods are non-traded4. The final good can be
either consumed or invested domestically to increase the future capital stock. For
example, consider the following production function    of      the final good


      (1)   Z5(X,Y;K)
                        =
                            h[(X) + (y)E]/E (IKE)hi;   0   <       1   and   S   1


where X and Y are the two types of intermediate products (domestic and foreign) and
KE is the capital stock. Note that the elasticity of substitution between the intermediate

products is given by 1/(1—s). Our analysis will demonstrate that this elasticity is a
useful measure of trade dependency: a lower value will be shown to correspond with a
greater trade dependency. The term h€ is a technological coefficient. We assume that
the developing countries are more trade dependent relative to the developed nations,
and that they face a choice regarding their trade dependency. Henceforth we will refer
to the sector producing ZE as sector



      4.    The supply side is usinga framework similar to Ethier (1982). In Ethiers
model the gains from trade stem from 'international" returns to scale. These scale
economics are the result of an increase division of labor (and other inputs) due to the
rise in the market size.
                                                 -7-
      A   way of characterizing this situation is by assuming that the developing
countries have access to two technologies with different s, denoted by t =      6; where

  6 1. The discussion is greatly simplified by assuming that the developed nations have
access to a production technology that allows perfect substitutability between the
various intermediate products, with E = 1. We normalize productivity such that the
productivity coefficient for the developing country is unity (hence h€=i = 1). To focus on
the role of substitution flexibility in determining the trade dependency, we suppose that
all technologies share the same capital intensity (thus all have the same

1.2 PREFERENCES AND THE DUDGET CONSTRAINTS



      The utility is given by the discounted value    consumption of the final good. The
                                                        of

preferences of the two blocks of   nations are summarized by the following functions:


      (2)   U = C1 + p C2      U    =
                                        C1
                                             +   p C2
where C is the consumption at time t.


      We assume    that the intermediate products are produced using a Ricardian
process and that there is a fixed supply of labor in each country and no labor mobility.
We normalize units such that the supply of intermediate products is equal to one in
both blocks of nations. Thus, X5        1, and Y5 = 1 where X5 and Y5 denotes the
intermediate products produced by the developed and the developing    block. The   use   of X




      5.    While the key insight of the paper carries to more general systems, the
characteristics of the solution are modified if we alter the above assumption. The
concluding remarks to the paper (Section 4) discuss how altering the above assumption
will affect the solution.
                                             -8-
and Y by developing countries at time t     is   denoted by   X        and   Y    and the investment

level in the developing and the developed countries is denoted by                         I   and   11

respectively. Thus, the developed countries are using 1 - X and 1 - Y of the two
intermediate products. The use of the two intermediate products by industry e in the
developing countries (s = 8 or     is denoted by X5t and Y5 . The periodic budget
constraints are given by:


     (3)       C + i= Z           C+I=Z

     (4)   X        X,t +X;         =
                                           +Y X +             =   1;         + Yt =   1


where
     (5)   Z   =   h[(X) + (Y)n1 (K,t)' + h5[(X&t)5 + (Y)]'5 (K5)
     (6)            Z=    [1   - X + 1 - YtJ (Kt)

We now focus our attention on      the characterization of the global equilibrium.
                                                -9-

2. THE EQUILIBPJUM


     We study the global equilibrium by first analyzing the characteristics of the
bargaining equilibrium. This equilibrium will occur if the level of initial debt is large
enough. An understanding of the bargaining equilibrium allows us to precisely define              the
threshold level of debt that will trigger both a partial default and will move us to              the
bargaining outcome. And by understanding the bargaining outcome we can easily
characterize the propertiesof the competitiveequilibrium.


2.1. THE BARGAINING REGIME



        Suppose   that we start period one with a large initial debt due to be paid to the
developed nations, whose value is large enough to motivate a partial default. A partial
default will initiate a renegotiations between the two blocks of nations. The threat
associatedwith such bargaining is that in the absence of an agreement no international
trade will occur. The bargaining outcome over the effective repayment is derived by the
Nash fixed threat bargaining framework6. We review the bargaining solution in two
steps. First, we identify the allocations that are Pareto efficient (the contract curve).
Next, we identify the bargaining solution by finding the trading point on the contract
curve that maximizes the product of the gains from trade for both blocks of nations.




        6.   For a discussion regarding the Nash fixed threat bargaining framework see
Nash (1950) and Roth (1979). The solution of this bargaining problem is obtained by the
allocation that maximizes the products of the trade gains for each party (relative to the
fixed   threat allocation).   A   useful characteristic   of   the solution   is   that it is a Pareto
efficient allocation (see Roth (1979)).
                                                       -   i_a    -

The technical derivations of the solution are described in the Appendix. Here we review
the key results, starting with the case in which there is no new investment7.


2.1.1. THE PARETO EFFICIENT ALLOCATIONS
        Pareto efficiency is characterized by an allocation where all use equal quantitIes
of   both intermediate goods (i.e., X = Y and X4 = Y*)8.
        For a given X the Appendix shows that the efficient allocation is given by:


        (7)               (1   —
                                   X)   s;   X6
                                                  = (1     - X)(1     —
                                                                          s1)




                        K52
where        s
                  K2      +5K52

for       /(1 - )                       (h)1"'             (for           ,8);   and


        7.       assumption is justified as the benchmark case, in which we assume
                 This

that the two blocks of nations have reached their desired closed economy capital stock.
Such a level is determined by the rates of time preference, as given by (p,p*). In order
for further investment to equate the marginal product across the two blocks of nations,
capital mobility will be required Our analysis in section 3 will more closely examine
the potential role of investment in the presence of partial default.
      8.    The Appendix shows that, because both intermediate goods are perfect
substitutes in the production process             of   the developed nations, in a Pareto allocation
the jnarginal product of both X and          be equal for all activities. This result,
                                                  Y should

coupled with the assumption that the global supply of each intermediate product is
equal to one, implies that X = Y and X
                                                  -   11   -

      (8)    Xe=Ye                                         X*=Y*Xs+X Ys+Y.

Note that (7) implies
                   that the division of intermediate inputs between sectors S and is
determined by the relative share of the effective capital (si), obtained by weighting

the capital stock by     2       (for   t   =   8,i. The properties of the Pareto allocation Imply

that for a given  we can completely characterze the solution by equation (7) and
                    X                                                                           (8),

Consequently, we can view the bargaining as a process determining X.


2.2.2 THE DEFAULT DECISION


      It is noteworthy that since X and '{ are perfect substitutes in the production
process of the developed nations, a free trade, competitive equilibrium is characterized
by a unitary terms of trade. Let us denote by R the resources- to be transferred to the
developed nations due to existing debt (a negative value of R will correspond to a
resource transfer to the developing countries). In the absence of default, the exports of
the developing nations finance the imports and the transfer to the developed nations:

      (9)      1_Y*1_X+R,

Applying     the property of the Pareto allocation, where X       =   1   - Y, we derive that

      (9')     R= 2X-1

      A  default will move us to the bargaining regime, yielding an allocation that is
characterized by a level of X denoted by Xb. The equal proportions of X and Y in all the
activities imply that Xb is fully characterizing the system and the developing nations
                                                           -   12   -
use [Xb ,        ] = [1   - Xb .1 -   XbJ        The bargaining allocation is            obtained by the exchange

of 1 - Xb  units of the developed countries intermediate product with Xb units of ths
developing countries intermediate product. Thus, the bargaining allocation is equivalent
to a competitive allocation in which the resource transfer is given by Rb = 2Xb - 1. The
term Rb defines the effectiveceiling on repayment: if the repayment due exceeds Rb the
developing nations will prefer to default partially, arid will transfer only Rb.
Consequently, one can view Xb as the key variable in determining the smooth
functioning of the international credit market.  larger Xb is associated with a world
                                                                         A

system that will allow greater capital flows from the developing to the developed
countries.
      We can summarize this insight with the help of an Edgeworth Box diagram (see
Figure 1), whose dimensions are given by the global endowment of X and Y, where 0
and 0* denotes the origin of the developed and the developing countries, respectively.
The diagonal 00* describes the Pareto allocations9. The line T0* corresponds to the
repayment schedule, defined by (9). A competitive allocation A corresponds to a
repayment   of    R (measured by the vertical                           bold line). Suppose     that the bargaining
allocation is given by       the point           Ab, corresponding             to   X = Xb.   The resource transfer
ceiling is Rb, and        the feasible rangecompetitive free trade equilibria with full
                                                      of

integration capital markets
            of                     given by those X to the left of Xb, in which the
                                            is

repayment due is R, with R <     Rb. The precise location of the free trade equilibrium is
characterized by the desirable level of resource transfer. In the absence of resource
transfer, the equilibrium will occur at the point A0, where X = .5, Y = .5. A resource
transfer to the developing nations will imply an equilibrium to the left of A0
      Note that in a two periods world with no uncertainty, the maximum level                                   of
credit to the developing nations that could be allocated equals the discounted value                            of


      9.    Curves ZZ        (Z*Z*) describe allocations                     that yield a constant output in the
developed (developing) countries, respectively.
*
0
    *
            x
        0
                                                           - 13 -
the second period transfer resource ceding (i.e. Rb2/(1 + r), where r is the iendert
interest rate, and Rb2 is the second period resource transfer ceiling). The purpose of the
next section is to characterize Xb, and to demonstrate that it is directly tied to the
trade dependency       of      the developing countries.


2.2.3. THE BARGAINING EQUILIBRIUM


        We now turn to the characterization of the bargaining equilibrium. We adapt the
framework of the fixed threat Nash equilibrium. The bargaining allocation is
characterized by the X value that maximizes the products of the gains from trade. Let
us denote by Z(X) and Z(X4) the production level of the developed and the developing
nations that is generated with an allocation of (X, X*). Note that the autarky production
level of the developed and the developing nations is given by Z(1) and Z*(0). The
bargaining allocation Xb is found by solving:


        (10)    MAX              [Z(X) - Z(1)]   [Z(1      - X) - Z*(0)1
                  X

        We start by considering the case where                      <   0   <   6   1. The Appendix   demonstrates
that:

        (11)   Z(1)    K                 ;       Z(X) =    (2X)


        (12)   Z*(0) = h5K5                      Z*(i. - X)   = (1      —
                                                                            X) -r

where
                                                        -J6
        (13)          -t   =         2       +   6K5   2
                                                                  - 14 -
 We      can apply (11)—(12) to                 (10),   taking a logarithmictransformation, obtaining that    Xb
 the solution               of10:


                 (14) MAX            ln[(2X) -     ii + mt (1< {                  - 1]


The two terms measure the percentage increase in the production (relative to autarky)
of the developed and developing countries, respectively. Note that the gains from trade
for the developing nations depend positively on T/K5. Inspection of (13) reveals that
t/K5 depends positively on the capital ratio in the sector with the low substitutability
relative to the high substitutability (i.e., on K/K5). The rational for this outcome is that
in autarky only sector 6 is producing. Sector          is ideal, because it can not produce

without Imports of X. Consequently, the gains from trade are greater for sector than
for sector 8, and these gains are tied to the relative size of sector f , as measured by the
K/K5 ratio.
             Maximizing (14) yields the following first order condition:




             (15)
                                    X2-X
                                                   =                tJ'
                                                                     rT




             10.           Henceforth we restrict our attention to the bargainingregion in which there
are gains from trade for both nations. In terms of                         (14)   we assume that
.5   <       X    <    1   —
                               C
                                   h5K5
                                          }
                                              (i_)/      Note   that from the definition    of T   it follows that
             -        h5K5
         1
                                              - 15   -

     The     left    measures the percentage increase in the developed nations gains
                    side
                      s
from trade that associated with a marginal increase of X, and is described by curve
DD (Figure 2). The right side measures the percentage loss in the developing
                                                                                   nation
                                                                                  schedule
gains from trade associated with a marginal increase in X, and is described by
GG. The feasible bargaining range is given by the shaded values of X (Figure 2),
                                                                                   and the
intersection of both schedules gives the bargaining   outcome   (Xb). At this allocation a

marginal transfer of X will cause percentage losses of the gains from trade to one party
that equal the percentage gains to the other party.
      The relative size     the two sectors plays a key role in determining both the
                             of
                                                                                       the
bargaining outcome and the riskiness of the developing countries (as measured by
feasible region of no default). A greater trade dependency is associated with a higher
relative size of the sector with lower elasticity of substitution. Basically, higher Ke/Ks
ratios are associated with a raise in     and an increase in the gains from trade of the
                                          ,



                                                                     shift GG downwards
developing nations. In terms of Figure 2, a higher K/K5 ratio will
and rightwards, to GG, increasing the bargaining solution from Xb to Xb. In terms of
                                                               no default, increasing the
Figure 1, the resultant increase in Xb will raise the range of
resource transfer ceiling from Rb to Rb
      The insight behind these results is clear: a higher relative size of the sector that is
more trade dependent increases the bargainingpower of the developed nations, thereby
                                                                                      of the
increasing their willingness to supply credit, and reducing the tendency
developing countries to default. Thus, while a strategy of outward growth
                                                                                has the cost
of increasing the trade dependency, it has the benefit of increasing the resource
 transfer ceiling as well as the availability of external finance12.



       11.      A   formal proof that     >   0 is   given in Appendix A.2.

              potential cost of trade dependencyis the increase of the vulnerability
                                                                                           of
       12.      A
 the economy to external commercial policy and foreign productivity shocks. In terms       of
t.D
              c'J
              UJ
              (D
              U-
          0
      0
                                          -   16   -
      Our   analysis has demonstrated that a useful measure of trade dependency is the
elasticity of substitution between the foreign and the domestic intermediate products
where lower substitutability is associated with a greater trade dependency. While here
we have considered the case in which the elasticity of substitution is above unity in one
sector (sector 5) and below unity in the second sector (sector ), the Appendix
demonstrates that the same result holds true for the case in which the elasticity of
substitution in both sectors exceeds unity13.




our model, we focus on the case where the move to the bargaining equilibrium is
determined by the will of the developing nations. In a more symmetric environment,
the move to the bargaining equilibrium may be also determined by the developed
nations. A higher trade dependency of the developing nations may increase their
vulnerability to such policies. In analyzing the consequences of external productivity
shocks the addition of explicit uncertainty is required. Section 4 review such an
 extension.
       13.   The case in which the elasticity of substitution is below unity for both
 sectors corresponds to the case in which in the absence of trade, output is zero in the
                                                                             outcome is
 developing nations. It can be shown that in this case the bargaining
 independent of the relative size of both sectors. Because this case corresponds to the
 implausible outcome (that output is zero in           the absence of international trade) our
 analysis ignores this possibility.
                                         -   17



3.   PARTIAL DEFAULTS, CONDITIONALITYAND DIRECT iNVESTMENT


     Suppose  that we start period one with substantial debt overhang, implying that
we are in the partial default region, in which the effective repayment is given by the
bargaining outcome, Rb. This situation s characterized by the elimination of any
voluntary resource transfers from the developed to the developing countries. We now
examine the conditions under which renewed investment in the developing countries
may occur.
       If there are no ways to commit the developing nations to follow a specified
investment plan, no new marginal resource transfer will occur. The reason for this is
that as long as we operate in the bargaining region, the repayment is dictated by the
bargainrng outcome. From the point of view of the developing nations it will be
advantageous to apply any investment towards reducing their trade dependency. Such
an investment will be beneficial for the developed countries for two reasons. First, they
will receive the standard productivity gains; second, the drop in trade dependencywill
allow the developing nations to cut the resources transferred to the developed nations.
Obviously, the interests of the developed nations will be best served by minimizing
investment in projects that reduce the trade dependency.
      If there are credible ways to commit the developing countries to follow a specified
investment policy, then it may be beneficial for both blocks of nations to renew
marginal resource transfers, with the condition of targeting the investment in projects
that will increase the trade dependency of the developing countries. This may occur if
the developed nations agree to cut the resource transferred today below Rb, in exchange
for an investment in the sector that is highly trade dependent. Such an investment will
have the consequences of increasing the future resource transfer from Rb to Rb,
allowing higher repayment in   the future. The modified budget constraint is now
                                                              18

       (9)     Y =   1 - X + Rb -


where the developed nations agree to reduce                          the effective present resource transfer
below the bargaining solution, to                  =   Rb - is.. In exchange, the     developing nations are

investing the marginal product                of   I
                                          the trade dependent sector (f) today, and
                                                        in

returning to the (new) bargaining solution, with a resource transfer of Rb , in the
future. Note that in the new equilibrium we still observe Y = X, implying that

                    = (1                               = (1
        (16)   X1          +
                               Rb- l)/2;


Let us evaluate the conditions under which such a transaction will increase the welfare
of   both parties. Note that from the point                   of   view   of   the developing countries Z1 stays

intact in the present, while Z2 is affected by two factors. First, the present investment

                                                   ,
increases the capital stock in sector raising the effective capital stock ('r) and thereby
raising future output. Second, the increase in Rb, resulting from the investment in the
trade dependent sector, will increase the resource transfer in the future, thereby
reducing the future X and the future output. Applying (12) we can summarize these
two factors by:



        (17)
                       -         =
                                     Z2 I   --
                                            1—n    0-r -




The  first term on the left side of (17) is positive, and measures the enhanced
productivity effect due to the accumulation of capital. The second term is negative, and
reflects the increase in trade dependency, with the result of reducing future production
due to the increase in the resource transfer ceiling (Rb). Appendix A.2 demonstrates
                                             -   19   -
that the first positive effect dominates, and the developing nations are better off with
the renewed investment. Therefore, a strategy of reducing the present resource transfer
from the developing nations, in exchange for an equivalent increase in investment in
sector (the sector that is more trade dependent), and the return in period two to the
bargaining repayment (with repayment Rb) will benefit the developing countries.
        While the outcome for the developing nations is clearly favorable, the outcome for
the developed nations is ambiguous. First period production goes down by                 MP    I
(where    MP is the marginal product of Xl, whereas second period production         goes up   by

MPx7It          Thus, the gross   return attributed to this policy   is   given by the marginal

consequence of    the investment on the resource ceiling:


                Z2         Xb
        (18)




                                                                                   14
The Appendix     demonstrates that          is positive and proportional to 1/'r     .   Recalling


(13),   't is a measure  the developing countries capital stock. It follows that lIT is a
                          of
measure of capital scarcity in the developing countries.
       As seen by the developed nations, they trade of f the marginal drop of repayment

today against the increase in repayment tomorrow, If the increase in future repayment
is large enough, the developed nations will be better off, as will be the case with

countries where capital is scarce.
       It IS worth noting that the strategy of investing in a highly trade dependent
         s
secto'- only the second best for the developing nations. Their interests are best served


        14.    See Appendix A2, equation (A18),
                                              - 20 -

by targetingthe investment in activity 8 (the sector that is less trade dependent),
thereby reducing their trade dependency15. Obviously, with such a strategy the
developed nations are always worse off16. Hence, the fact that the developing nations
will benefit from investment in trade dependent sectors does not negate the need to
impose conditionalityto ensure proper investment in the more trade dependent sector.
      A way to alleviate some of the problems associated with setting the conditionality

for the proper use of funds, is to execute the renewed resource transfer through direct
investment. Such investment will be targeted to the proper sector, and may avoid some
of the monitoring issues. Therefore, we may conclude that the move to a bargaining

regime due to a partial default put greater weight on the importance of direct
investment as one of the few remaining channels for external finance of investment in


      15.   In terms   of   equation (17) the second term       is   positive   if   the investment is


targeted towards sector S. Consequently,               <

                                                           J8
                 terms of (18), —-
                                SXb <
      16.   In                          0   and therefore the developed nations are worse          of

                                 a18

if investmentis targeted towards a reduction in trade dependency of the developing
nations. Thus, such type of investment must be domestically financed. If there are no
strategic restrictions on inward investment, the debtor will invest in sector 8 until the
marginal gain in future output equals the domestic real interest rate. The first order
condition for optimal investment in sector 8 is that             1 r*, where       is the     r
debtor real interest rate. The scarcity of capital and high real interest rates in the
                         the feasibility of inward investment. Conditionality, coupled
developing countries limit
with external financing of investment in the trade dependent sectors may impose
another obstacle to inward investment.
                                         - 21.   -

thedeveloping nations. The incentive problems that characterize the bargaining regime
in the presence of partial defaults leave few options for the renewal of external finance
for investment. The developing countries can choose either to accept detailed
conditionality attached to the finance of new investments, or to tolerate direct private
investment. In the first case, the conditionality provides the framework for monitoring.
In the latter, the private investor does the monitoring himself, by choosing the
investment projects. While none of these options may be enthusiastically endorsed by
the developing nations, they represent the few remaining channels for external finance
for renewed investment.

4. CONCLUDING REMARKS

      A   key result derived in this paper is that the trade dependency determines the
bargaining outcome regarding the repayment associated with a partial default. Even
with a partial default, investment in highly trade dependent sectors with high
productivity may be warranted. This investment may be implemented by a marginal
relief of the debt service today in exchange for the investment in the proper sector.
Following such a scheme may require detailed conditionality and close monitoring. A
way to partially overcome some of the monitoring problems is through direct
investment. We close the paper with remarks concerning extensions and qualifications.
       While we assumed there was no uncertainty, it could be added without
difficulties. For example, stochastic productivity of intermediate products will make the
dimensions of the Edgeworth Box in Figure 1 random, but the logic of our analysis will
stay intact17. An interesting result obtained in the paper is that the bargaining solution
depends only on the capital ratio among the various activities, and not on the absolute
level of capital. This result is related to the functional specification, which assumes a


      17.   The contract curve is the 45 ray starting from     0.   It can   be shown   that
productivity shocks affecting   Y and X5 will make   the corresponding repayment ceiling
Rb random.
                                               - 22   —




unitary elasticity of substitution between the aggregat intermediate product and
capital, and dose not hold for a general elasticity of substitution. Another simplifying
assumption applied throughout the analysis.   s that the developed nations have access
to a production technology    that allows perfect substitutability between the various
intermediate products. This assumption generated a simple solution where the contract
curve is a straight line. Abandoning this assumption will generate a non-linear contract
curve. Such modification  may be important in the presence of systematic uncertainty,
because different levels of trade dependencywill affect the trade off (and the relative
price)   of   foreign and domestic products.
                                                       - 23 -
                                                      APPENDIX
      The purpose of this Appendix is to derive some of the key results reported in the
text. Appendix A.1 reviews the derivations of the bargaining outcome, and Appendix A.2
analyzes the role          of   marginal investment and conditionality.

A.1   THE BARGAININGOUTCOME



      A useful characteristic of the bargaining outcome in the Nash fixed threat

framework (s that it is Pareto efficient (see Roth (1979)). We start the analysis by
deriving the characteristics of the contract curve, defined by the Pareto efficient points.
Thus, a point on the contract curve is defined by an allocation of X and Y among the
various activities that maximize the global weighted average of output. Therefor, for a
given cu, 0   K            1 we maximize:



      (Al)

Equivalentlymaximizing

      (A2)    [l - X             + 1   -
                                           Y] (Kt)t    + (1   -
                                                                  (h{(Xt) +   ()5] (K)'   +


                                       - X,)8 + (Y - Y,)'6 (K6t)1).
                           hs[(X

The weight w corresponds to the relative importance attached to    the developed nations,
and varying it will move us along the contract curve. Direct optimization (with respect
to X              X;
                  and      gives us the following first order conditions:




      (A3)        w[1. -         + 1   -        (Kt)' = (1 - w)(h&[Qs1'1(X - X)1 (K&,t)1'}
                                                       - 24 -
     (A4) ()[1    -       +     1   -            (Kt)1 = (1 - W)(hss]'(Y            Y) (K5)')
     (A5)    h[Q11 lKt)' (Xt)' h55]1 (Ktt)1 (X -                =




     (A6)    h5[Q]1 (K5t)' et)' = h[Q]1 (K5t)'                                      -   Y)
where E       (Xt)5 + (5)5 for                   =   ,8.
     Taking the ratio of (A3) and fA4) yields                       that

     (A7)                   -            =           -
                                                         Y,t

Takrng   the ratio of   (AS)        and (A6) yields that


     (A8)             (X5t/Yt)' [(X - Xt)/(Yt -
                                             =




Applying (A7) and (4) to (A8) yields                     that

     (AS)             Xtt           =
                                        5,t;                    =          =   =   Yt



     We can apply (A7) and (A9) to (AS), replacing the terms involving Y with the
terms involving X. Solving the resulting equation for                      X
                                                      yields (7) in the text.


                                                                                   -
     Applying equation (7) to (5) yields the result reported in (12) regarding Z*(1 X).
The autarky output for the case where < 0 5 s 1, is obtained by noting that for the             '
process both inputs must be used in order to produce anything. Thus, in autarky only
the S process is employed, yielding the Z*(0) in (12).
                                                       - 25 -

      We   noi turn to   an overiiew of the bargaining problem for the case where the
elasticity of substitution excess one for both processes- If the elasticity of substitution
exceeds one in both activities (i.e. if U e 6 < 1) then the autarky output is obtained
by choosing      that maximize the following expression:


      (Alo)        he(Yt) (Kt)1 +            h5(l       -       (K6t)1

yielding that the autarky level      of   Y and the corresponding autarky output are
      (All)        's,t = ss /(Ke            +



      (A12)        Z(O)   =
                              (heK

      In solving the bargaining outcome for the case where 0          6 s 1, we follow the

steps described in (14)-(15), adjusting for the new value of Z*(0), and obtaining that the
modified equations are


                                                   - X) {
      (14)    MAX    ln[(2X)-     1] +    ln[ (1                (K+K(

                                             f          T
                                           '1hK+h5K5J
      (1                      =

              X2—X'                                T
                                  (1_X){g}                       (lX)1
                                                -   26   -
                                                                                                   1        T
Note   that (14) and (15) can       be obtained     from (14) and            (15)   by replacing
                T
with                          Consequently, it follows           that the discussion regarding the
determination          and Figures 1-2 continue to
                    of Xb                                                hold     true for this case. Direct
derivation reveals that:


       (A13)         sign a
                              (K5+6K5)
                                           /G       = sign   (   S   -   }   0.


                                                                                                       -r
Thus, investment in the sector        that is more trade dependentwill increase
                                                                                                       ii5r6
shifting scheduleGO (Figure 1) rightwards, implyingthat Xb will go up.


A.2    MARGINAL INVESTMENT AND CONDITIONALITY


       We now   turn to the derivations of the results reported in section 3. Let us denote
by H
                          t-
        the term [ 5K5 } . Applying this notation we can rewrite the condition defining

Xb    (equation 15) by

           - (Xb)'     2      1   - Xb - (1 - Xb)' H


From which we derive that


                       =                 (1-)(1-X)H
        (A14)                 T




       Notice that the bargaining equilibrium must involve gains from trade for both
parties, therefor Xb must satisfy the following:
      (A15)                         .5    X       1- H   1/

      Applying this information to (A14) w€ find                    that       >   0. Observe   that from

definitions it follow that:



      (A16)
                      aT
                               =
                                    ...
                                    h 2           and    —
                                                         aXb   =
                                                                   axb aT
                                                                   IT      0
                          0
                                                                        alt
Applying (A16) and (A14) to (17) we obtain that:


                ac
                —                  /t     (i)C;           2-(1-X)K -( 1-)(X2)
      (A17)           =
                              h52             T         2-(1-)(1-X) H-(1-) (X2Y


                                          the conditions given in (AlS) ensure that        —
Inspection of (A17) reveals that
                                                                                                  >   0.



Finally, note   that by combining         (A14)     and (A16) we concludethat

                IXb   =
                              1
       (A18)                       f(K/K5)


where f is a proportionalityfactor that is a function only of the capital ratio (and not of
the absolute level of capital). Note that from the definition of T (see (13)) it follows that
T is a measure of the capital level in the developing countries. Consequently, (A18)
                                                                                  the greater
implies that the larger the scarcity of capital in the developing economies,
the marginal effect of investment on the Xb and the transfer ceiling.
                                         -   28   -

                                       REFERENCES

Aizenman, Joshua, Country Risk, Incomplete information and Taxes on International
            Borrowing manuscript, 1986.
__________ and Eduardo R. Borensztein. Debt and Conditionality under Endogenous
            Terms of Trade Adjustment, manuscript, The International Monetary
            Fund, 1987; forthcoming,LM.F. Staff Papers.
Alesina Alberto and Guido Tabellini. 'External Debt, Capital Flight and Political Risk',
            manuscript, 1987.
Bulow I. Jeremy and Kenneth Rogoff. "A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign
            Debt," manuscript, 1987, forthcoming Journal of Political Economy.
Calvo, Gulliermo, 'Debt Repudiation: The Role of Expectations,"manuscript 1987.
Cole Harold L. and William B. English.          Expropriation and Direct Investment",
            manuscript, 1987.
Diwan, Ishac and Shabtai Donnenfeld. Trade Policy, Foreign Investment and Portfolio
            Expropriation," Studies in Banking and Finance, 3, 1986.
Dooley, Michael P. "Country-Specific Risk Premiums, Capital Flight and Net Investment
            Income Payments in Selected Developing Countries, manuscript, the
            International Monetary Fund, 1986.
Dornbusch, Rudiger. "External Debt, Budget Deficits and Disequilibrium Exchange rates,"
            NBER Working Paper No. 1336, 1984.
Eaton, Jonathan and Mark Gersovitz. "Debt with Potential Repudiation Theoretical and
            Empirical Analysis," Review of Economic Studies 48, 1981.
Ethier, Wilfred, "National and International Returns to Scale in the Modern Theory of
            International Trade," American Economic Review 72, 1982.
Edwards, Sebastian. "Country Risk, Foreign Borrowing and the Social Discount Rate in
            an Open Developing Economy," NBER Working Paper Series No. 1651, 1985.
Froot, Ken D,, "Buybacks, Exit Bonds and the Optimality of Debt and Liquidity Relief",
            manuscript, 1988.
Folkerst-Landau David. "The Changing Role of International Bank Lending in
            Development Finance" The I. M. F. Staff Papers 32, 1985,
Goldsbrough, David, "Foreign Private Investment in Developing Countries", Occasional
            paper no, 33, International Monetary Fund, 1985
Harberger, Arnold C, "On Country Risk and the Social Cost of Foreign Borrowing by
            Developing Countries," manuscript, 1976.
Helpman,  Elhanan,  "The Simple Analytics of Debt-Equity Swaps", manuscript, 1987,
                                        -   29   -
Kharas, Homi, J. 'Constrained Optimal Foreign Borrowing by L.D.C. 's Domestic Finance
           Study No. 75, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., 1981.
Kletzer, Kenneth M. "Asymmetries of Information and LDC borrowing with Sovereign
           Risk,' Economic Journal 94, 1984.
Xrugman, Paul. "International Debt Strategies in an Uncertain World,' in Smith, W.G.
           and Cuddington, J. T., eds., "International Debt and the Developing
           Countries", A World Bank Symposium, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.,
           1985.
           "Financing versus Forgiving a Debt overhang", 1987, forthcoming, Journal
           of Development Economics.
Nash, John F. 'The Bargaining Problem,' Econometrica, 1950.
Roth, Alvin E. Axiomatic Models of Bargaining. Springer-Verlag, 1979.
Sachs, Jeffery D. "Theoretical Issues in International Borrowing," Princeton Studies in
            International Finance 54, 1984.
Smith, Gordon, W. and John T. Cuddington. "International Debt and the Developing
            Countries," A World Bank Symposium, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.,
           1985.
World Development Reports, The World Bank, 1981-1988.
