                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               DEADLY DEBT CRISES:
                           COVID-19 IN EMERGING MARKETS

                                     Cristina Arellano
                                          Yan Bai
                                    Gabriel P. Mihalache

                                     Working Paper 27275
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27275


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    May 2020




We thank Mark Aguiar and Manuel Amador for their comments, and Hayagreev Ramesh for
excellent research assistance. We also thank Stony Brook Research Computing and
Cyberinfrastructure, and the Institute for Advanced Computational Science at Stony Brook
University for access to the high-performance SeaWulf computing system, which was made
possible by a $1.4M National Science Foundation grant (#1531492). The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Gabriel P. Mihalache. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Deadly Debt Crises: COVID-19 in Emerging Markets
Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Gabriel P. Mihalache
NBER Working Paper No. 27275
May 2020
JEL No. E52,F34,F41

                                          ABSTRACT

The COVID-19 epidemic in emerging markets risks a combined health, economic, and debt
crisis. We integrate a standard epidemiology model into a sovereign default model and study how
default risk impacts the ability of these countries to respond to the epidemic. Lockdown policies
are useful for alleviating the health crisis but they carry large economic costs and can generate
costly and prolonged debt crises. The possibility of lockdown induced debt crises in turn results
in less aggressive lockdowns and a more severe health crisis. We find that the social value of debt
relief can be substantial because it can prevent the debt crisis and can save lives.


Cristina Arellano                                Gabriel P. Mihalache
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis              S633, Social and Behavioral Sciences Bld.
Research Department                              Department of Economics
90 Hennepin Avenue                               Stony Brook University
Minneapolis, MN 55401                            Stony Brook, NY 11794
and NBER                                         gabriel.mihalache@stonybrook.edu
arellano.cristina@gmail.com

Yan Bai
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
216 Harkness Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
yanbai06@gmail.com
1    Introduction

The Coronavirus pandemic is blazing through the world and presents enormous challenges for society.
The disease is highly contagious and causes significant loss of lives. Countries are imposing mitigation
and lockdown policies that limit social interactions to control the disease. These lockdown policies have
been effective in taming the spread of the disease but are associated with substantial economic costs, as
productive activities shut down and unemployment soars. Many governments are engaging in large
fiscal transfers to support consumption during the lockdowns.


                                                                 700


                                                                 600


                                                                 500
                                                                                                                        South Africa

                                                                 400
                                                                                                                        Brazil
                                                                                    Turkey
                                                                 300
                                                                                                Mexico
                                                                 200                                                      Russia


                                                                 100
                                                                                                           Peru
                                                                     0
                                                                     1/1   1/15   1/29   2/12        3/4   3/18   4/1   4/15     4/29   5/6

            (a) Fatalities (daily since 3 fatalities)                                     (b) CDS Spreads

                            Figure 1: Official COVID-19 Fatalities and Sovereign Spreads

    The epidemic in emerging markets is growing and leading to a large human cost. As of May 13,
the total number of official deaths across 35 emerging countries is over 39,000 and, as Figure 1 shows,
the number of official COVID-19 daily fatalities across a few emerging markets continues to grow.1
These countries are confronting the epidemic with additional challenges. As documented in Hevia and
Neumeyer (2020), the pandemic is a tremendous external shock for emerging markets with collapsing
export demand, tourism, remittances, and capital flows. These countries also have limited fiscal space,
which has made it difficult for governments to extend substantial support to their citizens. A main
impediment for these countries is their chronic problem with external debt and susceptibility to debt
crises, as argued in Gourinchas and Hsieh (2020). Argentina and Ecuador have already defaulted on their
sovereign debt, and all emerging markets are seeing their sovereign spreads rise in anticipations of more
defaults, as shown in Figure 1.
    In this paper, we study the COVID-19 epidemic in emerging markets that face a combined health,
    1 Current data is incomplete as to eventual human cost in emerging markets from COVID-19. The New York Times reported
large underreporting of deaths in emerging markets; the ratio of excess deaths to official deaths is 2 in Istanbul and 15 in Ecuador.
Also, the historical account from the Spanish Flu of 1918 in Barro, Ursúa, and Weng (2020) shows that developing countries had
the highest death toll and warns of an even larger threat for the current epidemic.


                                                                 1
economic, and debt crisis. We integrate a standard epidemiological susceptible-infected-recovered (SIR)
model into a sovereign default model and study how the epidemic impacts both economic activity and
the likelihood of a debt crisis. The epidemic creates a health crisis and generates time paths for the
infected and deceased population. The government can impose lockdowns that save lives but depress
output. The government borrows internationally and can default with varying intensity and a choice of
duration for the episode. Borrowing smooths consumption during the lockdowns, but default risk limits
fiscal capacity for supporting consumption. Default risk also increases the cost of lockdowns, because in
addition to depressing output, they also lower the prospects for debt repayment, increasing the likelihood
of a lengthy and costly debt crisis. The increased cost of lockdowns from default risk, in turn, leads to less
aggressive lockdown choices and a more severe health crisis: default risk costs lives.
    We study the dynamics of lockdowns, default, consumption, and fatalities following the outbreak of
the epidemic. For the baseline, we consider the case when the economy starts with 30% debt to output
ratio. We find that lockdowns start about two months after the outbreak and last for eight months. The
first two months feature a high lockdown intensity, with about 50% of employment in lockdown, followed
by gradually relaxed lockdowns. This optimal lockdown path reduces the death toll from the epidemic by
half. Absent lockdowns, the death toll from the epidemic is 1% of the population; with optimal lockdowns,
the death toll is 0.5% of the population. Lockdowns reduce output by 19% in present value and generate a
debt crisis of 43 months with defaults. The first six months of the crisis feature high default intensity, the
country defaults on more than 50% of the debt due; default intensity falls thereafter but remains elevated
for 37 more months. Overall, the epidemic is costly for the country; welfare in terms of consumption
equivalence falls 1.8% relative to pre-epidemic level.2
    Debt alters the outcome of the epidemic because it changes the costs of lockdowns. A highly indebted
economy, with a looming debt crises, chooses a less strict path of lockdowns because of its limited ability
to use financial markets to support consumption. As a result, the highly indebted economy ends with a
higher death toll from the epidemic. We find that economies that start the outbreak with more debt will
suffer more severe health and debt crises: more fatalities and more prolonged defaults. Lockdowns are
effectively an investment to save future lives. As such, our finding that high debt and default discourage
lockdowns relates to the debt overhang literature, which has shown that high debt reduces investment as
in Aguiar and Amador (2011).
    The International Monetary Fund, the Inter-Development Bank, and other international organizations
are sponsoring debt relief programs to help countries get through the COVID-19 epidemic. We use our
    2 Thelengthy and costly debt crises caused by the epidemic in our model are reminiscent of the Latin American debt crisis of
the 1980s, which imposed sizable costs, as documented by Bergoeing, Kehoe, Kehoe, and Soto (2002) and Kydland and Zarazaga
(2002).



                                                               2
model to perform debt relief counterfactuals and evaluate these programs on the health, economic, and
debt crises. Debt relief helps countries because it enables them to avoid debt crises, giving the government
the fiscal capacity to implement stricter lockdowns that save lives. In our baseline, a debt relief program
that costs a financial assistance entity about 10% of output results in welfare gains to country of about 14%
of output. Lenders also benefit through a capital gain on the market value of the debt, although in the
baseline the gains are small and less than 1% of output. The social value of these programs is generally
positive because the cost born by the financial assistance entity is more than offset by the gains to the
country and its lenders. We also find debt relief programs that put more weight on the benefits to the
country than the benefits to the lenders, should be targeted towards countries with intermediate levels of
debt. Debt relief for these marginal economies can alter more profoundly the outcomes of the epidemic,
as the program helps avoid the debt crisis and induces more lives saved.
   The epidemiological model is the standard susceptible-infected-recovered framework. The epidemic
starts when a fraction of the population is infected. The growth in the infected population depends on
the infected population, on the susceptible population, and on how fast infections move from infected to
susceptible. The infected population transit to either a recovered state or to the unfortunate deceased state.
We follow Alvarez, Argente, and Lippi (2020) and assume that the death rate depends on the fraction of
the infected population and that mitigation policies take the form of lockdowns that limit the growth of
infections.
   The sovereign debt and default framework we adopt follows the recent work in Arellano, Mateos-
Planas, and Rios-Rull (2019). In this model, a sovereign in a small open economy chooses the intensity
of default and the duration of the default episode. A fraction of the defaulted debt accumulates over
time and new credit is endogenously restricted. Default in this framework amplifies shocks and leads
to persistent adverse effects on the economy, resembling more closely historical emerging market data.
Importantly, as the length of the debt crisis is endogenous, so are its associated costs, which enter into the
calculation about the appropriate lockdown response to the epidemic.
   The sovereign in our model values the lives of its citizens as well as consumption per capita. The
government borrows internationally and can default on its debt. The epidemic lowers the value for the
sovereign because it is associated with a loss of lives. The sovereign chooses policies for lockdowns,
borrowing, and default to manage the epidemic dynamics and support consumption. Default risk
interacts with optimal lockdown policies. High default risk restricts the country from supporting its
consumption and makes lockdown policies more costly. The susceptibility of the debt crises, hence, makes
the economic and health crises more severe. Our work suggests that the risks of a sovereign debt crisis
are an additional first-order cost from the COVID-19 epidemic in emerging markets.



                                                      3
   Our work also makes a methodological contribution. We develop a framework that integrates the
dynamics of debt with the dynamics of the epidemic. We set up and solve a Markov problem where
the government’s choice on debt and lockdown affects the endogenous evolution of four state variables,
namely the debt, and the three population groups: susceptible, infected, and recovered. The government
lacks commitment and chooses these policies taking as given the future choices. We also provide an
algorithm that can be adapted to other applications on epidemics with time-varying endogenous aggregate
state variables.


Literature Our paper contributes to the fast-growing literature that studies the COVID-19 epidemic
and its interactions with economics. Atkeson (2020) is the first to introduce to economists the classic
epidemiology model of SIR to study the human costs of the COVID-19 epidemic for the United States.
Alvarez, Argente, and Lippi (2020) study optimal lockdown policies in a simple production economy
when the epidemic dynamics follow a SIR model. Their results highlight the trade-off of lockdowns:
saving lives but costly for economic output. They also quantify their framework and find that an optimal
lockdown policy has an inverted U shape over time and lasts about four months. Eichenbaum, Rebelo,
and Trabandt (2020) modify the epidemic dynamics to depend on consumption and labor and show
that these forces create negative externalities. In their framework, the optimal path of consumption
and labor during the epidemic is more depressed than the laissez-fair outcome because the depressed
production and consumption reduce infections and save lives. Farboodi, Jarosch, and Shimer (2020) also
find that in the environment of Alvarez, Argente, and Lippi (2020), negative externalities apply and call
for government imposed lockdowns.
   A growing literature studies targeted mitigation strategies. Glover, Heathcote, Krueger, and Rios-
Rull (2020) delved into the crucial distributional considerations, as the old are more at risk than the
young from the epidemic, yet the young endures most of the economic costs from lockdowns. They
find that the lockdowns mostly benefit the old and are used more extensively with better redistribution.
Acemoglu, Chernozhukov, Werning, and Whinston (2020) studies unconstrained optimal lockdowns in an
environment with multiple ages and sectors, a multi-risk SIR model, and also find that smart mitigation
strategies that target the old are most helpful. Favero, Ichino, and Rustichini (2020) develop a framework
with multiple sectors and ages, apply it to the case of Italy by comparing the performance of Lombardy
with Veneto, and find similar results: smart mitigation strategies target the old and the at risk population.
Baqaee, Farhi, Mina, and Stock (2020) and Azzimonti, Fogli, Perri, and Ponder (2020) study how networks
across sectors and geography can be exploited in the design of optimal mitigation policies. Additional
recent contributions on the optimal policy response to the COVID-19 pandemic are Hall, Jones, and
Klenow (2020), Jones, Philippon, and Venkateswaran (2020), and the policy pieces in the volume by

                                                     4
Baldwin and Weber (2020). These papers focused on the epidemic costs for advanced economies and have
abstracted from the additional challenges in emerging markets. Our paper highlights a main additional
cost from the epidemic for emerging markets which are debt crises. With this focus in mind, we have
abstracted from smart mitigation policies that depend on distributional considerations.
    A few papers also share our focus on the impact of COVID-19 on emerging markets. Çakmaklı,
Demiralp, Kalemli-Özcan, Yesiltas, and Yildirim (2020) construct a SIR-macro model considering the
domestic and international input-output linkages and sectoral heterogeneity. They compare two types
of exogenous lockdown: full and partial lockdown, under the calibration to the Turkish input-output
network. They abstract from sovereign default risk. Espino, Kozlowski, Martin, and Sanchez (2020) study
optimal fiscal and monetary policy of emerging markets in a sovereign default model with endogenous
distortionary taxes and seigniorage. They model COVID-19 as an unexpected shocks to productivity, the
disutility of labor, terms of trade and transfers, and find that default risk rises from the epidemic. They do
not consider explicitly the epidemiological dynamics and hence are not concerned with the interaction
between mitigation policies and debt.
    The dynamic debt and default framework builds on the sovereign default literature in Aguiar and
Gopinath (2006), Arellano (2008), and Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012). We adopt the more recent
approach of Arellano, Mateos-Planas, and Rios-Rull (2019) that model debt crises with partial default
and an endogenous length for the debt crisis. They find defaults generate long lasting crises because the
defaulted debt accumulates over time. This framework matches the empirical regularity of growing debt
during debt crises and an exit from default when the economy recovers.
    Our quantitative evaluation of debt relief contributes to the literature on debt buybacks. As in Bulow,
Rogoff, and Dornbusch (1988) and Aguiar, Amador, Hopenhayn, and Werning (2019), we also find that
international lenders would benefit from debt buybacks during the COVID-19 epidemic through capital
gains. Nonetheless, we emphasize that the gains to the country net of financial assistance from debt
buybacks are large and positive, including when the country is highly indebted. Reducing debt overhang
can considerably shorten and lessen the debt crisis and save the output cost in default. Furthermore, debt
reduction allows the country to adopt stricter lockdown policies, which are investments in future saves.



2   Model

We consider a small open economy model with a continuum of identical agents and government that
borrows from the rest of the world and can default on its debt. Output in the economy depends on
labor input and productivity. We evaluate the dynamics of this economy after it is hit with an epidemic
(COVID-19) unexpectedly. The epidemic dynamics follow a standard epidemiological SIR (Susceptible-

                                                      5
Infectious-Recovered) model. During the epidemic a subset of the population endogenously transitions
from being susceptible to infected. The infected eventually either recover or die. The government jointly
sets lockdown policies and uses international debt and default to manage the epidemic.
      We first describe preferences, technology, and the environment of sovereign debt and default. We
then set up the recursive formulation for the economy before the epidemic. We proceed to describe the
evolution of the disease and formulate the dynamic problem during the epidemic. The outbreak starts
when a subset of the population exogenously becomes infected.


2.1      Preferences and Technology

The government values both the consumption and life of agents in the economy. As in Alvarez, Argente,
and Lippi (2020) and Farboodi, Jarosch, and Shimer (2020), the value for the government increase with
consumption per capita ct and decrease with fatalities φD,t . We assume that preferences over consumption
are concave and that each fatality imposes a loss of χ. The lifetime value of the government is

                                                       ∞
                                                v0 =   ∑ βt [u(ct ) − χφD,t ]                                              (1)
                                                       t =0


where β is the discount factor. The utility function u(c) is given by u(c) = (c1−σ − 1)/(1 − σ), with σ
controlling the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.
      Output in the economy Yt is produced using labor, with a linear technology. Labor input depends on
lockdown policies. Absent lockdown policies, each surviving agent provides one unit of labor and hence
total labor supply equals the mass Nt . During a lockdown of intensity Lt , agents cannot supply all their
labor endowment, which reduces total labor to (1 − Lt ) Nt .3 The economy output equals


                                                    Yt = zt (1 − Lt ) Nt                                                   (2)


where zt is the economy-wide productivity. It depends on an underlying level z̃ and falls with government
default.


2.2      Government Debt and Default

The government issues long-term debt internationally and lacks commitment to repay it. We consider
a flexible sovereign default model where the government can choose to partially default on the debt
every period and decides whether to start or end the default episode. We study long-term debt in a
      3 In
       this baseline model we have assumed that all consumers, infected or not, can work with equal productivity. It is easy to
consider an extension with infected consumers are unable to work or work with a reduced productivity.



                                                              6
tractable way by considering random maturity bonds, as in Hatchondo and Martinez (2009). The bond
is a perpetuity that specifies a price qt and a quantity `t such that the government receives qt `t units
in period t. In the following period, a fraction δ of the debt matures. Every period, conditional on not
defaulting, each unit of debt calls for a payment of δ + r.4 The government can choose to default on a
fraction dt of the current debt obligation. The government transfers to consumers all of its proceeds from
operating in international debt markets. The resource constraint of the economy is given by


                                        Nt ct + (δ + r )(1 − dt ) Bt = Yt + qt `t .                                     (3)


The equilibrium bond price qt is determined by a schedule that depends on the face value of the debt as
well as epidemic dynamics because, as we will see below, default intensity depends on next-period states
including the severity of the infection.
    In this model with accumulation of long-term defaulted debt, the face value of the debt due next
period Bt+1 depends not only on new issuances `t but also the legacy debt Bt and the share of debt
defaulted on over time. Following Arellano, Mateos-Planas, and Rios-Rull (2019), we assume that partial
default reduces the current debt service payment to (1 − dt )(δ + r ) Bt but increases future debt obligation
by a κ fraction of the defaulted debt. We annuitize these future debt obligations such that the next period
debt obligations increase by κdt (δ + r ) Bt . Default also depresses productivity to zt = z̃γ(dt ), where the
function γ(dt ) satisfies 0 ≤ γ(dt ) ≤ 1 and γ0 (dt ) < 0. The evolution of long-term debt is controlled by the
new issuance `t , the legacy debt that has not matured, (1 − δ) Bt , and the defaulted debt that is carried
over,
                                        Bt+1 = `t + [(1 − δ) + κ (δ + r )dt ] Bt .                                      (4)

International lenders are risk-neutral and competitive. They take as given the world risk-free rate r, their
opportunity cost. The bond price qt compensates lenders in expectation, for their losses due to future
defaults,
                                  1
                          qt =       {(δ + r )(1 − dt+1 ) + [1 − δ + κ (δ + r )dt+1 ] qt+1 } .                          (5)
                                 1+r

This expression reflects that partial default tomorrow dt+1 reduces the value that lenders get in period
t + 1 but increases the subsequent value for lenders as the defaulted debt accumulates at rate κ and
becomes due in the future.
   4 We set this coupon payment as to normalize the price of a default-free bond to 1. This normalization does not alter the
maturity of the debt.




                                                             7
2.3     Epidemic Dynamics

We now describe the outbreak of the epidemic and subsequent dynamics. We build on the classic
SIR model in Kermack and McKendrick (1927) and Atkeson (2020). Following the outbreak of the
disease, a subset of the population will transition endogenously from being susceptible to infected and,
eventually, to either recovered or deceased. During the epidemic, the population Nt is partitioned in three
epidemiological groups, susceptible, infected, and recovered, with the mass of each group denoted by
µSt , µtI , and µtR , respectively. We assume that the initial population size is 1. The total mass of deceased is
µtD = 1 − Nt . The epidemic starts when an initial mass from the population becomes infected exogenously,
µ0I > 0. The rest are susceptible, except possibly for measure of agents already recovered µ0R ≥ 0, so that
µ0S = 1 − µ0I − µ0R .
      The epidemic dynamics can be modulated with lockdown policies that the government implements
as in Atkeson (2020) and Alvarez, Argente, and Lippi (2020). We consider untargeted lockdowns, where
the government can dictate the fraction of time agents must refrain from participating in labor markets,
independent of their epidemiological state. A lockdown policy of size Lt reduces labor input by Lt and
social interactions by θLt . The parameter θ controls the effectiveness of lockdowns in reducing social
interactions and therefore preventing infections.
      A key component of the SIR dynamics concerns how likely susceptible agents become infected. We
follow the standard approach that their probability of infection depends on the mass already infected µtI
and lockdown policies and their effectiveness in dampening social interactions θLt . We denote by µtx the
mass of newly infected and assume that it is determined by


                                       µtx = πSI (1 − θLt )µtI (1 − θLt )µSt                                   (6)


      The presence of 1 − θLt twice in the above expression reflects the fact that the social interactions of
both the infected and susceptible are reduced by lockdowns. The mass of susceptible agents in period
t + 1 depends on that in period t net of the newly infected,


                                                µSt+1 = µSt − µtx .                                            (7)


Infected agents remain in this state with probability π I . The mass of infected in period t + 1 equals a π I
fraction of the infected in period t plus any new infections. These dynamics are given by


                                               µtI+1 = π I µtI + µtx .                                         (8)




                                                         8
With probability 1 − π I each infected agent either recovers or dies. As in Alvarez, Argente, and Lippi
(2020), we assume that the probability of dying from the disease conditional on being infected π D (µtI )
depends on the measure of current infections, resulting in φD,t = π D (µtI )µtI fatalities every period. We
         0 ( µ I ) > 0 to capture the role of health care capacity for the fatality rate of the disease; more
assume π D    t

infections put a strain on the health care system and diminish its ability to successfully treat cases. The
mass of agents that die or recover from the epidemic depends on the fraction of the infected that transition
into these states, as well as the population in each of these absorbing states the previous period. These
dynamics are

                                                 h                    i
                                    µtR+1 = µtR + 1 − π I − π D (µtI ) µtI ,                               (9)

                                    µtD+1 = µtD + π D (µtI )µtI .                                        (10)


The dynamics of the epidemic induce an evolution of the population size Nt , given by


                                         Nt+1 = µSt+1 + µtI+1 + µtR+1 .                                  (11)


The loss of life from the epidemic is the cost that we focus on.
      As is well known in epidemiology models, the epidemic continues until the mass of infected consumers
asymptotes to zero. Absent lockdown policies, the SIR parameters πSI , π I , π D (µtI ) determine the duration
and severity of the epidemic. Lockdown policies Lt can alter these outcomes. In practice, we adopt an
assumption that the epidemic ends H periods after it starts because a vaccine becomes available. With the
discovery of a vaccine all susceptible agents vaccinate and functionally become recovered, so that no new
infections can occur.


2.4     Government Problem

We first set up the recursive formulation for the government prior to the epidemic and then move to the
corresponding problem during the epidemic.


Recursive Formulation Before the Epidemic The recursive problem for the government before the
epidemic resembles the problem in Arellano, Mateos-Planas, and Rios-Rull (2019). We also assume that
the government does not expect the epidemic arising in the future, the probability of dying is expected
to be always zero and the measure of population remains at one. We study a Markov problem for the
government. At period t, with debt holding Bt , the government chooses new issuance `t and partial




                                                         9
default intensity dt ∈ [0, 1] to solve the following problem


                                      V pre ( Bt ) =      max           u(ct ) + βV pre ( Bt+1 )                         (12)
                                                       `t , dt ∈[0,1]


subject to the evolution of the debt in equation (4), the resource constraint of the economy (3) with Nt = 1,
and the bond price function qpre ( Bt+1 ). The Markov structure generates a time invariant bond price
function that depends on future default and borrowing decisions,

                       1
    qpre ( Bt+1 ) =       {(δ + r )(1 − dt+1 ( Bt+1 )) + [1 − δ + κ (δ + r )dt+1 ( Bt+1 )] qpre ( Bt+2 ( Bt+1 ))} .      (13)
                      1+r

    This government’s problem results in pre-epidemic decision rules for the evolution of government
debt Bt+1 = Bpre ( Bt ), default dt = dpre ( Bt ), and per capita consumption ct = cpre ( Bt ). It also gives the
bond price function qpre ( Bt+1 ) and value function V pre ( Bt ) pre-epidemic. We will use these results to set
initial conditions for the following problem during the epidemic. In the baseline experiment, we use the
steady state values for debt Bt of this problem as initial condition.


Dynamic Problem During the Epidemic We now integrate the epidemic dynamics into the govern-
ment’s problem. The government and international lenders learn about the epidemic in period 0. During
the epidemic, the government continues to borrow and default from international financial markets and
also chooses lockdown policies Lt to reduce the loss of lives from the epidemic. We impose an upper
limit L, reflecting the presence of essential activities that cannot be suspended. The epidemic changes
the prospects for the economy because it increases the probability of losing lives and reduces the output
due to potential lockdowns. In studying this problem, we assume that a vaccine will be available in a
future period H when all the susceptible population vaccinates and the epidemic quickly winds down.
We study a Markov problem for the government, by solving the problem backward starting from the
vaccine period H.
    Consider first the problem of the government for any period before the vaccine arrives t < H. The state
variable for the government consists of the measures of each group µt = (µSt , µtI , µtR ) and its debt Bt . The
deceased population is µtD = (1 − µSt − µtI − µtR ). The value function for the government depends on these
states and on time Vt (µt , Bt ). The bond price function depends on future states and time, qt (µt+1 , Bt+1 ),
because default decisions will depend on these variables.5 The government takes as given future value
functions Vt+1 (µt+1 , Bt+1 ) and the bond price function and chooses optimal borrowing `t , partial default
    5 The time-dependency of the functions specified in the t subscripts reflects time-dependency of the vaccine. They would

be time-invariant absent a terminal condition. In the baseline quantitative analysis the results do not depend on the terminal
condition.



                                                                    10
dt , and lockdowns Lt to maximize its objective given by


                  Vt (µt , Bt ) =           max                 [u(ct ) − χφD,t ] + βVt+1 (µt+1 (µt , Lt ), Bt+1 )   (14)
                                    `t , dt ∈[0,1], Lt ∈[0,L]


subject to the resource constraint,


                   Nt ct + (1 − dt )(δ + r ) Bt =z̃γ(dt ) Nt (1 − Lt ) + qt (µt+1 (µt , Lt ), Bt+1 )`t ,             (15)


the evolution of debt (4), the SIR dynamics (6)-(9) that map current population groups and lockdown
policies to future population groups µt+1 (µt , Lt ), fatalities given by these dynamics φD,t = π D (µtI )µtI , and
the total population constraint (11). The government internalizes that its choices for debt and lockdown
impact the states tomorrow and the bond price.
   The government trades off the potential benefits of savings lives against the consumption costs of
lockdowns when choosing lockdown Lt . The consumption cost increases with the output disruptions
from lockdown and it is amplified with limited availability of international credit and default risk. If
international credit is ample and default risk is low, the output disruption only matters for consumption
through the reduction of lifetime wealth. Consumption adjusts down to lower lifetime value, but the
period-by-period consumption does not need to adapt to the contemporaneous declines in output from
lockdowns.
   The consumption costs from lockdown, however, are elevated when international credit is restricted
and the default crisis deepens. Lockdowns spur default. The optimal interior partial default decision for
the government satisfies


                             −z̃(1 − Lt ) Nt γ0 (dt ) = [1 − κqt (µt+1 , Bt+1 )] (δ + r ) Bt .                       (16)


Partial default benefits the economy by lowering its debt payment but it is costly because it induces a
loss of productivity. The right-hand side is the marginal benefit of default due to debt reduction: current
debt payment minus the increase in the future payment of κ fraction of the defaulted debt, with the
future market value depending on qt (µt+1 , Bt+1 ). Our model shares the same feature with the standard
sovereign default models that default incentive increases with current debt Bt . The left-hand side reflects
the costs from partial default and shows that both lockdowns and a lower population from the disease
lower the marginal cost of defaulting and hence generates more partial default. With lockdowns, high
future default risk, and restrictive credit, consumption is substantially depressed, and the government
will prefer to default more on the debt. Defaults bring extra productivity costs and lead to persistent debt



                                                                      11
crises. The debt crises, in turn, magnify the costs from the epidemic and lockdowns.
    The government’s problem results in decision rules for economic variables in periods t = 0, 1, . . . , H − 1
for government debt Bt+1 = Bt+1 (µt , Bt ), default dt = dt (µt , Bt ), lockdowns Lt = Lt (µt , Bt ), and per
capita consumption ct = ct (µt , Bt ). The problem also induces functions for the evolution of epidemiolog-
ical variables that depend on the level of debt as well as the distribution of the population over types.
Debt affects population dynamics through its impact on lockdowns. Let the equilibrium functions for the
evolution of susceptible, infected, and recovered be µt+1 = µt +1 (µt , Bt ).
    The bond price function during the epidemic, qt (µt+1 (µt , Lt ), Bt+1 ), depends on the debt levels as well
as on lockdown policies because they impact epidemic dynamics. The bond price function satisfies

                                        1
       qt (µt+1 (µt , Lt ), Bt+1 ) =       {(δ + r )(1 − dt+1 ) + [1 − δ + κ (δ + r )dt+1 ] qt+1 (µt +2 , Bt+2 )} .
                                       1+r

where future defaults, borrowing, and lockdowns are given by the policy rules of the government problem.
The problem from period H on, is similar to the problem described above, except that the vaccine at
period H moves all the susceptible agents to the recovered state and resolves all infections. We solve this
problem working backwards starting from period H. The appendix provides a definition of the dynamic
equilibrium of the economy during the epidemic.
    We define spreads in our model using a synthetic credit default swap (CDS) instrument. CDS spreads
reflect the average default probabilities on underlying bonds without taking into account recovery. We
can calculate a synthetic bond price for this security of duration controlled by δ with our default and
borrowing policy function as follows

                                            1 n                                                           o
                qCDS
                 t   (µt+1 , Bt+1 ) =           (δ + r )(1 − 1dt+1 >0 ) + (1 − δ)qCDS
                                                                                  t +1 ( µ t +2 , B t+2 )   .
                                           1+r

We measure the underlying spreads using the standard yield-to-maturity expression


                                              spreadt = (δ + r )[1/qCDS
                                                                    t   − 1].                                         (17)



3    Quantitative Analysis

This section contains the quantitative analysis of the model. We first discuss the choice of parameters,
including those controlling SIR dynamics and the cost of default. We then describe model policy functions
for lockdowns and defaults and the economy dynamics during the epidemic for varying initial levels of
indebtedness. Finally, we conduct counterfactual debt relief experiment and show that these programs
can have large social gains.

                                                               12
3.1      Parameterization

We consider a weekly model. The intertemporal elasticity of substitution is set at a standard value of 0.5,
and the annual risk-free rate is 1%. The discount factor β is chosen to match an average 2% real domestic
interest rate for emerging market inflation targeters, reported in Arellano, Bai, and Mihalache (2020). The
real domestic interest rate is constructed using the domestic short-term rates and ex-post CPI inflation.
      Following Alvarez, Argente, and Lippi (2020), we assume the case fatality rate π D (µtI ) depends on the
number of infected people in a linear way, to capture the congestion effect in the health care system,


                                              π D (µtI ) = π D
                                                             0    1 I
                                                               + πD µt .


The SIR parameters are calibrated using epidemiological research findings. π I determines the rate at
which infected people either recover or die of the diseases. According to Wang, Wang, Dong, Chang,
Xu, Yu, Zhang, Tsamlag, Shang, Huang, et al. (2020), the duration of illness is on average 18 days.6 For
our weekly model, this implies π I = (1 − 1/18)7 = 0.67. The parameter πSI relates to the widely used
measure R0 , the expected number of additional infection caused by one infected person. Zhang, Diao, Yu,
Pei, Lin, and Chen (2020) uses the data from the Diamond Princess cruise ship and estimates a R0 of 2.28
with a 95% confidence interval of [2.06, 2.52]. In the model R0 = πSI /(1 − π I ), which implies a value of
πSI = 2.28 × 0.33 = 0.75.
                       0 and π 1 control the mortality rate of the infected. In the data, measured mortality
      The parameters π D       D

from COVID-19 varies for many reasons, for example incomplete information on the number of infections
and various mitigation policies across countries. We assume that, absent health care capacity constraints,
the fatality rate is 0.5%, which within the range of parameters used in the recent papers studying COVID-
                        0 = 0.005(1 − π ). We rely on Alvarez, Argente, and Lippi (2020) for setting π 1 and
19. This implies that π D              I                                                               D
              1 = 0.05(1 − π ). The combined parameters for the SIR block imply that the fatality rate of
assume that π D             I

the epidemic conditional on being infected ranges from 0.5% to 1.5% at the peak of the epidemic, absent
lockdowns, when 20% of the population is infected. We adopt the values for lockdown effectiveness
θ = 0.5 and the upper bound on lockdown intensity L = 0.7 from Alvarez, Argente, and Lippi (2020).
      The cost of losing a life χ relates to the value of statistical life (VSL), which measures the marginal
willingness to take on mortality risk. Viscusi and Masterman (2017) report estimates of the VSL across
countries. In terms of annual consumption per capita, their estimation implies that the VSL is 184
for Argentina, 229 for Brazil, 224 in Mexico, 297 in Russia, 226 in South Africa, and 211 in Turkey.7
      6 This
        is also the duration used in Atkeson (2020) and Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and Trabandt (2020).
      7 For
       the U.S. Viscusi and Masterman (2017) find an VSL estimate of 9.6 million, which represents 207 times per capita
consumption.



                                                          13
Using an annual interest rate of 2% and a residual life of 40 years, we can express the VSL in terms of
weekly consumption. For example, a typical individual in Brazil is willing to give up 0.81% of weekly
consumption forever to avoid a 0.1% increase in mortality rate. The median level of willingness to pay for
0.1% of mortality rate is 0.85% of weekly consumption. We use this calculation in setting the parameter χ,
as the solution to the following equation,

                           1 − β20×52                 1 − β20×52
                                      u(1) − 0.001χ =            u(1 − 0.0085),
                             1−β                        1−β

where we assume the representative COVID-19 victim has 20 years of residual life. The implied value
for χ is 7295, given our parameters values for β, the utility specification and intertemporal elasticity.
As Farboodi, Jarosch, and Shimer (2020) discusses, the relevant cost of the epidemic in terms of utility
depends on the VSL and the fatality rate of the epidemic. Our parametrization is well within the range of
values considered in the literature. Finally, we assume that a vaccines arrives 3 years after the outbreak of
the epidemic, with H = 156. The arrival of the vaccines turns out to be irrelevant in our baseline model
because herd immunity is reached before 3 years.
   As in Arellano, Mateos-Planas, and Rios-Rull (2019), we assume that the default cost is a convex
function of the default intensity,


                                      γ(d) = [1 − γ0 dγ1 ](1 − γ2 1d>0 )


where the indicator 1d>0 is 1 if d is positive so that a share γ2 of productivity is lost if the country
defaults at all, with any intensity. We adopt estimates for the default parameters γ0 and γ1 from Arellano,
Mateos-Planas, and Rios-Rull (2019). The debt recovery κ is set to be 0.58 consistent with the evidence in
Cruces and Trebesch (2013), once preemptive restructurings are excluded. Lastly, we choose the fixed cost
parameter γ2 to generate a 30% of debt-to-output ratio. Table 1 summarizes the parameter values and
targeted moments. We set z̃ = 1, a normalization.
   Appendix B describes our computational algorithm. Briefly, we first compute the model without the
epidemic. We then compute the epidemic-default model backwards, starting from the terminal period
H when the vaccine arrives. As shown in the appendix, the period H problem is very similar to the
pre-epidemic problem as no new infections occur. We use the equilibrium of the pre-epidemic model to
set up the problem in the terminal period. The solution of the problem results in the time dependent
functions for policies, bond price functions, and value functions.




                                                     14
                                           Table 1: Parametrization and Moments
                   Parameters                            Value       Moments

                   Preference
                     Intertemporal elasticity 1/σ           0.5      Standard value
                     Risk free rate r (annualized)         1%        International real rate of 1%
                     Discount factor β                  0.9996       Domestic real rate 2%, emerging markets
                     Value of life χ                      7295       VSL, Viscusi and Masterman (2017)

                   SIR and lockdown parameters
                     SIR newly infected πSI               0.75       Contagion rate R0 = 2.28
                     SIR resolution π I                   0.67       Mean recovery 18 days
                     SIR fatality π 0D                 0.165%        Baseline fatality rate 0.5%
                     SIR congestion π 1D                1.65%        Alvarez, Argente, and Lippi (2020)
                     Lockdown effectiveness θ              0.5       Alvarez, Argente, and Lippi (2020)
                     Maximum lockdown L                    0.7       Alvarez, Argente, and Lippi (2020)

                   Debt and default parameters
                     Long-term debt decay δ              0.003       Mean debt maturity 6 years
                     Debt recovery factor κ                0.58      Cruces and Trebesch (2013)
                     Default costs γ0 , γ1           0.04, 1.62      Arellano, Mateos-Planas, and Rios-Rull (2019)
                     Default cost γ2                    0.0014       Mean debt-to-GDP 30%




3.2     Policy Functions

We start by describing the policy functions at the start of the outbreak, t = 0. We consider the lockdown
Lt (µt , Bt ) and partial default dt (µt , Bt ) policies as a function of the epidemiological states for susceptible
and infected (µ0S , µ0I ) when the debt state is B0 and no deceased, µ0D = 0. The fraction of recovered is
µ0R = 1 − µ0S − µ0I − µ0D .
      Figure 2 plots lockdown and default as a function of the infected µ I and susceptible µS for the pre-
epidemic steady state level of debt. The disease is more contagious for higher levels of µ0S and/or µ0I .
SIR dynamics (6) show that both µ I and µS increase the number of newly infected µ x , which in turn
generates a sequence of future deaths. States of the world in which these two groups are large are therefore
associated with higher benefits of lockdowns, because they can be most helpful in saving lives, which is
reflected in the shape of the lockdown policy L that increases with both the fraction of infected and the
fraction of susceptible.
      The figure also shows that partial default responds to epidemiological states. High levels for (µ0S , µ0I )
are associated with higher partial defaults. When the epidemic is very contagious, the government
implements lockdowns that depress output dramatically. To support consumption, the government
defaults on the debt.8
      8 Appendix   C includes plots of the value V0 and bond price q0 as functions of the µS and µ I states.




                                                                  15
                         (a) Lockdown Intensity                  (b) Partial Default

                            Figure 2: Joint Behavior of Lockdowns and Default



      Lockdown policies are also responsive to the debt holding of the economy. Governments with higher
debt levels implement more relaxed lockdown policies. High debt comes with either lower consumption
due to sizable debt repayments or with a default, which also depresses consumption, due to the cost of
default. Lower consumption increases marginal utility which effectively makes lockdown less attractive.
Therefore, lockdowns are more relaxed with higher levels of debt. Figure 3 shows the lockdown as a
function of the number of currently infected (for a fixed number of susceptible µS ) and two levels of debt,
a low level, equal to 0, and a high one, equal to 60% of debt to output. As we show in Figure 2, lockdown
intensity increases with the number of infected. At a higher debt level, lockdown starts when the infection
rate is about 5.5% infected and climbs gradually to L = 70% when the rate is around 12%. For a lower
debt level, the economy can fight the infection with a tighter lockdown; it starts the lockdown when the
infection rate is 4% and reacts more aggressively, reaching the peak of 70% lockdown when the infected is
about 7%. We find that lockdowns tend to decrease with debt but their sensitivity is higher with respect
to the epidemiological groups, µS and µ I .


3.3     Baseline Dynamics under Optimal Lockdown

We now describe the dynamics of the economy as the epidemic evolves and the government jointly
chooses borrowing, partial default, and lockdowns. Lockdowns help reduce fatalities, lowering the peak
of infections, but generate a long debt crisis.
      We focus first on baseline dynamics, when the economy in period t = 0 is hit by the epidemic and the
government has outstanding debt at the steady-state level prevalent prior to the epidemic. Considering
asymptomatic carriers, we start the outbreak with a small fraction of the population infected µ0I = 0.5%


                                                     16
                                        0.7


                                        0.6

                                                  Lower Debt
                                        0.5


                                        0.4


                                        0.3


                                        0.2


                                        0.1                            Higher Debt


                                          0
                                              0            0.05            0.1
                                                                   I



                                       Figure 3: Lockdown Policy Function



and 3% recovered or immune to the disease µ0R = 3%. Figure 4 plots the time-path of lockdowns, the SIR
dynamics, the economic variables of consumption and output, partial default, spreads, and debt.
    Figure 4 (a) plots the time paths induced by the optimal lockdown policy. The lockdown starts two
months after the outbreak. It remains at a 50% level for about two months, it then gradually winds down
and lasts about eight months in total. Lockdown successfully saves lives. The solid line in Figure 4 (b)
plots the evolution of the deceased µtD under the optimal lockdown, while the dashed line shows the
reference case without any lockdowns. Under this reference scenario, the number of deceased increases
sharply and reaches 1% eleven months after the outbreak. Optimal lockdowns flatten the death curve; it
takes about 16 months to reach the stable level of 0.5%. An optimal lockdown slashes the death toll by
more than half.9
    The next two panels of Figure 4, (c) and (d), plot the evolution of the infected and susceptible during
the epidemic. In each panel, the solid lines are paths under optimal lockdown while the dashed lines
are those without lockdowns. With the government’s mitigation efforts in place, the number of infected
reaches its peak, 7.6% of the initial population, three months after the outbreak. Without lockdowns,
the number of infected would peak at 20%. As the epidemic progresses, the fraction of susceptible falls
smoothly. After three years, the vaccine arrives, and all the susceptible become recovered, but the vaccine
comes too late, and it is irrelevant for the outcomes both in our baseline and in the reference with no
mitigation. For the no-lockdown reference paths, the fraction of susceptible level off at 13% about 9
months after the outbreak. The epidemiological parameters of R0 = 2.28 and 18 days to resolution of the
infection imply a fairly rapid evolution of the disease. With optimal lockdowns under our baseline, the
    9 The decrease in fatalities with the optimal lockdown goes a long way towards the minimum feasible fatalities from the

epidemic which equals 0.3% as derived in Hethcote (2000) and the pedagogical exposition in Moll (2020).


                                                                  17
60                                                1

50                                                                     No Lockdown
                                                0.8

40
                                                0.6
30
                                                0.4
20

                                                0.2
10

  0                                               0
      0     20     40     60    80   100              0   20      40       60        80   100
                     Weeks                                         Weeks

          (a) Lockdown Intensity                               (b) Deceased

25                                              100


20                                               80
                 No Lockdown

15                                               60


10                                               40


  5                                              20                      No Lockdown


  0                                               0
      0     20     40     60    80   100              0   20      40       60        80   100
                     Weeks                                         Weeks

                 (c) Infected                              (d) Susceptible

  1                                              60

0.9                                              50

0.8                                              40

0.7               Consumption                    30

0.6                                              20

0.5                                              10
                 Output
0.4                                               0
      0     20     40     60    80   100              0   20      40       60        80   100
                     Weeks                                         Weeks

      (e) Consumption and Output                          (f) Partial Default

14                                               35

12

10

  8
                                                 30
  6

  4

  2

  0                                              25
      0     20     40     60    80   100              0   20      40       60        80   100
                     Weeks                                         Weeks

                 (g) Spread                                      (h) Debt

                 Figure 4: Dynamics under Optimal Lockdown



                                           18
fraction of susceptible level off at about 29% of the population at the end of the epidemic, or about 2.3
times higher, as a sizable share is spared from having to experience infection.
      Figure 4 also plots the paths for output and consumption per capita, partial default, spreads, and debt.
The epidemic alone, absent lockdowns, does not affect much output or consumption per capita. Combined
with lockdown, however, the epidemic generates a debt crisis: partial default jumps to about 54% and
spreads increase 300 basis points during the lockdowns. The lockdown generates a protracted debt crisis,
with the economy continuing to default for 3.5 years. While the economy is in lockdown, government
debt increases mainly due to the accumulated defaulted debt, arrears. The economy also receives new
funding from its lenders, albeit at high-interest rates. These defaults and increasing indebtedness support
consumption during the lockdown. In anticipation of the lockdown, the economy first goes through
a short spell of austerity, by reducing consumption and debt before the lockdown begins. Once the
lockdown starts, the economy smooths its consumption through partial default and borrowing, so that
consumption declines considerably less than output. Consumption, however, remains depressed, about
1% below the initial steady-state, for much longer as the debt levels remained elevated for several years
after the end of the lockdown.
      These paths suggest that the epidemic, combined with mitigation policies that reduce output, can
have long lasting detrimental consequences for debt crises. The lockdowns end in week 40, the economy
continues to default until week 175, the debt level falls slowly and continues to be high relative to
historical benchmarks past week 200. Figure 8 in Appendix D plots the same key outcome variables on
a longer time frame, in excess of 200 weeks since the start of the pandemic, to capture more fully the
longer-term consequences of the episode.


3.4     Dynamics under Exogenous Lockdown

Our baseline results features an optimal lockdown path, which starts two months after the outbreak,
remains at about 50%, and gradually opens up. To highlight the importance of the timing of the start of
the policy and the gradual opening, we consider an experiment with an exogenous lockdown, which
starts one month after the outbreak and ends abruptly four months later. In Figure 5 we compare the time
paths for this economy against our baseline. The exogenous lockdown shown in Figure 5 (a) does help
reduce total deaths and the peak of the infection, though the reduction is smaller than under the optimal
lockdowns of the baseline. Consumption decreases earlier but also recovers earlier than in the baseline.
      In terms of the debt crisis, this intense 4 month lockdown generates a deep debt crisis that lasts over 5
years. The intense lockdown generates more intense defaults than in the baseline, which in turn cause a
greater run-up in debt, as more of the defaulted debt accumulates. With higher debt, the government


                                                       19
defaults more and takes longer to recover from the debt crisis.
      Comparing this exogenous lockdown policy to the optimal one can provide some lessons for emerging
countries. Most emerging economies began school closings and restrictions in movement in early March,
similar to U.S. states. These restrictions are still in effect as of early May. Our experiments suggest that
it is best for these countries to open up only very gradually. Such policy would not only help with the
health crisis but also it can potentially alleviate the severity of the debt crisis.


3.5     Dynamics under a Lower Debt Burden

The fiscal capacity of the economy is a major determinant of the optimal lockdown policies in our baseline
model. With ample fiscal space, the government can react with tighter and longer lockdowns that can save
more lives. We explore here the time paths of the epidemiological and economic variables for an economy
that starts the epidemic without outstanding debt. Figure 6 compares the dynamics of the baseline (solid
lines) with those of an economy hit by the outbreak at a zero debt level (dashed lines). Without the initial
debt burden, the economy responds with more aggressive lockdowns, reaching a peak of 57%, which is
6% higher than the peak in the baseline, and ends the lockdown later compared to the baseline. By week
37, the no-debt case still has a lockdown in effect at 23% intensity, while the baseline has already removed
the lockdown. The combined effect of this more aggressive lockdown path is a reduction in deaths of
about 0.05% of the initial population (10% of total deaths in the baseline).
      Without any initial debt, the economy can maintain an almost constant level of consumption per
capita. Lockdowns do not trigger any default for the first three months. Defaults only happens for a
much briefer two month spell, with at most 22% intensity, as shown in Figure 6 (f). Spreads only rise
slightly. Our model suggests that the indebtedness of emerging economies during the COVID-19 outbreak
has important consequences for their ability to manage the strains from the epidemic, for supporting
consumption, and savings lives.


3.6     Summary of Health, Economic, and Debt Crises

We now summarize our findings on the health, economic, and debt crises, under different lockdown
scenarios and across different initial debt levels. We evaluate these scenarios with summary statistics for
the crises.
      We consider two summary measures for the health crisis: the eventual measure of deaths and the
peak number of infections, both as a percentage of the total population. For the economic crisis, we
report cumulative output losses in per capita terms, as well as the length and intensity of lockdowns.
The cumulative output loss is the present discounted value of the output path relative to the analogous


                                                       20
  60                                                   0.8
                   Exogenous
  50
                                                       0.6                                      Exogenous
  40

                                                             Baseline
  30                                                   0.4

  20
                          Baseline                     0.2
  10

   0                                                     0
       0     20      40        60     80    100               0         20      40         60       80      100
                        Weeks                                                     Weeks

           (a) Lockdown Intensity                                            (b) Deceased

  14                                                   100

  12
                          Exogenous                     80
  10

   8                                                    60

                                                                                         Baseline
   6                                                    40
   4
                                                        20
   2                             Baseline
                                                              Exogenous
   0                                                     0
       0     20      40        60     80    100               0         20      40         60       80      100
                        Weeks                                                     Weeks

                  (c) Infected                                           (d) Susceptible

   1                                                    80

0.95                                                                          Exogenous
                          Exogenous
                                                        60
 0.9

0.85
                                                        40
 0.8                                                                             Baseline

0.75                Baseline
                                                        20
 0.7

0.65                                                     0
       0     20      40        60     80    100               0         20      40         60       80      100
                        Weeks                                                     Weeks

             (e) Consumption                                            (f) Partial Default

  25                                                    38

                                                        36
  20                                                                             Exogenous
                                Exogenous
                                                        34
  15                                                    32

  10                                                    30
                                                                              Baseline
                                                        28
   5         Baseline
                                                        26

   0                                                    24
       0     20      40        60     80    100               0         20      40         60       80      100
                        Weeks                                                     Weeks

                   (g) Spread                                                  (h) Debt

                  Figure 5: Dynamics under Exogenous Lockdown



                                                  21
60                                                          0.5
                 Baseline                                         Baseline
50
                                                            0.4
                                                                                                       No Debt
40
                                                            0.3
30                          No Debt
                                                            0.2
20

                                                            0.1
10

  0                                                           0
      0     20         40        60         80   100              0        20        40       60        80       100
                        Weeks                                                         Weeks

          (a) Lockdown Intensity                                                 (b) Deceased

  8                                                         100

                 Baseline

  6                                                          80



  4                                                          60

                                                                                                   No Debt
                                   No Debt
  2                                                          40
                                                                      Baseline

  0                                                          20
      0     20         40        60         80   100              0        20        40       60        80       100
                        Weeks                                                         Weeks

                 (c) Infected                                                (d) Susceptible

1.2                                                          60
                                                                                  Baseline
1.1                          No Debt                         50

  1                                                          40

0.9                                                          30

0.8                                                          20

0.7                                                          10                              No Debt
            Baseline
0.6                                                           0
      0     20         40        60         80   100              0        20        40       60        80       100
                        Weeks                                                         Weeks

            (e) Consumption                                                (f) Partial Default

14                                                           35

12                                                           30
                                 Baseline
10                                                           25                                     Baseline

  8                                                          20

  6                                                          15

  4                                                          10
                                                                                  No Debt
  2                    No Debt                                5

  0                                                           0
      0     20         40        60         80   100              0        20        40       60        80       100
                        Weeks                                                         Weeks

                 (g) Spread                                                        (h) Debt

                 Figure 6: Dynamics under a Lower Debt Burden



                                                       22
output path pre-epidemic, discounted at the risk-free rate r = 1% and expressed in terms of average
pre-epidemic annual output Y. In each comparison, the pre-epidemic paths are constructed for the same
initial debt level as for the paths during the epidemic. The length of the lockdown is the number of
months with positive lockdown intensity Lt > 0. We asses the intensity of lockdowns with both the
mean and maximum of their intensity, conditional on it being positive. For the debt crisis we focus on
measures of partial default. We provide three summary measures for the debt crisis, akin to our statistics
for lockdowns: the length of the crisis, measured by the number of months with positive partial default
dt > 0, and default intensity, using both the mean and maximum of partial default conditional on positive
values.
   We also report welfare losses from the epidemic for both the country and international lenders. The
country suffers from the epidemic because of the loss of life, the loss of output from lockdowns, and
costs associated with the prolonged debt crisis. To evaluate the country’s welfare loss, we consider a
consumption equivalence measure ceq (µ0 , B0 ), at the outbreak of the epidemic, implicitly defined by

                                       1
                                          u(ceq (µ0 , B0 )) = V0 (µ0 , B0 ),                               (18)
                                      1−β

where V0 (µ0 , B0 ) is the value function at time 0. The value function V0 reflects both the stream of
consumption and the stream of deaths. Our consumption equivalence measure summarizes these two
streams into one quantity, which is the constant per capita consumption flow that equates a value absent
any mortality risk. We express the welfare loss in two ways. The first measure, CE flow, is the percentage
deviation from the pre-epidemic consumption equivalence, ceq (µ0 , B0 )/cpre,eq ( B0 ) − 1, where cpre,eq ( B0 )
is the pre-epidemic consumption equivalence when initial debt is B0 . The second measure is the present
value of the losses using the discount of the country β given by

                                                        ceq (µ0 , B0 ) − cpre,eq ( B0 )
                               CE present value =                                       .                  (19)
                                                                    1−β

Lenders also suffer losses because the epidemic triggers a debt crisis that they did not forecast, a drop in
the market value of the bonds they hold, a capital loss. We report welfare losses for lenders as the change
in the market value of debt B0


                                 Lenders’ loss = q0 (µ0 , B0 ) B0 − qpre ( B0 ) B0 .                       (20)


where qpre ( B0 ) is the bond price before the epidemic.
   Table 2 reports the health, economic, and debt crises summary measures for our baseline (with optimal



                                                         23
lockdowns), exogenous lockdowns, and no lockdowns. Without any mitigation policies, the epidemic
eventually kills about one percent of the population, with 20% of the population simultaneously infected
at the peak. The epidemic itself need not lead to economic or debt crises. The loss of lives reduces
welfare, with an associated consumption equivalence loss of 2.65% relative to the pre-epidemic level. In
the baseline, optimal lockdowns reduce the loss of life by half, with 0.5% of the population eventually
deceased. Lockdowns save lives but with costs in terms of reductions in consumption and a prolonged
and deep debt crisis. In the baseline the cumulative output decline is about 19% of pre-epidemic output;
about 17.4% of the losses are due to lockdowns, while the rest are due to default costs. A lengthy debt
crisis follows the lockdown, 43 months with a mean intensity of 22% and a maximum of 55%. Overall the
epidemic is very costly for the economy. The welfare loss in the baseline economy corresponds to 1.80%
of consumption equivalence every period, which equals 87% of pre-epidemic annual output in present
value. Lenders are also slightly worse off from the epidemic, by about 1% of pre-epidemic annual output,
via unexpected capital losses. The epidemic is an order of magnitude worse for the country than for its
lenders.
    The second column of Table 2 reports the case of exogenous lockdowns, 4 months at 50% intensity.
As explained above, the exogenous lockdown starts earlier and is shorter than our baseline optimal
lockdown. This policy saves fewer lives but results in similar economic crisis and a more severe debt
crises. The present value loss of output with this lockdown policy is similar to the loss of in the optimal
lockdown. The 4 month lockdown of intensity 50% induces a 5 year long debt crisis with intense defaults.
The higher death toll and more severe debt crisis leads to a consumption equivalence loss higher than in
the baseline, with a loss of 2.33% of consumption equivalence every period, or 113% in present value.
Lenders lose about 2% of annual output in this scenario.
    As shown above, debt levels matter for the health and economic outcomes. To highlight the role of
debt we report our summary measures as we vary the initial debt-to-output ratio, ranging from 0 to 50%
in 10% steps. We view this exercise as shedding light on how the indebtedness of countries at the outbreak
can affect the outcomes of the epidemic. Table 3 reports the health, economic, and debt crises measures
for each of these debt levels.
    A higher initial debt reduces consumption, as the economy allocates more of its output to debt
repayment. The higher marginal utility of consumption increases the effective price of lockdowns, and the
government shortens the lockdown from 9.3 months for zero debt to 7.5 months for 50% debt-to-output.
The mean intensity of lockdown is also curtailed from 35% to 31% over the same debt-to-output range.10
Less mitigation arising from higher initial debt comes with a cost in lives, the fraction of deceased increases
   10 Lockdowns  are not strictly monotonic with the level of debt because of default; more debt generates more default, which
mitigates the reduction in consumption and supports tighter lockdowns. This non-monotonicity, however, is very minor.


                                                             24
                         Table 2: Health, Economic, and Debt Crisis: Lockdown Policies

                                                                 Baseline: Optimal      Exogenous       No lockdown
                                                                    Lockdown            Lockdown
                 Health Crisis
                 Deceased (% Pop)                                       0.50                0.72             0.99
                 Peak Infections (% Pop)                                 7.6                13.2             20.4

                 Economic Crisis
                 Output loss (%)                                       −18.9               −17.8              0.0
                 Lockdown
                   Length (months)                                       7.8                  4                0
                   Intensity, max (%)                                    51                  50                –
                   Intensity, mean (%)                                   29                  50                –

                 Debt crisis
                 Default
                   Length (months)                                       43                  66                –
                   Intensity, max (%)                                    55                  78                –
                   Intensity, mean (%)                                   22                  24                –

                 Welfare losses
                  Country CE flow (%)                                  −1.80               −2.33            −2.65
                  Country CE present value (% output)                  −87                 −113             −129
                  Lender (% output)                                    −1.2                −1.9              0.0
Notes: Deceased are eventual deaths. Deceased and peak infections are reported in terms of population. Output losses are present
discounted per capita cumulative losses during the epidemic in terms of annual output relative to the pre-epidemic paths. Lockdown
and default length are the number of months with positive values, mean and max intensities are their respective statistics conditional
on positive values. Welfare losses for the country are reported as consumption equivalence (CE) measures (equation (18)) relative to pre-
epidemic level, both as percent change in flow and as present value changes in units of output. Welfare loses for the lender are market
value losses on the outstanding debt relative to pre-epidemic values in units of output (equation (20)).




                                                                  25
from 0.44% to 0.50%.
      Output losses are non-monotonic with respect to the initial debt level. Starting debt-free, the output
loss is high due to a lengthy and intense lockdown, about 24.6% of annual output, relative to pre-epidemic.
When debt-to-output is at 20%, the associated output loss is close to 18%. When highly indebted, at 50%
debt-to-output, output losses are higher and about 22% due to the prolonged and intense default spell,
with its associated costs.
      The severity of the debt crises increases exponentially with level of debt at the onset of the epidemic.
The length of the partial default spell increases from four months, for zero initial debt, to about three
and a half years (43 months) in the baseline, and to over 13 years with a 50% initial debt-to-output. The
intensity of default also rises rapidly with debt, to the 100% maximum intensity, at 50% debt-to-output.
      The table also reports welfare losses from the epidemic for the country and its lenders, evaluated
relative to pre-epidemic levels for the same initial book value of debt. The epidemic induces welfare
losses to both, although as before the country’s losses are an order of magnitude higher. Welfare losses for
both groups increase in the initial debt burden.
      These comparisons suggest that the level of debt that emerging markets have at the outbreak of the
pandemic can shape eventual outcomes, not only in terms of default and consumption but also epidemic
mitigation and loss of life.


3.7     Debt Relief Counterfactuals During COVID-19

In our environment, international financial assistance can have a profound impact on the epidemic out-
come, because the economy’s debt burden weighs heavily on the government’s ability to mitigate through
lockdowns. The International Monetary Fund, the Inter-Development Bank, and other international
organizations have rapidly established debt relief programs for countries during the COVID-19 epidemic,
to support them in dealing with the crisis. We now use our model to measure the benefits from debt relief
programs. We find that financial assistance programs can have a large positive social value because they
shorten the debt crisis and allow for better mitigation policies that save lives.
      The experiment we consider is a debt relief policy that lowers the face value of debt by 10% of
pre-epidemic output. In this scenario, an external finance assistance entity reduces the face value of the
debt by buying back from lenders part of the outstanding debt of the country. The buyback is conducted
at market prices. Our analysis in this section relates to the work on debt buybacks by Bulow, Rogoff,
and Dornbusch (1988) and Aguiar, Amador, Hopenhayn, and Werning (2019). We describe next, in more
detail, the experiment and the associated gains for the country and its lenders, as well as the cost to the
financial assistance entity.


                                                      26
                              Table 3: Health, Economic, and Debt Crisis: Debt Levels

                 Initial debt to output                            0%      10%      20%        30%          40%      50%
                                                                                            (baseline)
                 Health Crisis
                 Deceased (% Pop)                                 0.44     0.47     0.49        0.50        0.50     0.50
                 Peak Infections (% Pop)                           6.1      6.9      7.4         7.6         7.7      7.7

                 Economic Crisis
                 Output loss (%)                                  -24.6    -21.4   -18.3       -18.7        -20.0   -21.7
                 Lockdown
                   Length (months)                                 9.3      7.8      8.0         7.8         7.8     7.5
                   Intensity, max (%)                              57       61       51          51          51      51
                   Intensity, mean (%)                             35       36       30          29          29      31

                 Debt crisis
                 Default
                   Length (months)                                  4        6        7          43         112      161
                   Intensity, max (%)                              22       28       36          55          94      100
                   Intensity, mean (%)                             20       22       27          22          28       35

                 Welfare loss
                  Country CE flow (%)                             -1.56    -1.59   -1.67       -1.80        -1.79   -1.78
                  Country CE present value (% output)             −76      −78     −81         −87          −87     −86
                  Lender (% output)                                −0      −0.1    −0.2        −1.2         −2.0    −3.4
Notes: The table reports outcomes for different initial debt to output ratios at the epidemic outbreak. Deceased are eventual deaths.
Deceased and peak infections are reported in terms of population. Output losses are present discounted per capita cumulative losses
during the epidemic in terms of annual output relative to the pre-epidemic paths. Lockdown and default length are the number of
months with positive values, mean and max intensities are their respective statistics conditional on positive values. Welfare losses for the
country are reported as consumption equivalence (CE) measures (equation (18)) relative to pre-epidemic level, both as percent change in
flow and as present value changes in units of output. Welfare loses for the lender are market value losses on the outstanding debt relative
to pre-epidemic values in units of output (equation (20).




                                                                    27
    Consider a model economy that is hit by the epidemic with an initial debt level B0 . The market
value of this debt in secondary markets is equals to q0 (µ0 , B0 ) B0 and depends on the bond price at
time 0, where µ0 is the initial epidemiological state. The financial assistance entity buys back debt in
order to reduce the face value of outstanding debt by 10% of pre-epidemic output Y. The resulting debt
level for the country is B0new = B0 − 0.1 × Y. This buyback is done at market prices, so that required
spending is q0 (µ0 , B0new )( B0new − B0 ); the price for the buyback depends on the eventual debt level, which
in general will be higher because B0new < B0 . This price change induces a capital gain for the lenders,
who thus benefit from the debt reduction program. The change in payoff for the lenders is given by
[q0 (µ0 , B0new ) − q0 (µ0 , B0 )] B0 .
    The country benefits from the buyback because it lowers its outstanding debt. We measure these gains
with the difference in values V0 (µ0 , Bnew ) − V0 (µ0 , B0 ), expressed in terms of the difference in present
value of consumption equivalence. This facilitates comparison with the gains and losses of the other
parties, the lenders and the financial assistance entity. Our welfare-based measure of the country’s gains
reflect not only the increase in countries wealth, but also the fact that lower indebtedness changes behavior
and impacts welfare through three channels. First, lowering debt reduces incentives to default and allows
the country to save on default costs, which in our model are a social waste. Second, lower debt gives the
government fiscal space to implement tighter lockdowns, that saves more lives. Third, the country is
relatively impatient, β(1 + r ) < 1, and benefits from tilting consumption.
    An alternative way to measure the country’s gains is based on the change in the market value of
the debt q0 (µ0 , B0 ) B0 − q0 (µ0 , B0new ) B0new . This market based measure is used for example in Bulow,
Rogoff, and Dornbusch (1988) when studying the buybacks of Bolivia in the 1980s. We focus on the
consumption equivalence measures, as opposed to the market base measures, because in our model with
costly equilibrium default and value for life, the market based measures miss the additional benefits that
come about from debt relief that change default paths and mitigation policies.
    In Table 4 we present gains and losses to the involved parties when the initial debt for the economy,
before the debt relief program, ranges from 10% to 50% of output. As described above, the gains and
losses for the three parties are


                       Country gain CE present value =[ceq (µ0 , B0new ) − ceq (µ0 , B0 )]/(1 − β)        (21)

                                            Lenders gain =[q0 (µ0 , B0new ) − q0 (µ0 , B0 )] B0           (22)

                                Financial assistance cost =q0 (µ0 , B0new )( B0new − B0 )                 (23)


reported as percentages of pre-epidemic annual output Y, where ceq (µ0 , B) is computed according to



                                                              28
equation (18).
   Consider the outcomes of the debt relief program for the baseline economy, which starts with a face
value of debt to output of 30% that is reduced by 10% with the program. The country gains from this
debt reduction by 13.7%, the lender gains by about 0.9%, while the cost to the financial assistance entity
is 9.9%. Most of the gains accrue to the country, about 94% (13.7 out of a total of 13.7+0.9), because the
change in bond prices from this program are modest. The gains from the debt relief program are large for
the economy because debt matters for future default paths and mitigation policies. We found that the
counterfactual gains from the same debt relief program in the pre-epidemic economy would be about half
and equal to 7%. Absent the epidemic the economy does not experience a debt crisis nor requires fiscal
space to save lives, which lowers the value of the debt relief program.
   The table also reports outcomes for economies that start with other initial debt levels. The gains for
lenders monotonically increase with debt because the capital gains from the debt relief program are the
highest for the most indebted economy. For example, the gain for lenders is highest when the economy
starts with 50%, where they capture 25% of total gains. The cost of financial assistance modestly decreases
with debt, because the buyback price is lower when debt is high. The gains for the country from a 10%
face value reduction are, however, non-monotonic with respect to debt, reaching a high for the economy
with an average debt level. Debt relief benefits most these economies because it allows them to both
dampen the debt crisis and implement more aggressive lockdowns, saving more lives. Economies with
low debt levels have large fiscal space to manage the epidemic and financial assistance programs do not
change their outcomes much. For highly indebted economies, modest debt relief programs also do not
alter their lockdown choices much, as they continue to experience long debt crisis even with financial
assistance.
   The debt relief program has varying gains and losses for the three parties: country, lenders, and
financial assistance entity. The social benefits from the program depend on the weight that society puts
on the three parties. We consider two sets of weighting functions: a case that puts equal weight on the
gains and losses of all three parties and a weighting function that puts equal weight on the country and
the financial assistance entity and disregards the capital gains of the lenders. The second panel in Table 4
reports the social value for the program under the two weighting functions, reported as a percentage of
the cost of financial assistance.
   We find that the social value of debt relief is positive for economies that start with debt-to-output
ratios above 20%. Under equal weighting of all three parties, the social value of debt relief increases with
the country’s debt and can be very large, reaching 75% for an economy with 50% debt-to-output. The
social value of debt relief is negative when initial debt to output is 10% because of our choice to evaluate



                                                    29
the present value of consumption equivalence gains using the economy’s discount factor β, which is
lower than the inverse of the risk-free rate. Evaluating this present values using instead the risk-free rates
increases estimated gains substantially and results in them always being positive independent on the
initial level of debt.
      Consider now the weighting function that weights only the country and the financial assistance entity,
while excluding the lenders. The social value of debt relief continues to be large for the majority of
the cases and is non-monotonic with respect to debt. This social value peaks for middle levels of debt,
reaching here 38% of the cost of the program. These findings suggest debt relief policies which prioritize
gains to countries rather than to their lenders should be targeted towards marginal countries, on the brink
of a debt crisis. Debt relief is most useful for them because the program changes their behavior the most,
towards avoiding deep debt crises and saving more lives during the epidemic.

                             Table 4: Gains from Debt Relief: 10% Debt-to-Output Reduction

                        Initial debt-to-output                                   10%      20%      30%     40%      50%

                        Welfare Gains (% output)
                        Country gain CE present value                             8.7    11.0     13.7     12.7     11.6
                        Lenders gain                                              0.0     0.1      0.9      3.1      3.9
                        Financial assistance cost                                −10     −9.9     −9.9     −9.6     −8.8

                        Social Value of Debt Relief (% financial assistance cost)
                          Weights country, lenders, financial assistance −12                11       47       64      75
                          Weights country, financial assistance                  −12        11       38       33      31
    Note: Welfare gains for the country are consumption equivalence (CE) measures in present value as in equation (21)). Lender gains arise
    from capital gains induced by debt relief given by equation (21) and the cost for the financial assistance entity is market value given by
    (23)). The social values are the sum of gains and losses under and equal weighting function for the three parties and under a weighting
    function that excludes lenders reported as percentage of the cost of the financial assistance.




4      Discussion and Other Results

The recent active literature studying the impact of COVID-19 in the world has explored additional aspects
of the epidemic. Here we relate how some of the findings from this literature apply to emerging markets
that face debt crises.


Smart Mitigation In our work we have focused on nondiscriminatory lockdowns for controlling the
disease. An important strategy for combating the epidemic is the use of smart mitigation strategies such
as trace and test, which is explored in Chari, Kirpalani, and Phelan (2020) and Berger, Herkenhoff, and
Mongey (2020), age specific lockdowns, which is explored in Glover, Heathcote, Krueger, and Rios-Rull
(2020), Favero, Ichino, and Rustichini (2020), and Acemoglu, Chernozhukov, Werning, and Whinston

                                                                       30
(2020), and sector specific lockdowns explored in more detail in Baqaee, Farhi, Mina, and Stock (2020) and
Azzimonti, Fogli, Perri, and Ponder (2020). Implementing these smart mitigations are akin in our model
to reducing the parameter πSI . Such policies would be very specially useful in emerging markets because
of the additional costs from nondiscriminatory lockdowns that generate costly debt crisis.


External Shocks The world pandemic also brings additional shocks to emerging markets as reduced
demand for their exports and disruptions in global supply chains. In the context of our model these
shocks can be introduced by modifying the underlying productivity paths for the emerging economy
upon the outbreak of the epidemic. We have experimented in our model with declines in productivity
and find that for modest declines the results are unchanged. Using estimates for the IMF that forecasts a
global recession of about 5% during 2020, we fed into the model a decline in productivity of 5% for one
year followed by a slow recovery. The baseline results do not change substantially. The reason is that in
the context of the lockdowns and the debt crisis a 5% decline in productivity is a small additional shock
to already large epidemic response. Larger and more persistent declines in productivity do make the debt
and health crisis more severe.


Externalities An emerging consensus is developing on the need of additional government imposed
lockdowns during the epidemic because of negative externalities arising from consumers not being
quarantined. Farboodi, Jarosch, and Shimer (2020) and Eichenbaum, Rebelo, and Trabandt (2020) show
that although consumers would have incentives to self-quarantine, they would choose insufficient
quarantines relative to a planner, because they don’t internalize their behavior affect the well being of the
economy as a whole. In our work, we have not directly studied the epidemic externality but instead have
considered directly the government problem that internalizes these externalities. Nevertheless, debt crises
bring additional negative externalities arising from lockdowns as consumers would not internalize that by
self-quarantining they are causing a debt crisis. We leave for future work analyzing whether government
controlled lockdowns are larger or smaller than what consumers would choose in the presence of debt
crises.


Vaccines and Treatment      Emerging markets face the additional hurdle of limited medical and scientific
resources for managing the epidemic. As vaccines and treatments become available, accessing those
resources could lead to additional expenses and constraints. Our model suggests, however, that if these
medical resources become available far in the future, their cost does not matter. In our model we have
assumed that the vaccine and/or treatment arrives free of cost 2 years after the outbreak of the epidemic.
Given this timing, it turns out the vaccine/treatment is irrelevant for the emerging country because herd


                                                     31
immunity had already been reached by then.



5     Conclusion

In this paper we studied the COVID-19 epidemic in emerging markets. We developed a framework that
combines an epidemiology model with a sovereign default model. Our results suggest that this epidemic
threatens not only a large health and economic crisis, but also a prolonged debt crisis. We also show
that default risk makes lockdowns more costly because they limit the fiscal capacity of governments to
support consumption. These additional costs from default risk in turn result in a deeper health crisis,
with more lives lost to the epidemic.
     Through counterfactuals, we show that debt relief programs can have profound positive effects: debt
relief supports consumption, can reduce the severity of the debt crisis, and can save lives. In this context,
our work suggests that the recent debt relief policies promoted by the International Monetary Fund
and other international organizations, are right on target to combat the costs associated with COVID-19.
We hope that our work contributes to the discussion on the optimal domestic and international policy
response to the COVID-19 pandemic in emerging markets.



References

Acemoglu, D., V. Chernozhukov, I. Werning, and M. D. Whinston (2020, May). A multi-risk sir model
    with optimally targeted lockdown. Working Paper 27102, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Aguiar, M. and M. Amador (2011, 06). Growth in the Shadow of Expropriation. The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 126(2), 651–697.

Aguiar, M., M. Amador, H. Hopenhayn, and I. Werning (2019). Take the short route: Equilibrium default
    and debt maturity. Econometrica 87(2), 423–462.

Aguiar, M. and G. Gopinath (2006). Defaultable debt, interest rates and the current account. Journal of
    International Economics 69(1), 64–83.

Alvarez, F. E., D. Argente, and F. Lippi (2020, April). A simple planning problem for covid-19 lockdown.
    Working Paper 26981, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Arellano, C. (2008). Default risk and income fluctuations in emerging economies. American Economic
    Review 98(3), 690–712.



                                                      32
Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and G. P. Mihalache (2020). Monetary policy and sovereign risk in emerging economies
  (nk-default). Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Arellano, C., X. Mateos-Planas, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2019). Partial default. Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Atkeson, A. (2020). What will be the economic impact of covid-19 in the us? rough estimates of disease
  scenarios. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Azzimonti, M., A. Fogli, F. Perri, and M. Ponder (2020, May). Social distance policies in econ-epi networks.
  Working paper minneapolis fed.

Baldwin, R. and B. Weber (2020, 03). Mitigating the covid economic crisis: Act fast and do whatever it
  takes. Technical report.

Baqaee, D., E. Farhi, M. Mina, and J. Stock (2020, May). Evaluating the economics and epidemiology of
  strategies for reopening the economy. Working paper harvard university.

Barro, R. J., J. F. Ursúa, and J. Weng (2020, March). The coronavirus and the great influenza pandemic:
  Lessons from the “spanish flu” for the coronavirus’s potential effects on mortality and economic activity.
  Working Paper 26866, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Berger, D. W., K. F. Herkenhoff, and S. Mongey (2020, March). An seir infectious disease model with
  testing and conditional quarantine. Staff Report 597, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Bergoeing, R., P. J. Kehoe, T. J. Kehoe, and R. Soto (2002). A decade lost and found: Mexico and chile in
  the 1980s. Review of Economic Dynamics 5(1), 166–205.

Bulow, J., K. Rogoff, and R. Dornbusch (1988). The buyback boondoggle. Brookings Papers on Economic
  Activity 1988(2), 675–704.

Çakmaklı, C., S. Demiralp, e. Kalemli-Özcan, S. Yesiltas, and M. A. Yildirim (2020). Covid-19 and emerging
  markets: An epidemiological multi-sector model for a small open economy with an application to
  turkey. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chari, V. V., R. Kirpalani, and C. Phelan (2020, May). The hammer and the scalpel: On the economics of
  indiscriminate versus targeted isolation policies during pandemics. Working paper minneapolis fed.

Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor (2012). Maturity, indebtedness, and default risk. American Economic
  Review 102(6), 2674–2699.


                                                    33
Cruces, J. J. and C. Trebesch (2013). Sovereign defaults: The price of haircuts. American economic Journal:
  macroeconomics 5(3), 85–117.

Dvorkin, M., J. M. Sanchez, H. Sapriza, and E. Yurdagul (2018, June). Sovereign Debt Restructurings.
  Working Papers 2018-13, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Eichenbaum, M. S., S. Rebelo, and M. Trabandt (2020). The macroeconomics of epidemics. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Espino, E., J. Kozlowski, F. M. Martin, and J. M. Sanchez (2020). Seigniorage and sovereign default: The
  response of emerging markets to covid-191. Technical report, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis working
  paper.

Farboodi, M., G. Jarosch, and R. Shimer (2020, April). Internal and external effects of social distancing in a
  pandemic. Working Paper 27059, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Favero, C. A., A. Ichino, and A. Rustichini (2020, May). Restarting the economy while saving lives under
  covid-19. Working Paper DP14664, CEPR.

Glover, A., J. Heathcote, D. Krueger, and J.-V. Rios-Rull (2020). Health versus wealth: On the distributional
  effects of controlling a pandemic. Technical report, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Gordon, G. (2019, September). Efficient Computation with Taste Shocks. Working Paper 19-15, Federal
  Reserve Bank of Richmond.

Gourinchas, P.-O. and C.-T. Hsieh (2020, 04). The COVID 19 Default Bomb. Technical report.

Hall, R., C. Jones, and P. Klenow (2020). Trading off consumption and covid-19 deaths. Technical report,
  Stanford Working Paper.

Hatchondo, J. C. and L. Martinez (2009). Long-duration bonds and sovereign defaults. Journal of
  International Economics 79(1), 117 – 125.

Hethcote, H. W. (2000). The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM review 42(4), 599–653.

Hevia, C. and A. Neumeyer (2020). A conceptual framework for analyzing the economic impact of
  covid-19 and its policy implications. Technical report, UNDP Latin American and the Cribbean.

Jones, C. J., T. Philippon, and V. Venkateswaran (2020, April). Optimal mitigation policies in a pandemic:
  Social distancing and working from home. Working Paper 26984, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

                                                     34
Kermack, W. O. and A. G. McKendrick (1927). A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics.
  Proceedings of the royal society of london. Series A, Containing papers of a mathematical and physical charac-
  ter 115(772), 700–721.

Kydland, F. E. and C. E. Zarazaga (2002). Argentina’s lost decade. Review of Economic Dynamics 5(1),
  152–165.

Moll, B. (2020). Lockdowns in sir models. Technical report, Lecture Notes, Princeton University.

Viscusi, W. K. and C. J. Masterman (2017). Income elasticities and global values of a statistical life. Journal
  of Benefit-Cost Analysis 8(2), 226–250.

Wang, H., Z. Wang, Y. Dong, R. Chang, C. Xu, X. Yu, S. Zhang, L. Tsamlag, M. Shang, J. Huang, et al.
  (2020). Phase-adjusted estimation of the number of coronavirus disease 2019 cases in wuhan, china.
  Cell Discovery 6(1), 1–8.

Zhang, S., M. Diao, W. Yu, L. Pei, Z. Lin, and D. Chen (2020). Estimation of the reproductive number of
  novel coronavirus (covid-19) and the probable outbreak size on the diamond princess cruise ship: A
  data-driven analysis. International Journal of Infectious Diseases 93, 201–204.




                                                      35
                                O NLINE A PPENDIX TO
             “D EADLY D EBT C RISES : COVID-19 IN E MERGING M ARKETS ”

                        BY   C RISTINA A RELLANO , YAN B AI , AND G ABRIEL M IHALACHE




A      Definition of Epidemic Equilibrium

The epidemic equilibrium consists of the sequence of functions of consumption ct (µt , Bt ), the govern-
ment’s policy of borrowings Bt+1 (µt , Bt ), default dt (µt , Bt ), and lockdown Lt (µt , Bt ), the value function
Vt (µt , Bt ), the bond price schedule qt (µt , Bt+1 ), and the epidemiological state µt +1 (µt , Bt ) that summarizes
the mass of susceptible, infected, and recovered for period t = 0, 1, 2, ... such that given the initial state
(µ0 , B0 ) and the availability of the vaccine at period H,

    (i) For period t > H, the epidemic is eliminated, µSt = 0, µtI = 0, and µtR = µ RH + µSH + (1 − π D
                                                                                                      0 /π ) µ I
                                                                                                          I    H
                                                             0 /π fraction of infected dies and 1 − π 0 /π
       under the assumption that at period H a fraction of π D   I                                    D    I

       fraction gets recovered. The optimal lockdown intensity is zero, Lt (µt , Bt ) = 0. The government’s
       borrowing and default policy, the value function, and the bond price schedule are the same as
       the pre-epidemic ones, Vt (µt , Bt ) = V pre ( Bt ), dt (µt , Bt ) = dpre ( Bt ), Bt+1 (µt , Bt ) = Bpre (µt , Bt ), and
       qt (µt , Bt+1 ) = qpre ( Bt+1 ).

 (ii) For period t ≤ H, taking as given the value function and the bond price schedule at period t + 1,
       the value function and the government’s policy solves the following problem,


                       Vt (µt , Bt ) =             max                  [u(ct ) − χφD,t ] + βVt+1 (µt+1 (µt , Lt ), Bt+1 )
                                          Bt+1 , dt ∈[0,1], Lt ∈[0,L]


       subject to the resource constraint


               Nt ct + (1 − dt )(δ + r ) Bt =z̃φ(dt ) Nt (1 − Lt ) + qt (µt+1 (µt , Lt ), Bt+1 )( Bt+1 − (1 − δ) Bt ),


       the SIR dynamics (6)-(9), the deaths φD,t = π D (µtI )µtI for t < H and φD,t = π D
                                                                                        0 /π µ I for t = H, and
                                                                                            I t

       Nt = µSt + µtI + µtR .

 (iii) For period t ≤ H, taking as given the government’s policy in period t + 1 and the epidemiological
       state, the bond price schedule satisfies

                                             1
           qt (µt+1 (µt , Lt ), Bt+1 ) =        {(δ + r )(1 − dt+1 ) + [1 − δ + κ (δ + r )dt+1 ] qt+1 (µt +2 , Bt+2 )} .
                                            1+r


                                                                          36
 (iv) The evolution of the epidemiological state µt +1 (µt , Bt ) is consistent with the SIR dynamics (6)-(9)
      and Lt = Lt (µt , Bt ).



B     Computational Algorithm

In this appendix, we first augment the original problem with taste shocks on borrowing B0 , following
Dvorkin, Sanchez, Sapriza, and Yurdagul (2018) and Gordon (2019). We then describe our computation
algorithm, which works backwards for value function and policy functions.
    The taste shock on B0 helps stability and convergence of our model with long-term defaultable debt.
The set of B is a discrete set and each element in the set is associated with an i.i.d taste shock distributed
Gumbel (Extreme Value Type I). Let the parameter control taste shocks be ρ B .


Model with taste shocks In this appendix, we switch the state from (µSt , µtI , µtR ) in the main text to
(µSt , µtI , µtD ). Given that the sum of the four group is always 1, µSt + µtI + µtR + µtD = 1, the two states are
equivalent. By abuse of notation, we use µt = (µSt , µtI , µtD ) as the SIR state. The government’s problem
becomes,
                    Wt (µt , Bt , Bt+1 ) = max u(ct ) − π D (µtI )µtI + βVt+1 (µt+1 (µt , Lt ), Bt+1 )                     (24)
                                              Lt ,dt

subject to the resource constraint and the SIR dynamics

                                { Bt+1 − [1 − δ + κ (δ + r )dt ] Bt } qt (µt+1 (µt , Lt ), Bt+1 ) − (δ + r )(1 − dt ) Bt
    ct = z̃φ(dt )(1 − Lt ) +                                                                                               (25)
                                                                       1 − µtD



                                                       µtx = πSI (1 − θLt )2 µSt µtI                                       (26)

                                                  µSt+1 = µSt − µtx                                                        (27)

                                                  µtI+1 = π I µtI + µtx                                                    (28)

                                                  µtD+1 = µtD + π D (µtI )µtI                                              (29)


Let the optimal default and lockdown choice be dt (µt , Bt , Bt+1 ) and Lt (µt , Bt , Bt+1 ). The choice probabili-
ties of Bt+1 are given by

                                                     exp((Wt (µt , Bt , Bt+1 ) − W t (µt , Bt ))/ρ B )
                       Pr ( Bt+1 |µt , Bt ) =
                                                 ∑ B̃t+1 exp((Wt (µt , Bt , B̃t+1 ) − W t (µt , Bt ))/ρ B )




                                                                   37
where W is the maximum value W t (µt , Bt ) = maxBt+1 Wt (µt , Bt , Bt+1 ). The expected value V satisfies
                                                               (                                                  )
                                                                          Wt (µt , Bt , Bt+1 ) − W t (µt , Bt )
                    Vt (µt , Bt ) = W t (µt , Bt ) + ρ B log       ∑                       ρB
                                                                                                                      .
                                                                   Bt+1


We can write the bond price schedule for any choice of ( Lt , Bt+1 ) under state µt as,

                                    1
             qt (µt+1 , Bt+1 ) =
                                   1+r   ∑ Pr ( Bt+2 |µt+1 , Bt+1 ) ×
                                         Bt+2

                         {(δ + r )(1 − d∗t+1 ) + [1 − δ + κ (δ + r )d∗t+1 ] qt+1 (µt+2 (µt+1 , L∗t+1 ), Bt+2 )}


where d∗t+1 = dt+1 (µt+1 , Bt+1 , Bt+2 ) and L∗t+1 = Lt+1 (µt+1 , Bt+1 , Bt+2 ).


Computational algorithm Note that at period t, the state of the deceased µtD only affects the period t
equilibrium through the per-capita debt burden Bt /(1 − µtD ) and per-capita borrowings Bt+1 /(1 − µtD ).
In particular, µtD does not affect current or future losses of death. At our benchmark SIR parameters, the
eventual death is less than 1% without lockdowns. Hence its impact on per-capita debt is very small.
Therefore, we approximate the original problem with a simplified problem with SIR state only includes
(µSt , µtI ) and rewrite the resource constraint as


   ct = z̃φ(dt )(1 − Lt ) + { Bt+1 − [1 − δ + κ (δ + r )dt ] Bt } qt (µt+1 (µt , Lt ), Bt+1 ) − (δ + r )(1 − dt ) Bt .    (30)


We verified that the simplified problem approximates well the original one. This simplification, however,
reduces the state space by one variable and saves computation time dramatically.
    We first solve the stationary equilibrium, which is both the solution for the pre-epidemic equilibrium
and the solution after introducing of vaccine. We then solve backwards the equilibrium under SIR.

   1. Stationary equilibrium

        (a) Guess value function V s ( B) and bond price schedule qs ( B0 ).

       (b) For each ( B, B0 ), solve for the optimal default decision. We find the solution d∗ of the following
            first order condition of partial default,


                                                −z̃φ0 (d) = (δ + r ) B 1 − κqs ( B0 ) .
                                                                                    



            Evaluate the consumption per capita c from the resource constraint


                             c = z̃φ(d) + B0 − [1 − δ + κ (δ + r )d] B qs ( B0 ) − (δ + r )(1 − d) B
                                         


                                                               38
         at three default choices, d = {d∗ , 0, 1}, and pick the default value that gives the highest con-
         sumption per capita under ( B, B0 ). Let the optimal default be ds ( B, B0 ) and the corresponding
         consumption be cs ( B, B0 ).

   (c) Calculate the value under ( B, B0 ) and the optimal default ds ( B, B0 ). We then evaluate the value
         of W s ( B, B0 ) = u(cs ( B, B0 )) + βV s ( B0 ).

   (d) Calculate the probability of each B0

                                                                                         s
                                                                 exp((W s ( B, B0 ) − W ( B))/ρ B )
                                          Pr B0 | B =
                                                   
                                                                                             s            ,
                                                              ∑ B̃0 exp((W s ( B, B̃0 ) − W ( B))/ρ B )

                                                                  s
       and the maximum of W s for each b, W ( B) = maxB0 W s ( B, B0 ).
                                                                       s
                                    s                    W s ( B,B0 )−W ( B)
                                                   n                         o
   (e) Update V s ( B), V s ( B) = W ( B) + ρ B log ∑ B0          ρB           .

    (f) Update the bond price schedule qs ( B0 )

                        1
          qs B0 =              ∑00 Pr     B00 | B0        (δ + r )(1 − d( B0 , B00 )) + 1 − δ + κ (δ + r )ds ( B0 , B00 ) qs B00
                                                                                                                            
                       1+r      B


   (g) Check whether V s and qs converge. If so, we are done. Otherwise go back to step 1(a).

2. Period H problem (with vaccine)
                                                                                        0 /π of the
  In period H a vaccine is available. All susceptible individuals recover, a fraction π D   I

  infected dies, while the rest recover.
                                                                  0 
                                                                  πD
                                                                                           
                                                                         I       s
                           WH (µ H , BH , BH +1 ) = max u(c H ) −      µ H χ + βV ( BH +1 )                                     (31)
                                                     dH           πI

                                                                                   {0}             {0}
  subject to the resource constraint (30). Let the solution be VH (µ H , BH ), d H (µ H , BH , BH +1 ), Pr {0} ( BH +1 |µ H , BH ),
   {0}                              {0}
  q H (µ H +1 , BH +1 ), and L H (µ H , BH , BH +1 ) = 0.

3. Period t < H problem

                       {0}
   (a) Start with qt+1 (µt+2 , Bt+2 ), d0t+1 (µt+1 , Bt+1 , Bt+2 ), L0t+1 (µt+1 , Bt+1 , Bt+2 ), Pr {0} ( Bt+2 |µt+1 , Bt+1 ),
                {0}
         and Vt+1 (µt+1 , Bt+1 ).
                                          {1}
   (b) Construct bond price qt                  (µt+1 , Bt+1 )

                                                    1                                    n
                                                        ∑
                       {1}                                                                              {0}
                      qt     (µt+1 , Bt+1 ) =                Pr {0} ( Bt+2 |µt+1 , Bt+1 ) (δ + r )(1 − dt+1 )
                                                  1 + r Bt+2
                                                    h                         i                              o
                                                                          {0}    {0}                {0}
                                                  + 1 − δ + κ (δ + r )dt+1 qt+1 µt+2 (µt+1 , Lt+1 ), Bt+2


                                                                      39
                   {0}       {0}                                  {0}        {0}
          where dt+1 = dt+1 (µt+1 , Bt+1 , Bt+2 ) and Lt+1 = Lt+1 (µt+1 , Bt+1 , Bt+2 ).

       (c) Solve for the optimal default and lockdown policy for each Bt and Bt+1

                                                                                              {0}
                         Wt (µt , Bt , Bt+1 ) = max u(ct ) − π D (µtI )µtI χ + βVt+1 (µt+1 (µt , Lt ), Bt+1 )
                                                 Lt ,dt


          subject to the resource constraint (30) and the SIR dynamics. Specifically, we search over the
          grid of Lt to find the maximum value. For each (µt , Bt , Bt+1 , Lt ), we find the solution d∗ to the
          following equation,

                                                                    h                                 i
                                                                           {1}
                          −z̃φ0 (d)(1 − Lt )(1 − µtD ) = (δ + r ) Bt 1 − κqt (µt+1 (µt , Lt ), Bt+1 )


          We pick the default value of {d∗ , 0, 1}, which has the highest consumption per capita un-
                                                                                                                {1}
          der (µt , Bt , Bt+1 , Lt ). Let the optimal default and lockdown choice be dt (µt , Bt , Bt+1 ) and
            {1}
          Lt (µt , Bt , Bt+1 ).

      (d) Calculate the probability of choosing each Bt+1

                                                              exp((Wt (µt , Bt , Bt+1 ) − W t (µt , Bt ))/ρ B )
                           Pr {1} ( Bt+1 |µt , Bt ) =
                                                          ∑ B̃t+1 exp((Wt (µt , Bt , B̃t+1 ) − W t (µt , Bt ))/ρ B )

          with the maximum value given by W t (µt , Bt ) = maxBt+1 Wt (µt , Bt , Bt+1 ).

       (e) Calculate the period t’s value and bond price function for t − 1
                                                                        (                                                  )
                                                                                   Wt (µt , Bt , Bt+1 ) − W t (µt , Bt )
                                                                            ∑
                           {1}
                         Vt (µt , Bt )   = W t (µt , Bt ) + ρ B log
                                                                            Bt+1
                                                                                                    ρB


       (f) Assign the functions with superscript {1} to functions with superscript {0}. Go back to step
          3(a) until t = 0.



C    Value Function and Bond Price Schedule

We plot the period-0 value function and bond price schedule in Figure 7.



D    Baseline Dynamics under Optimal Lockdown: extended weeks

This section reports extended time paths for optimal lockdowns, consumption and output per capita,
partial default, spreads, and debt for the baseline economy. The epidemic gives rise to long lasting debt


                                                                 40
                       (a) Bond Price Schedule                  (b) Value Function

                           Figure 7: Bond Price Schedule and Value Function



crises with defaults happening well past the resolution of the health crisis. Lockdowns end 48 periods
after the epidemic outbreak, while partial defaults end much later, 172 periods after.




                                                   41
60                                                     1

50                                                   0.9          Consumption

40                                                   0.8

30                                                   0.7

20                                                   0.6

10                                                   0.5         Output

 0                                                   0.4
     0      50     100         150   200                   0     50        100      150   200
                  Weeks                                                   Weeks

         (a) Lockdown Intensity                             (b) Consumption and Output

60                                                    14

50                                                    12

                                                      10
40
                                                       8
30
                                                       6
20
                                                       4

10                                                     2

 0                                                     0
     0      50     100         150   200                   0     50        100      150   200
                  Weeks                                                   Weeks

           (c) Partial Default                                         (d) Spread

                          35




                          30




                          25
                               0     50       100          150   200
                                             Weeks

                                           (e) Debt

     Figure 8: Dynamics under Optimal Lockdown: Extended Weeks




                                             42
