NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COMMON PRACTICE:
SPILLOVERS FROM MEDICARE ON PRIVATE HEALTH CARE
Michael L. Barnett
Andrew Olenski
Adam Sacarny
Working Paper 27270
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27270

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2020

We thank Loren Baker, Sarah Berkson, Janet Currie, Amy Finkelstein, Tal Gross, Kate Ho,
Amanda Kowalski, Neale Mahoney, Maxim Pinkovskiy, Brad Shapiro, and participants in
presentations at the Columbia Health Economics and Policy Seminar, Princeton University
Center for Health and Wellbeing, ASSA/AEA HERO sessions, and AHRQ for their helpful
comments. We gratefully acknowledge support from the Laura and John Arnold Foundation (all),
National Institute on Aging K23 AG058806-01 (Barnett), and National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship (Olenski). We acknowledge the assistance of the Health Care Cost
Institute and its data contributors, Aetna, Humana, and UnitedHealthcare, in providing the claims
data analyzed in this study. The authors report no relevant financial conflicts of interest; Barnett
and Sacarny assisted the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services in conducting the original
trial this research analyzes, but were not compensated for this work. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Michael L. Barnett, Andrew Olenski, and Adam Sacarny. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Common Practice: Spillovers from Medicare on Private Health Care
Michael L. Barnett, Andrew Olenski, and Adam Sacarny
NBER Working Paper No. 27270
May 2020
JEL No. H44,I13,I18
ABSTRACT
Efforts to raise the productivity of the U.S. health care system have proceeded slowly. One
potential explanation is the fragmentation of payment across insurers. Each insurer's efforts to
improve care could influence how doctors practice medicine for other insurers, leading to
unvalued externalities. We study these externalities by examining the unintended private
insurance spillovers of a public insurer's intervention. In 2015, Medicare randomized warning
letters to doctors to curtail overuse of antipsychotics. Even though the letters did not mention
private insurance, they reduced prescribing to privately insured patients by 12%. The reduction to
Medicare patients was 17%, and we cannot reject one-for-one spillovers. The results imply that
physicians experience large costs to setting insurer-specific medical practice styles. If private
insurers conducted a similar intervention with their own limited information, they would stem
half as much prescribing as a social planner able and willing to better target the intervention. Our
findings establish that insurers can affect health care well outside their direct purview, raising the
question of how to match their private objectives with their scope of influence.
Michael L. Barnett
Department of Health Policy and Management
Harvard School of Public Health
677 Huntington Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
mlbarnett@gmail.com

Adam Sacarny
Mailman School of Public Health
Columbia University
722 West 168th Street
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
ajs2102@columbia.edu

Andrew Olenski
Department of Economics
Columbia University
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
andrew.olenski@columbia.edu

A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at AEARCTR-0003209

1

Introduction

With nearly 20% of GDP at stake, the U.S. health care system plays an outsize role in the performance of the economy at large. Yet in many cases, productivity-raising innovations in the health
care system proceed slowly. Classic examples of delayed adoption include low-cost, evidence-based
treatments such as aspirin and beta-blockers; health information technology in the form of electronic
medical records; and reforms to health payment mechanisms that favor value over volume (Cutler,
2011; Lee, McCullough and Town, 2013; Skinner and Staiger, 2015). One potential root of this
phenomenon is the fragmented system that pays for care. Health care providers contract with an
array of government and private insurers. When insurers try to raise the performance of health care
providers, their efforts may have externalities that accrue to other insurers. For example, if one
insurer tries to change how physicians treat its beneficiaries, those physicians may change how they
treat all patients (Baker, 2003; Glied and Graff Zivin, 2002). As a result, fragmentation may yield
weak incentives for insurers to invest in improving performance relative to the socially optimal level
(Glazer and McGuire, 2002; Frandsen, Powell and Rebitzer, 2019). Whether such external impacts
occur in practice remains an open question.
This study provides evidence on how physicians behave when contracting with multiple health
insurers. We show that one insurer’s investment to improve quality of care generated large, unintended spillovers onto the health care covered by other insurers. Our research exploits a randomized
controlled trial conducted by Medicare, the largest insurer in the U.S., which sent warning letters to
doctors who heavily prescribed the most popular antipsychotic medication, quetiapine. We consider
the external effects of these letters on private insurance patients covered by three of the five largest
insurers in the U.S. Those patients were not mentioned in, nor were they the focus of, the Medicare
letter.
Figure 1 shows our central result: Medicare’s investment in stemming use of antipsychotics
also reduced their use outside Medicare. The figure shows that following the intervention, treated
doctors rapidly curtailed their prescribing of the antipsychotic in Medicare and private insurance
compared to doctors in the control group. Treated physicians cut back by 17% in Medicare and 12%
in private insurance. We cannot reject that the spillover effect was the same as the direct effect.
We next probe a potential mechanism that led Medicare’s intervention to have such a large

1

and unintended effect on other care. We explore whether the intervention encouraged physicians
to check clinical guidelines and update their beliefs about the returns to antipsychotics. Changes
in beliefs could result in spillover effects if physicians draw upon these primitives when they treat
all of their patients. Yet our findings are inconsistent with this mechanism in two ways. First,
we look at effects on prescribing of other antipsychotics with similar costs and benefits as the one
mentioned in the letter. Updated beliefs should apply to these drugs as well. However, there are no
signs that physicians reduced their prescribing of these drugs. Second, we test whether physicians
tailored their cutbacks to patients who were observably (to the econometrician) poor candidates for
antipsychotics. If the letters prompted physicians to learn from clinical guidelines, we would expect
the reductions to be concentrated here. In contrast, we find that cutbacks occurred irrespective of
the patient’s appropriateness.
These patterns suggest an alternative mechanism: the letters raised the implicit costs of prescribing, resulting in a blunt change in prescribing. That we further observe a spillover to private
insurance suggests that physicians are unable or unwilling to distinguish insurers when determining
how they treat patients. This suggests that doctors face additional costs to customizing treatment
decisions to the insurer paying for the care. The result implies that when physicians develop styles
of practicing medicine, those styles are not insurer-specific.
Next, we show evidence that physicians used a more clinically salient patient attribute to tailor
their reductions: age. In private insurance, large prescribing cutbacks occurred for patients old
enough to be eligible for Medicare within the next decade. Reductions to younger people were
economically small and statistically indistinguishable from zero. If doctors use age as a proxy
for Medicare coverage, they can more closely concentrate their reductions on Medicare patients
while keeping their treatment approaches agnostic to insurer. Spillovers onto private insurance
remain large because the privately insured recipients of antipsychotics tend to be older and Medicare
recipients tend to be younger.
Rich data on patient health outcomes provides evidence on the welfare impacts of the intervention and its spillovers. We consider whether the respurce savings from reduced prescribing were
offset by patient harms. We fail to detect adverse effects on patients in the form of emergency
department visits and hospital stays. Doctors may have used private information to appropriately
cut back prescribing to patients who appeared to be good candidates to the econometrician. Al2

ternatively, doctors could have prescribed poorly to begin with, and their cutbacks could rectify
prescribing that did not benefit patients in the first place.
Finally, as a window into how the fragmented payment system discourages similar interventions
with spillovers, we test what would happen if private insurers conducted one. We simulate a private
insurance intervention with the same effects as the one Medicare conducted and select doctors who
were outliers in private insurance data. The simulation shows that these doctors are typically not
high prescribers in overall prescribing. If private insurers intervened with the same intervention
size as Medicare, they would stem half as much prescribing as a social planner that was able and
willing to target the overall outliers. Private insurers’ limited information on outside prescribing,
as well as their objectives that ignore patients on other plans, serve to reduce the social return on
the intervention.
Our study builds on a theoretical and empirical literature on physician-insurer contracting.
Classically, the literature views physician behavior through a principal-agent framework (see e.g.
Pauly, 1980). A key variant of this model considers physicians contracting with multiple insurers
at once. These physicians are called common agents of insurers. This model dates to Bernheim and
Whinston (1986), who extended the principal-agent problem to contexts in which an agent contracts
with several principals who do not necessarily coordinate. Glazer and McGuire (2002) and Frandsen,
Powell and Rebitzer (2019) consider common agency in health care. They set out conditions under
which insurer principals can free ride on each other (or fail to coordinate) in contracting with health
care provider agents. The result is the under-provision of performance-improving investments.
The Medicare intervention provides a unique opportunity to study common agency in health care
empirically. First, it was targeted at prescribing covered by Medicare – the letter did not mention
private insurance prescribing, and Medicare did not track or have access to the outside data. Thus,
changes in private insurance prescribing did not trivially derive from Medicare using its leverage
to influence health care covered by other insurers. Second, the direct effects of the intervention
on Medicare prescribing were large. In turn, it is a priori plausible that the intervention led to
detectable spillovers. Large direct effects make it more plausible that a detected spillover is real
and that a failure to detect a spillover reflects a true null.
To our knowledge, this study is the first to use a randomized intervention to show that one
insurer’s actions to change physician practice styles can affect the health care that physicians provide
3

to patients covered by other insurers. We review the related research on doctors below, though
these studies do not exploit random variation. The randomized treatment in the current study
eliminates concerns about endogeneity. This is particularly useful for evaluating spillovers. When
identification is questionable, an effect on a second-order outcome like a spillover could represent a
failure to address endogeneity rather than a true external impact.
Earlier literature on managed care plans generally found spillovers, but the non-random growth
of managed care threatened causal inference (c.f. Baker, 2003). In the cross-section, Glied and
Graff Zivin (2002) show that physicians who treat more managed care patients utilize a more
judicious practice style for all of their patients. Two quasi-experimental studies have looked at
cross-insurer spillovers, though not for doctors. Baicker, Chernew and Robbins (2013) find that
Medicare managed care lowers the intensity of hospital treatment for the privately insured while
Grabowski, Gruber and Angelelli (2008) show that nursing homes provide common levels of quality
across self-pay and Medicaid patients. An adjacent literature has studied the effects of one insurer’s
payment changes on other insurers. Private insurers mimic Medicare’s payment systems and relative
prices for services (Clemens, Gottlieb and Molnár, 2015; Clemens and Gottlieb, 2017); a randomized
Medicare hospital payment reform to lower costs of hip and knee replacements had similar effects on
the (private) Medicare Advantage program, which was not a part of this reform (Wilcock et al., 2020;
Einav et al., 2020). Appointment availability and utilization in one insurer depends on the payment
rates of others, suggesting that spillovers can operate through demand channels (Garthwaite, 2012;
Glied and Hong, 2018; Richards and Tello-Trillo, 2019).
Our findings speak to the nature of physician practice styles. Much of the research on practice
styles derives from the health care variations literature, which has found large regional differences
in care delivery. This work tends to find little or negative associations between cost and outcomes
– suggestive of variations in productivity across regions (Baicker and Chandra, 2004). Regional
variations in practice patterns reflect decisions of health care practitioners in the regions, highlighting the importance of studying practice styles at the physician level as well. Doctors tend to have
idiosyncratic practice styles overall and for specific procedures like c-sections (Phelps and Mooney,
1993; Currie and MacLeod, 2017; Molitor, 2018; Cutler et al., 2019; Fadlon and Van Parys, 2020).
We view the Medicare intervention as a shock to physicians’ practice styles with respect to
psychiatric medications. Berndt et al. (2015) and Currie and MacLeod (2020) study prescribing of
4

psychiatric drugs and focus on variations in a physician’s concentration of prescribing (i.e. favoring
one drug in a class vs. distributing patients to many drugs in a class). In particular, Berndt
et al. (2015) find that psychiatrists tend to concentrate their prescribing on one or a handful of
antipsychotics. The extant economic literature on psychiatric prescribing has yet to show how
physicians tailor their practices to insurers. We find that the intervention changed practice styles
in Medicare and private insurance. The result suggests that doctors’ practice styles depend on the
characteristics of patients, rather than those of insurers.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe the health care context.
In Section 3 we describe the intervention. Section 4 reviews our conceptual model and econometric
approach. Section 5 presents our findings and Section 6 discusses them. Section 7 presents an
extension looking at the targeting of the intervention under limited information available to private
insurers. We conclude in Section 8.

2

Background

The complexity and uncertainty around the use of antipsychotics make these drugs excellent objects
of study for understanding physician practice styles. In this section, we provide background on
antipsychotics and how and why they are prescribed.

2.1

Approved Uses of Quetiapine and Other Antipsychotics

Quetiapine, the focus of this study, is the most commonly used antipsychotic medication in the
U.S. (Gallini, Donohue and Huskamp, 2013). Over 9 million quetiapine prescriptions were written
in 2015 (Nutt and Keating, 2018). Antipsychotics like quetiapine are widely used to treat serious
mental illness, most notably schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. This use is backed by an array of
randomized clinical trials demonstrating reductions, often dramatic, in psychiatric symptoms for
these patients. For example, a meta-analysis of antipsychotics for schizophrenia found that they
reduce the risk of relapse by 59% (Leucht et al., 2012).
Quetiapine has three FDA-approved indications: schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and, when
alongside an antidepressant, major depression (Food and Drug Administration, 2020a,b). Its key
alternatives are other antipsychotics, which fall into two classes. The dominant class is second-

5

generation or “atypical” antipsychotics, including quetiapine, risperidone (Risperdal), and aripiprazole (Abilify); these drugs displaced the earlier first-generation or “typical” medications like
haloperidol (Haldol) and fluphenazine (Prolixin) (Alexander et al., 2011). Most trials comparing
quetiapine with other antipsychotics have demonstrated comparable benefits across medications
(Meltzer, 2013). However, there are meaningful differences in the side effects of these medications,
making the match of patient to side effect profile the central task in selecting an antipsychotic. For
example, a physician might prescribe quetiapine to patients with serious mental illness and insomnia
because quetiapine leads to more pronounced sedation than other antipsychotics (Jibson, 2019). The
potential for life-threatening movement disorders is greater in first-generation antipsychotics compared to newer atypical drugs like quetiapine, so the literature generally suggests starting patients
on the newer medications (Meltzer, 2013).

2.2

Use of Antipsychotics Outside Approved Indications

A key aspect of antipsychotic prescribing practice styles is how physicians use the drugs within
and outside their FDA-approved indications. The latter phenomenon is called off-label prescribing;
there has been significant controversy over such prescribing of antipsychotics. The practice is legal
but insurers may refuse to cover the drugs. The central concern is that it could reflect use that is,
in expectation, harmful or unproductive because the manufacturer has not demonstrated clinical
efficacy and safety, the FDA’s standard for approval. However, off-label use could benefit patients
by allowing them to access treatments based on early evidence or when alternatives are limited.
We leverage the fact that off-label prescribing of antipsychotics has been the subject of intensive
study in randomized trials. We distinguish between on-label prescribing with excellent support in
trials (described in the prior section), off-label prescribing that has some support, and off-label
prescribing that trials suggest has little benefit or even causes harms. Two indications fall into the
intermediate category with some support: generalized anxiety disorder and major depression (when
used without an antidepressant). While trials show that quetiapine benefits these patients, it also
causes much more severe side effects than alternative medications like antidepressants. The FDA
cited these side effects when it denied adding these indications to quetiapine’s labeling (Food and
Drug Administration, 2009).
We next move to conditions for which quetiapine and other antipsychotics have small or even
6

negative expected benefits. Much of the attention around quetiapine has focused on treatment
of patients with dementia, especially those in nursing homes. This use elevates the risk of death
and a host of other adverse effects, prompting warnings from major medical specialty societies, the
FDA, and federal oversight agencies (American Psychiatric Association, 2016; Maglione et al., 2011;
American Geriatrics Society, 2019; OIG, HHS, 2011; Government Accountability Office, 2015). The
sedating effects of antipsychotics have led some practitioners to call the drugs “chemical restraints”
(Flamm, 2018). Yet no pharmaceutical is currently approved in the U.S. to treat behavioral symptoms of dementia. The recommended alternatives tend to involve modifying how caregivers interact
with patients, which can be labor-intensive for nursing homes or involve major commitments from
informal caregivers (Press and Alexander, 2018). Other common off-label uses include insomnia,
alcohol use disorder, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). There is very little evidence supporting the use of quetiapine for these indications (Maglione et al., 2011). Other options typically
exist to treat these conditions. Some of these do not involve medication, like cognitive behavioral
therapy for insomnia. Others involve different medication classes, like antidepressants for anxiety.

3

Intervention

The intervention was conducted by Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), the U.S.
Office of Evaluation Sciences, and academic researchers. It was part of a larger program to test
interventions informed by behavioral science to make prescribing safer in the Medicare program
(Sacarny, Yokum and Agrawal, 2017). It built on existing efforts by CMS to stem overuse of health
care in the Medicare program using letters and electronic communications. CMS communications
with providers tend to focus on comparing them to peers with the aim of encouraging them to
self-audit (eGlobalTech, 2017). To our knowledge, these programs had not been rigorously studied
prior to these efforts.
This CMS collaboration sought to test whether augmenting a peer comparison message with
language about negative consequences and penalties for prescribers could lead to improvements
in the quality of prescribing in Medicare. Randomized evaluations have found that letters that
emphasize penalties raise tax payment, but there is less evidence on using this language in health care
(Castro and Scartascini, 2015; Fellner, Sausgruber and Traxler, 2013). CMS chose high prescribers

7

of quetiapine as the target following a report by a federal oversight agency that found high rates
of questionable antipsychotic prescribing in Medicare as well as case reports of patients abusing
and reselling these drugs (Government Accountability Office, 2015; Klein-Schwartz, Schwartz and
Anderson, 2014; Cubał a and Springer, 2014).

3.1

Selection of Physicians

The study population was primary care physicians (PCPs, defined as physicians with a specialty
of general practice, family practice, or internal medicine) who were persistent outliers in their
prescribing of quetiapine relative to other PCPs in the same state.1 This class of physicians was
chosen for the study because they supplied a high volume of a powerful psychiatric medication yet
lacked intensive psychiatric training. Moreover, AstraZeneca was fined for marketing quetiapine to
PCPs, which regulators questioned because these physicians were less likely to treat patients with
serious mental illness (U.S. Department of Justice, 2010).
CMS analyzed Medicare prescription drug claims in 2013 and 2014. Only PCPs were included.
Those who reported additional specialization in psychiatry, as well as those with little quetiapine
prescribing (fewer than 10 drug dispenses in the year), were removed. CMS identified outliers based
on two measures of volume: 1) the number of quetiapine prescriptions filled at pharmacies and 2)
the number of quetiapine days across the filled prescriptions. Outlier thresholds for each state-yearmeasure were calculated as the 75th percentile plus 0.25 times the interquartile range of physicians
falling into the cell (Tukey, 1977). To be selected, a physician had to clear the thresholds for both
measures in 2013 and 2014. After excluding one who had died by the time of analysis, there were
N=5,055 such physicians, and they became the study population.
The outlier calculations did not adjust for differences across physicians in their patient populations and the suitability of patients for the antipsychotics. In addition, the calculations omitted
prescriptions to long-term care patients. Many of the excluded prescriptions were likely dispensed
to people with dementia where overuse is most severe. While these factors may have deteriorated
the targeting of the intervention, a corollary is that study physicians tended to treat patients who
were observably appropriate as well as questionable candidates for quetiapine – permitting the
econometrician to study effects on both populations. We include all quetiapine prescribing in our
1

For more details on the selection process, see the online supplement in Sacarny et al. (2018).

8

analyses.

3.2

Intervention

The treatment letter combined a peer comparison emphasizing social and professional norms with
penalty-focused language emphasizing the adverse consequences for physicians determined to be
improper prescribers (Appendix Figure A1). It stated that the physician was responsible for many
more quetiapine prescriptions than other PCPs in the same state. A bar graph displayed the
physician’s Medicare prescribing level in red and compared it to that of her average peer. The
subject line stated that the physician’s quetiapine prescribing was “under review by the Center
for Program Integrity” – the division of CMS responsible for stemming fraud, waste, and abuse in
Medicare. The text of the letter discussed the consequences of medically unjustified prescribing, like
restrictions on receiving payments from Medicare. It also indicated that physicians could expect
to receive future communications from CMS. The placebo intervention was a letter and pamphlet
discussing an unrelated Medicare provider enrollment regulation.
A random 50% of the 5,055 physicians were allocated to the treatment group and the remainder were allocated to the control group. The randomization procedure was pre-specified to reject
allocations that were very imbalanced (P < 0.4 on a test of distance between the treatment and
control groups on ex ante observed covariates); the first candidate randomization passed this test
and was accepted.
CMS sent the treatment and placebo letters to the respective study groups in April 2015. The
treatment group was also sent follow-up letters with updated prescribing data in August and October
2015. The control group was sent a clarification notice in June 2015 to address questions about the
placebo message. Neither message to the control group mentioned quetiapine or antipsychotics.

3.3

Prior Findings from Medicare Data

Two prior clinical studies have analyzed the effects of these letters on Medicare prescribing but have
not considered spillovers to patients outside Medicare. The intervention caused PCPs to become
much less intensive prescribers of quetiapine in Medicare, a finding we closely replicate in this study
(Sacarny et al., 2018). Tracking prior Medicare patients of the PCPs, cutbacks were larger for
those who appeared to be poorer candidates for the drug; there were no detected patient harms
9

as measured by mortality or hospital use. A subsequent analysis failed to detect peer effects on
prescribers who worked with study PCPs (Sacarny, Olenski and Barnett, 2019). In this study, we
access prescribing covered by the three HCCI insurers to focus on private insurance patients who
were not tracked in the earlier works.

4

Data and Methods

4.1

Analytic Framework

Our main analyses are at the level of the physician. The estimating equations all take the form:

yin = αn + β n · T REATi + Xin Γn + εni

(1)

where i indexes physicians and n ∈ {P, M } indexes the two sources of insurance in the data (private
insurance or Medicare). yin denotes an outcome of interest, T REATi indicates the assignment of
the physician to the treatment or control group, and Xin is a set of statistical controls. Due to the
random assignment, there is no need for controls to identify the treatment effect. However, covariates
can improve precision when they have explanatory power and thus reduce residual variation in the
regression. Given the strong autocorrelation in prescribing volume, we pre-specified the inclusion
of one control, the lagged outcome, in all analyses. We do not control for any other covariates.
For each outcome yin , we estimate two sets of regressions: one for privately insured patients and
one for Medicare patients. We convert our estimates of β n to percent effects by dividing them by
the mean for the control group. To assess the magnitude of spillovers, we conduct tests of equality
of the percent effects between the two populations, i.e.

β C/ȳ C,control

= β M/ȳM,control .

An additional set of analyses tracks a cohort of baseline patients who received quetiapine from
study physicians in the year prior to the intervention. These analyses are at the patient level and
take the form:

n
yj = αn + β n · T REATi(j) + Xi(j)
Γn + Zj ∆n + j

j ∈ Jn

(2)

where j indexes patients and i(j) is the physician from which patient j received quetiapine in the
baseline period. We run separate regressions for privately insured patients (j ∈ J C ) and patients
10

insured under Medicare (j ∈ J M ). We denote physician-level statistical controls by Xin and patientlevel controls by Zj . We pre-specified one patient level control Zj and one physician-level control
Xin : the patient’s lagged outcome and the physician’s lagged outcome, respectively. For example,
when we study receipt of quetiapine for privately insured patients, we control for the volume of
quetiapine received by the patient in the baseline period as well as the volume of prescribing of the
patient’s physician to private insurance during that period.
In patient analyses, we cluster all standard errors at the physician level to match the level of
randomization. We also convert our estimates of β n to percent changes relative to the mean for the
control group patients in J n and test for equality in percent effects between the private insurance
and Medicare populations.

4.2

Data

Our data come from the Health Care Cost Institute (HCCI), an independent, non-profit entity
that collects claims from three of the five largest health insurers in the U.S.: Aetna, Humana, and
UnitedHealthCare. Our analyses use data from 2013-2017. Unless otherwise stated, we measure all
outcomes from the day after letters were mailed through the end of the data period, i.e. April 21,
2015 through December 31, 2017.2
We track prescribing using the HCCI pharmacy claims file. Each record in the file is an instance
of a pharmacy filling and dispensing a prescription. Prescriptions that are never filled do not enter
the data. Prescriptions with refills enter the data each time the patient fills them. We link records
to the IBM Micromedex RED BOOK database to identify the active ingredient (e.g. quetiapine)
and calculate the milligrams of the drug that were dispensed. Data on inpatient, outpatient, and
physician encounters provides diagnosis codes to classify the appropriateness of prescribing. We
also use this data to assess patients’ health care utilization.
HCCI data includes claims for enrollees who receive coverage through private insurance (employersponsored insurance and individual insurance market products) and Medicare Advantage. We remove private insurance patients age 65 and up since they are likely covered by Medicare. In 2017,
the data includes 27.2 million privately insured lives with prescription drug coverage and 7.1 million
2

We pre-specified that the outcome period would end on December 31, 2016, but later received 2017 data and
modified the outcome period to include it. The effect on prescribing was essentially identical with the shorter outcome
period (Appendix Table A1).

11

Medicare covered lives with drug coverage. The availability of claims for both Medicare Advantage
and private insurance patients allows us to capture both direct and spillover effects side-by-side.

4.3

Classifying the Appropriateness of Prescribing

To provide a sense of how physicians responded to the letter and whether these responses were
likely to be welfare-improving, we consider patients’ appropriateness for antipsychotics using their
observable characteristics. We develop a classification methodology based on clinical literature
(Maglione et al., 2011; Painter et al., 2017; American Psychiatric Association, 2016; American
Geriatrics Society, 2019). We use diagnoses from the baseline and outcome periods to classify
patients. Appendix Section A provides more detail on our approach.
The algorithm classifies patients into four mutually exclusive and exhaustive categories. Patients
who match multiple categories are assigned to the one listed first. Guideline-concordant patients
appear to be receiving quetiapine consistent with FDA approvals. These patients have bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or, if they are also taking an antidepressant, major depression. Intermediate
evidence patients have a condition that the drug may effectively treat according to the literature,
though the indication is not FDA-approved: generalized anxiety disorder or, if they are not taking
an antidepressant, major depression. Low-value candidates appear to be receiving quetiapine for
unapproved indications and evidence suggests it is unlikely to help them or may be harmful. The
key low-value condition in Medicare is dementia; the other conditions in this category are insomnia, PTSD, obsessive-compulsive disorder, personality disorders, eating disorders, and alcohol use
disorder. Unknown patients have no diagnoses in the above categories or are under age 18 (given
the differing guidelines for pediatric use).

4.4

Analysis Sample and Descriptive Statistics

The CMS intervention included 5,055 physicians, all of whom had large Medicare patient panels
on antipsychotics by construction. The vast majority of these physicians had contact with the
HCCI insurers: over 99% had at least one prescription of any drug covered during the one year preintervention period. Table 1 provides summary statistics on the study physicians. As expected given
the randomization, we found that pre-intervention outcomes were balanced between the treated and
control groups (P =0.32). The sample is 18% female; study physicians mostly specialized in family
12

medicine (48%) and internal medicine (48%) with a smaller share classifying themselves as general
practitioners (4%). Reflecting the CMS inclusion criteria of non-psychiatrist PCPs, less than 1% of
the sample had any psychiatric specialization (including secondary specializations).
While the physicians were high-volume quetiapine prescribers in the overall Medicare program
by design of the study, their volumes were often less extreme in the HCCI data. In the year prior
to the intervention, 42% had no quetiapine prescribing to Medicare Advantage patients and 74%
had no private insurance quetiapine prescribing. The low volume for some physicians occurs partly
because HCCI data does not include patients on Medicare with standalone prescription drug plans.
It also reflects variations in the market share of the HCCI contributors in private insurance and
Medicare Advantage, since Blue Cross and Blue Shield insurers that dominate some markets do not
participate in the version we access.
Patient-level analyses use a second sample, the baseline patients of the physicians. We define this
group as the patients who received quetiapine from study physicians in the one year pre-intervention
period. We omit patients who were not still covered when the study began, switched between private
insurance and Medicare, or received quetiapine from more than one study physician (see Appendix
Section B). Appendix Table A2 provides summary statistics on the 9,364 baseline patients. As
expected, pre-intervention characteristics are balanced between treatment and control (P =0.23 and
0.70 for private insurance and Medicare, respectively). The private insurance patients tend to be
much younger than Medicare patients, but there is also meaningful overlap in the age distributions.
Both groups have a substantial mass of patients age 45-64 – just over one-half in private insurance
and just under one-third in Medicare.
We find that off-label use of quetiapine is quite common: in the privately insured population,
just half of private insurance patients had diagnoses that matched FDA guidelines for prescribing
(guideline-concordant). One in eight lacked a clear indication for quetiapine but had off-label
diagnoses for which quetiapine could carry benefit (intermediate evidence); one in six had diagnoses
for which quetiapine has little benefit or is even harmful (low-value), and one in five had no relevant
diagnoses at all. Patterns were similar for Medicare patients although more patients were guidelineconcordant and low-value candidates while fewer were in the intermediate and unknown categories.

13

4.5

Trial Registration and Analysis Plan

The original trial with CMS was registered on ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02467933) and the AEA
Social Science Registry (AEARCTR-0000729). We pre-registered these secondary analyses on the
AEA Social Science Registry (AEARCTR-0003209) and archived a pre-specified analysis plan prior
to viewing any HCCI data. The analysis plan can be accessed from the registry website. We note
deviations from the analysis plan in the text.
The pre-specified primary outcome of the study is the amount of quetiapine supplied by the
physician, as measured by the days supply on the prescription fills. The analysis plan pre-specified
a host of secondary outcomes, all of which are presented in Section 5 or Appendix Section E.

5

Results

5.1

Effects on Prescribing Volume

Figure 1 presents an unadjusted time series of quetiapine prescribing by treatment and control
physicians. To visualize direct and spillover effects, the upper area plots Medicare prescribing and
the lower area plots private insurance prescribing (the primary outcome). The plot uses a log scale on
its y-axis to display effects in percent terms to facilitate comparisons between Medicare and private
insurance. Arrowheads denote when treatment letters were mailed. Relative to control physicians,
treatment physicians reduced their private insurance and Medicare prescribing substantially after
the letters were sent. These reductions persist through the end of the outcome period.
Table 2 reports estimates from equation (1) for the primary outcome and related secondary
outcomes. Consistent with the time series plot, the intervention caused study physicians to cut
back prescribing to private insurance and Medicare patients in nearly equal measure. Specifically,
the intervention caused physicians to reduce the days of quetiapine supplied to private insurance
patients over the outcome period by 24.5 days on a control group mean of 209.5 days, or 11.7%.
For Medicare, the reduction was 183.6 days on a control mean of 1,094.5 days, or 16.8%. We are
unable to reject that these percent effects are equal – i.e., we cannot reject one-for-one spillovers
(P =0.34).
These findings are highly robust to alternative measures of prescribing (Appendix Table A1).

14

Impacts are similar for fills (ignoring the durations of the prescriptions), costs (the charge the insurer
allowed for the fill), milligrams, and counts of unique patients; effects on costs and unique patients
are more imprecisely measured on the private insurance side.3 Taken together, the results indicate
that prescribing mainly fell through a reduction in the number of fills to patients, and not simply
because patients filled the same number of prescriptions but with shorter durations or at lower
doses. Physicians cut back the size of their patient panels on quetiapine.
Table 2 next splits prescribing into fills from new prescriptions and refills. New fills require the
physician to take action by writing a new script. They could respond rapidly due to the intervention.
In contrast, patients can receive refills from prior scripts until they exhaust them (unless physicians
take the unusual action of revoking them). Refills could thus respond slowly. As expected, the
percent reductions are greater when focusing on new fills: the decline is 17.8% for private insurance
and 20.2% for Medicare. In the long run, reductions are also expected for refills – if physicians
slow their new prescribing, refills on those scripts will also decline after a lag. Indeed, refills fall
but the magnitudes are smaller and are only statistically significant for Medicare (7.3% for private
insurance and 14.7% for Medicare).4

5.2

Effects on Prescribing of Other Drugs

We next consider prescribing of other drugs, including antipsychotics and other psychiatric medications (Appendix Table A3 lists all included medications). Effects on prescribing of other antipsychotics are ex ante ambiguous. Given the similarities between these drugs and quetiapine,
prescribing could rise if physicians seek to game the metric of quetiapine announced in the letter.
Prescribing could also decline if physicians glean new clinical information from the letter about
antipsychotics in general. Regardless, we fail to find any meaningful signs of such a shift. The final
outcome of Table 2 adds together prescribing of quetiapine with other drugs in the same class and
earlier antipsychotic medications. Absolute effects are slightly larger in magnitude for this outcome,
inconsistent with substituting patients to similar drugs. Confirming this result, we find no statisti3

Effects on costs are large in magnitude but, for private insurance, are only significant when the outcome is logged
(which was not pre-specified). This imprecision is partly the result of introducing variations in price which come from
whether the drug is branded and/or extended-release.
4
We identify new fills and refills using the refill flag on the claim. The analysis plan pre-specified using whether
the fill was the first for the patient-prescriber in the last year. This approach tended to mis-classify fills because
patients frequently churned off coverage. Appendix E reports those results for completeness.

15

cally significant changes in prescribing of other drugs in quetiapine’s class nor in prescribing of the
earlier class (Appendix Table A4).
Given the off-label use of quetiapine to treat conditions for which other psychiatric medications
are indicated, we also study prescribing of other drugs that are approved for those conditions:
benzodiazepines, which are frequently used to treat anxiety and insomnia; antidepressants, which
can treat depression and a variety of other mental health issues; and non-benzodiazepine insomnia
medications. Of the three drug classes across the two insurers, we detect a significant effect only on
private insurance antidepressant prescribing, which increased 4.5%. While such substitution could
benefit patients, the signal of this result is weakened by our failure to detect it in Medicare; we also
fail to detect this substitution in the patient-level analyses (Appendix Table A10).

5.3

Effects on Prescribing to Patient Subgroups

We next study effects on prescribing to patient age and appropriateness subgroups. These outcomes
help to better describe the marginal prescription curtailed by the intervention.

Age Table 3 shows effects on prescribing to varying patient age groups. Study physicians tend to
prescribe to older privately insured patients. Among control arm physicians, volume monotonically
increases in age band. Point estimates also become monotonically more negative with patient age.
Reductions are only statistically significant to privately insured patients age 55-64, the decade of life
before Medicare take-up becomes nearly universal. Cutbacks to this age range were 22.7%. Figure 2
visualizes this result. It presents estimates for three age groups (0-44, 45-54, and 55-64) that roughly
divide prescribing volume into thirds. There is a clear monotone path of the point estimates, with
a large and statistically significant effect only for the oldest private insurance age band. A similar
path of effects holds for Medicare prescribing, though the age distribution is shifted to the right.
These patterns show that spillovers onto private insurance were concentrated on patients who were
closest to the Medicare age range.

Appropriateness Next, to build evidence on whether the marginal prescription was likely to have
benefited the patient, we study effects on prescribing to patients of varying observable appropriateness (Table 4 and Figure 3). We find little relationship between the magnitude of the point estimate

16

and appropriateness. While the intervention significantly reduced private insurance prescribing to
likely good (guideline-concordant) candidates for the drug, point estimates were similar for low-value
candidates, though not significant. Given the smaller prescribing volumes and imprecise estimates
for some of the subgroups on the privately insured side, Medicare effects help to assess whether
physicians tailored their cutbacks to observably appropriate or inappropriate patients. In Medicare,
the effects are nearly identical across the four appropriateness groups: reductions are all 17-18% and
statistically significant. Percent effects are never statistically significantly different between private
insurance and Medicare. Thus in percent terms, the intervention appears to curtail prescribing by
similar magnitudes regardless of whether patients are observably indicated for quetiapine.

5.4

Effects on Patients

In order to study patient health outcomes, we now estimate equation (2) for a baseline cohort of
patients who received quetiapine from study physicians in the pre-intervention period. In Table
5, we first replicate physician-level findings for these patients. These outcomes count prescriptions
received from all physicians, not just the original study physicians, and so they are inclusive of any
potential substitution to other prescribers. As expected, private insurance patients experienced a
9% decrease in receipt of quetiapine due to the letter; reductions are similar when we count all
antipsychotics, not just quetiapine, showing that patients did not simply substitute away to other
drugs. These effect estimates are statistically significant at the 10%, but not 5%, level. A subgroup
analysis shows reductions for patients who met prescribing guidelines as well as likely low-value
patients, but the effect was larger in magnitude and only statistically significant at the 10% level
for guideline-concordant patients (Appendix Table A5).
Medicare patients experienced a significant reduction; it was smaller (5%) but not significantly
different from the private insurance patients. As before, we fail to see signs of substitution to
other antipsychotics for private insurance and Medicare patients: including all antipsychotics in the
outcomes yields little change in the estimates.
Given the “first stage” on antipsychotic treatment, particularly for patients with serious mental
illness, a key concern is that some prescriptions curtailed by the intervention may have carried
benefit for patients. To explore this issue, we study patient health outcomes and correlates thereof.
The subsequent rows of Table 5 report several measures of hospital utilization that proxy for adverse
17

outcomes. These patients have frequent interactions with the hospital: the average control private
insurance patient has 0.4 inpatient hospitalizations and one emergency department visit during
the outcome period. While going to the hospital might seem like a relatively extreme outcome, the
presence of mental health conditions among the vast majority of baseline patients and their high rate
of inpatient and emergency department encounters suggests that these outcomes might be sensitive
to improper disruptions in care. It is thus notable that we detect no statistically significant changes
in the number of inpatient stays or emergency department visits and that the point estimates are
small in absolute and percent terms. A similar pattern prevails for Medicare patients, where the
sample is larger and rates of encounters are higher.
In the final rows of Table 5 we study two measures of visits with mental health care providers
that could proxy for patient benefit from the intervention. Patients enter the baseline cohort because
they were prescribed an antipsychotic medication by a generalist physician. Given the frequency
of mental illness in this population, these patients might benefit from a mental health specialist.
The average control group private insurance patient has 1.2 visits with psychiatrists and 0.3 with
psychologists – these patients are nearly as likely to have a hospital visit as they are to see a mental
health care provider. We detect decreases in psychiatrist visits and increases in psychologist visits.
Both effects are significant at the 10% level and they net to zero nearly exactly, suggesting that this
channel is not operative in a substantial way. We also note no significant effects on these encounters
in the larger Medicare cohort.

6
6.1

Discussion
Mechanisms

We now explore the channels that drive our key finding: that physicians altered their prescribing
to patients who were unmonitored and not intentionally targeted by Medicare. We consider two
potential mechanisms. First, the intervention could have provided information that altered physician
beliefs around the clinical benefits of prescribing – the information channel. Second, the intervention
could have raised the implicit costs of prescribing by highlighting the potential for a CMS review
– the review channel. Since the trial involved only one intervention, there is no way to perfectly
distinguish the channels, but we find that the evidence is most consistent with the review channel.
18

The letter contained a peer comparison designed to activate social and professional norms as
well as a message emphasizing the administrative penalties CMS could levy against inappropriate
prescribers. Under the information channel, these two features of the letters may have induced
physicians to update their beliefs on the optimality of their prior quetiapine prescribing by, for
example, prompting them to consult with peers or review clinical guidelines. In this case, we would
expect a corresponding drop in prescribing to inappropriate patients irrespective of their insurer.
However, the effects by patient appropriateness described in Section 5.3 and presented in Figure 3
are inconsistent with reductions targeted at patients who failed to meet clinical guidelines.
The information channel would also predict changes in prescribing of other antipsychotics because these drugs tend to share guideline recommendations with quetiapine. Yet Section 5.2 and
Appendix Table A4 demonstrate no significant effects on antipsychotics in the same class as quetiapine nor effects on first-generation antipsychotics. It is hard to reconcile the broad patterns of
this study with updating based on clinical evidence.
The review channel provides an alternative (though not exclusive) mechanism. By sending this
letter, which stated the physician was under review and could face Medicare administrative actions,
CMS broadly raised the cost of prescribing to Medicare patients. It is consistent with reductions in
prescribing to Medicare patients irrespective of appropriateness, as we observe. It also aligns with
the failure of the letter to reduce prescribing of medications similar to quetiapine, since the plain
text of the letter left the costs of prescribing these drugs unchanged. However, this channel alone
does not imply cutbacks to private insurance patients. The spillovers we observe would require
physicians to find it costly to distinguish the insurer of their patients.
The effects on prescribing by patient age, presented in Section 5.3 and Figure 2, provide a
potential explanation for the nature of these costs. While providing care, it may be difficult for
physicians to assess a patient’s insurer. Physicians may find the insurer less salient relative to the
patient’s clinical features. Alternatively, physicians may find it distasteful to vary practice style
on the basis of attributes like insurer that are not directly relevant to care. In turn, physicians
could minimize the cost of responding to the letter by developing heuristics based on other readily
available patient attributes like age.
Under such a heuristic, a physician who does not directly observe the patient’s insurer could
predict it on the basis of age but only imperfectly. There are two principal reasons for Medicare
19

eligibility: old age (age 65 and up) and disability (receiving Social Security Disability Insurance for
at least two years). Much of study physicians’ Medicare prescribing goes to the latter category –
more than one in three of their baseline Medicare patients are under age 65. A physician trying to
cut back prescribing to Medicare patients but unable to observe insurer could do so effectively but
imperfectly by targeting older patients. This heuristic is consistent with the pattern we see of large
and statistically significant cutbacks in prescribing to the oldest privately insured patients under
age 65.

6.2

Welfare Impacts

Spillovers can compound or offset the welfare impacts of an intervention on its targeted population.
A prior clinical evaluation of this intervention, Sacarny et al. (2018), looked at its effects on the
universe of Medicare beneficiaries without observing the private insurance spillovers. This evaluation
was generally consistent with the intervention yielding welfare benefits. Specifically, the letters
triggered a large reduction in prescribing of quetiapine in Medicare, reducing quetiapine costs by
$979 per treated physician during the first 9 months. These cost reductions were not offset by any
detected harms in outcomes as measured by hospital visits.
The prescribing landscape in private insurance differs from Medicare in welfare-relevant ways.
Aside from the expected difference in age, the rate of dementia is much lower: just 2% of baseline
privately insured patients had it, compared to 43% of baseline patients in Medicare. Stemming
antipsychotic prescribing to patients with dementia has been a key objective of CMS. Yet this offlabel use is clearly a second-order problem for private insurers. In practice, physicians in the study
still prescribed to likely off-label patients in private insurance with other conditions like insomnia
and PTSD. As a result, the appropriateness of prescribing was ultimately similar by insurer. Taken
together, there is little evidence that the welfare effects differ when accounting for the spillover onto
private insurance.

6.3

Common Agency

The common agency framework of Bernheim and Whinston (1986) has motivated two more recent
studies of the failure of physician-insurer contracting to incentivize greater performance and to
finance performance-raising investments. Glazer and McGuire (2002) and Frandsen, Powell and
20

Rebitzer (2019) argue that free-riding and coordination failures across insurers can explain low
levels of investment. In the simplest model, a market failure occurs because some of the gains from
one insurer implementing the optimal contract accrue to the other insurers. To date, there has been
little empirical evidence on the key pattern these models assume: that efforts by one insurer to alter
physician practice styles affect the care reimbursed by other insurers.
Our finding of strong spillovers onto private insurance shows that the potential for free-riding
on these interventions exists. While warning letters like the ones sent by CMS can have powerful
effects on the practice of medicine, depending on the motivations and information available to
insurers, there is little reason to expect they would be provided optimally in equilibrium. For
example, suppose that insurers are fully informed about the care that physicians deliver to all
patients, even patients covered by other insurers. If insurers only seek to maximize the quality of
care they reimburse, they will fail to internalize the benefits (or harms) of such interventions when
determining how much of them to supply.
An additional friction comes from the incomplete information available to health insurers. In
general, insurers only observe the care that they cover. As a result, even a socially-minded insurer
that valued the external effects of its interventions would be hampered in its efforts. Taking the
CMS algorithm as given but broadening the data on which it was applied would likely have led the
algorithm to target a different set of physicians. We explore this issue in depth in the next section.

7

Targeting Simulation

We now simulate the effects of a similar intervention conducted by an insurer that does not observe,
or does not care about, prescribing covered by other plans. With multiple health insurers and
spillovers from one insurer’s contracting onto the care covered by other insurers, we expect privately
minded or information-constrained insurers to fail to intervene on the optimal population, even
conditional on the number of physicians in the intervention.
The simulation studies the targeting and effects of three potential interventions: one performed
by private insurers alone, one by Medicare alone, and one by a merged (social planner-like) entity.
It assumes that the effects of the intervention would match those of the CMS trial. It takes the
CMS outlier algorithm as the correct measure of prescribing quality; thus intervening on higher

21

prescribers is sufficient to improve intervention targeting. We also fix the number of physicians to
match the sample size CMS used as closely as possible in each simulated intervention. We then
show that insurers’ limited ability to observe prescribing covered by others deteriorates targeting.
In turn, it attenuates the economy-wide reductions in prescribing achieved.
We begin by applying the CMS outlier algorithm to HCCI Medicare and private insurance
prescribing in 2013 and 2014 (see Appendix Section D for a detailed description of the methodology).
We make several modifications to reflect the new data and context. We also update the outlier
formula so the outlier threshold is adjustable to yield the desired number of doctors. To ensure
that our findings are not driven by these changes, the section focuses on outliers in HCCI data
rather than the PCPs selected by CMS in the original intervention. The simulations yield three sets
of PCPs: Medicare outliers, private insurance outliers, and Medicare + private insurance outliers.
These analyses were not pre-specified.

7.1

Characteristics of the Outliers

In the simulation, each insurer accounts only for the prescribing it covers when running the algorithm. Its outliers may not match up well with the outliers for the other insurer, nor with those
selected when combining both insurers’ data (which we use to proxy for the socially optimal targeting). A Medicare intervention may be poorly targeted in private insurance or vice versa. Figure 4
and Panels A and B of Appendix Table A6 characterize the targeting. They describe the three sets
of outliers and their prescribing volume during the 2013-2014 period that the algorithm analyzed.
As expected, the outliers selected from one insurer’s data have the highest prescribing volume
for that insurer. They often prescribe little or nothing to patients of the other insurer. In Panel A
of Figure 4, Medicare-only outliers are shown prescribing more than fivefold the quetiapine volume
to Medicare patients than do outliers selected from private insurance data alone. 56% of private
insurance outliers prescribe no quetiapine in Medicare at all. Panel B shows Medicare outliers tend
to have low volumes covered by private insurance; they supply one-sixth as much quetiapine in
private insurance as the private insurance outliers. 72% supply none in private insurance at all.
The two sets of outliers had little overlap: only 9% of Medicare outliers were also private insurance
outliers and vice versa.
The final panel of Figure 4 plots prescribing in Medicare and private insurance combined. By
22

construction, the outliers selected from the combined data prescribe the most here on average
– yet outliers selected from Medicare data alone prescribe nearly as much. This finding reflects
that Medicare prescribing volume is much higher than private insurance. Accordingly, 76% of
the Medicare outliers were also outliers in the combined data. In contrast, targeting high total
prescribing with private insurance data alone works relatively poorly. The private insurance outliers
prescribe only half as much, on average, as the outliers selected from the combined data. Only 32%
of them are also outliers in the combined data.

7.2

Foregone Reductions in Prescribing

The simulation has so far shown that information-constrained or privately minded insurers would
fail to select doctors who prescribe heavily overall. We now explore how the difference in targeting
deteriorates the effects of the intervention. Panel C of Appendix Table A6 projects the change in
economy-wide primary care quetiapine prescribing from the interventions during the outcome period.
We project the volume of prescribing curtailed by the intervention by assuming the intervention
has effects on Medicare and private insurance given by Table 2. That projection is scaled by an
estimate of the volume of primary care prescribing that would have occurred nationally absent
the intervention. To avoid polluting results with the effects of the actual CMS intervention, the
estimates give treated PCPs in the original trial no weight and control PCPs proportionately higher
weight.
Private insurers intervening on their own would forego substantial economy-wide reductions.
Their intervention on top private insurance prescribers would reduce total prescribing in Medicare
and private insurance by less than half the effect of the social planner’s intervention (1.8% vs.
3.9%). These findings have two key implications. First, even if private insurers had found such
an intervention worthwhile and conducted it at the same intensity (and with the same effect on
prescribing) as CMS, they would have achieved substantially smaller national reductions. Because
private insurance prescribing and total insurance prescribing by PCPs is imperfectly correlated,
even if private insurers were to intervene, they would often not act upon PCPs that a social planner
would choose. Second, limited access to data on external prescribing means that even if private
insurers valued the spillovers of their efforts, they would struggle to target those external effects.
Panel C also shows that a Medicare program conducting its own intervention would essentially
23

match the social planner’s effect (3.9%) up to a rounding error. The concerns the private insurance
simulation uncovered are dampened when Medicare is the actor. Though Medicare does not observe
private insurance data in the simulation, its own information still provides a close approximation
to the total because it covers the bulk of quetiapine prescribing (roughly three-fourths in HCCI
data). Medicare is thus more able to target the doctors the social planner would pick. This result
highlights that when a single insurer observes an accurate signal of aggregate behavior, it can more
closely replicate the actions of the social planner. Whether the insurer would desire to replicate
those actions is less clear, since it may not value the spillovers it has on care covered by others.

8

Conclusion

This paper provides new, randomized evidence documenting spillovers from Medicare on private
insurance. We study a trial of Medicare letters which sought to improve the quality of prescribing of
the most commonly used antipsychotic medication, quetiapine. The letter focused on the Medicare
program and did not mention other insurers. Yet we find large effects on prescribing to privately
insured patients and cannot rule out one-for-one spillovers. Physicians cut back to patients who were
observably appropriate and questionable candidates, but did not detectably change prescribing of
medications with similar guidelines. This evidence suggests that the letter acted by bluntly raising
the costs of prescribing the drug. The spillovers suggest that physicians found it costly to set distinct
medical practice styles on the basis of insurer.
These findings have broader implications for the causes and evolution of health care productivity
in the U.S. A large literature has hypothesized that agency problems, and common agency in
particular, can explain striking failures of performance-raising changes to diffuse through the health
care system. The large cross-insurer spillovers following this intervention show that one insurer’s
efforts can lead to changes in care delivery well beyond the care the insurer covers. If insurers fail
to internalize the full benefits of these interventions, those that raise productivity are likely to be
under-provided in equilibrium. Thus a key open question for policymakers is how to encourage
these performance-raising investments when payment is fragmented across multiple, uncoordinated
entities.

24

References
Alexander, G. C., S. A. Gallagher, A. Mascola, R. M. Moloney, and R. S. Stafford.
2011. “Increasing Off-Label Use of Antipsychotic Medications in the United States, 1995-2008.”
Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 20(2): 177–184.
American Geriatrics Society. 2019. “American Geriatrics Society 2019 Updated AGS Beers
Criteria R for Potentially Inappropriate Medication Use in Older Adults.” Journal of the American
Geriatrics Society.
American Psychiatric Association. 2016. The American Psychiatric Association Practice
Guideline on the Use of Antipsychotics to Treat Agitation or Psychosis in Patients With Dementia. American Psychiatric Association.
Baicker, Katherine, and Amitabh Chandra. 2004. “Medicare Spending, The Physician Workforce, And Beneficiaries’ Quality Of Care: Areas with a High Concentration of Specialists
Also Show Higher Spending and Less Use of High-Quality, Effective Care.” Health Affairs,
23(Suppl1): W4–184–W4–197.
Baicker, Katherine, Michael Chernew, and Jacob Robbins. 2013. “The Spillover Effects
of Medicare Managed Care: Medicare Advantage and Hospital Utilization.” Journal of health
economics, 32(6).
Baker, Laurence C. 2003. “Managed Care Spillover Effects.” Annual Review of Public Health,
24(1): 435–456.
Berndt, Ernst R., Robert S. Gibbons, Anton Kolotilin, and Anna Levine Taub. 2015.
“The Heterogeneity of Concentrated Prescribing Behavior: Theory and Evidence from Antipsychotics.” Journal of Health Economics, 40: 26–39.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Michael D. Whinston. 1986. “Common Agency.” Econometrica,
54(4): 923–942.
Castro, Lucio, and Carlos Scartascini. 2015. “Tax Compliance and Enforcement in the Pampas
Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 116: 65–82.
25

Clemens, Jeffrey, and Joshua D. Gottlieb. 2017. “In the Shadow of a Giant: Medicare’s
Influence on Private Physician Payments.” Journal of Political Economy, 125(1): 1–39.
Clemens, Jeffrey, Joshua Gottlieb, and Tímea Laura Molnár. 2015. “The Anatomy of
Physician Payments: Contracting Subject to Complexity.” National Bureau of Economic Research
w21642, Cambridge, MA.
Cubał a, Wiesław Jerzy, and Janusz Springer. 2014. “Quetiapine Abuse and Dependence
in Psychiatric Patients: A Systematic Review of 25 Case Reports in the Literature.” Journal of
Substance Use, 19(5): 388–393.
Currie, Janet, and W. Bentley MacLeod. 2017. “Diagnosing Expertise: Human Capital, Decision Making, and Performance among Physicians.” Journal of Labor Economics, 35(1): 1–43.
Currie, Janet M., and W. Bentley MacLeod. 2020. “Understanding Doctor Decision Making:
The Case of Depression Treatment.” Econometrica, 88(3): 847–878.
Cutler, David, Jonathan S. Skinner, Ariel Dora Stern, and David Wennberg. 2019.
“Physician Beliefs and Patient Preferences: A New Look at Regional Variation in Health Care
Spending.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(1): 192–221.
Cutler, David M. 2011. “Where Are the Health Care Entrepreneurs? The Failure of Organizational
Innovation in Health Care.” Innovation Policy and the Economy, 11: 1–28.
eGlobalTech. 2017. “Comparative Billing Report: Emegency Department Services.”
Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Yunan Ji, and Neale Mahoney. 2020. “External Effects of
Payment Reform: Evidence from a National Randomized Controlled Trial on Bundled Payments.”
Fadlon, Itzik, and Jessica Van Parys. 2020. “Primary Care Physician Practice Styles and Patient Care: Evidence from Physician Exits in Medicare.” Journal of Health Economics, 71: 102304.
Fellner, Gerlinde, Rupert Sausgruber, and Christian Traxler. 2013. “Testing Enforcement
Strategies In The Field: Threat, Moral Appeal And Social Information.” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 11(3): 634–660.

26

Flamm, Hannah. 2018. "They Want Docile": How Nursing Homes in the United States Overmedicate People with Dementia. New York:Human Rights Watch.
Food and Drug Administration. 2009. “Summary Minutes of the Psychopharmacologic Drugs
Advisory Committee April 8, 2009.” https://wayback.archive-it.org/7993/20170404155531/
https://www.fda.gov/downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/
Drugs/PsychopharmacologicDrugsAdvisoryCommittee/UCM198219.pdf.
Food and Drug Administration. 2020a. “SEROQUEL (Quetiapine Fumarate) Prescribing Information.” https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2020/020639Orig1s068lbl.pdf.
Food and Drug Administration. 2020b. “SEROQUEL XR (Quetiapine Fumarate) Prescribing
Information.” https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2020/022047s043lbl.pdf.
Frandsen, Brigham, Michael Powell, and James B. Rebitzer. 2019. “Sticking Points:
Common-Agency Problems and Contracting in the US Healthcare System.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 50(2): 251–285.
Gallini, Adeline, Julie M. Donohue, and Haiden A. Huskamp. 2013. “Diffusion of Antipsychotics in the U.S. and French Markets, 1998–2008.” Psychiatric Services, 64(7): 680–687.
Garthwaite, Craig L. 2012. “The Doctor Might See You Now: The Supply Side Effects of Public
Health Insurance Expansions.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 4(3): 190–215.
Glazer, Jacob, and Thomas G. McGuire. 2002. “Multiple Payers, Commonality and FreeRiding in Health Care: Medicare and Private Payers.” Journal of Health Economics, 21(6): 1049–
1069.
Glied, Sherry, and Joshua Graff Zivin. 2002. “How Do Doctors Behave When Some (but Not
All) of Their Patients Are in Managed Care?” Journal of Health Economics, 21(2): 337–353.
Glied, Sherry, and Kai Hong. 2018. “Health Care in a Multi-Payer System: Spillovers of Health
Care Service Demand among Adults under 65 on Utilization and Outcomes in Medicare.” Journal
of Health Economics, 60: 165–176.

27

Government Accountability Office. 2015. “Antipsychotic Drug Use: HHS Has Initiatives to
Reduce Use among Older Adults in Nursing Homes, but Should Expand Efforts to Other Settings.”
GAO GAO-15-211, Washington, DC.
Grabowski, David C., Jonathan Gruber, and Joseph J. Angelelli. 2008. “Nursing Home
Quality as a Common Good.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(4): 754–764.
Jibson, Michael D. 2019. “Second-Generation Antipsychotic Medications: Pharmacology, Administration, and Side Effects.” https://www.uptodate.com/contents/second-generation-antipsychoticmedications-pharmacology-administration-and-side-effects.
Klein-Schwartz, Wendy, Elana K. Schwartz, and Bruce D. Anderson. 2014. “Evaluation
of Quetiapine Abuse and Misuse Reported to Poison Centers:.” Journal of Addiction Medicine,
8(3): 195–198.
Lee, Jinhyung, Jeffrey S. McCullough, and Robert J. Town. 2013. “The Impact of Health
Information Technology on Hospital Productivity.” The RAND Journal of Economics, 44(3): 545–
568.
Leucht, Stefan, Magdolna Tardy, Katja Komossa, Stephan Heres, Werner Kissling, and
John M Davis. 2012. “Maintenance Treatment with Antipsychotic Drugs for Schizophrenia.”
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews.
Maglione, Margaret, Alicia Ruelaz Maher, Jianhui Hu, Zhen Wang, Roberta Shanman,
Paul G. Shekelle, Beth Roth, Lara Hilton, Marika J. Suttorp, Brett A. Ewing, Aneesa
Motala, and Tanja Perry. 2011. Off-Label Use of Atypical Antipsychotics: An Update. AHRQ
Comparative Effectiveness Reviews, Rockville (MD):Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
(US).
Meltzer, Herbert Y. 2013. “Update on Typical and Atypical Antipsychotic Drugs.” Annual Review
of Medicine, 64(1): 393–406.
Molitor, David. 2018. “The Evolution of Physician Practice Styles: Evidence from Cardiologist
Migration.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(1): 326–356.

28

Nutt, Amy Ellis, and Dan Keating. 2018. “One of America’s Most Popular Drugs — First
Aimed at Schizophrenia — Reveals the Issues of ‘off-Label’ Use.” The Washington Post.
OIG, HHS. 2011. “Medicare Atypical Antipsychotic Drug Claims for Elderly Nursing Home Residents.” Office of Inspector General, Department of Health and Human Services OEI-07-08-00150.
Painter, Jacob T., Richard Owen, Kathy L. Henderson, Mark S. Bauer, Dinesh Mittal,
and Teresa J. Hudson. 2017. “Analysis of the Appropriateness of Off-Label Antipsychotic Use
for Mental Health Indications in a Veteran Population.” Pharmacotherapy: The Journal of Human
Pharmacology and Drug Therapy, 37(4): 438–446.
Pauly, Mark V. 1980. Doctors and Their Workshops: Economic Models of Physician Behavior. A
National Bureau of Economic Research Monograph, Chicago:University of Chicago Press.
Phelps, Charles E., and Cathleen Mooney. 1993. “Variations in Medical Practice Use: Causes
and Consequences.” In Competitive Approaches to Health Care Reform. , ed. Richard J. Arnould,
Robert F. Rich and William D. White, 139–75. Washington, D.C.:Urban Institute Press.
Press, Daniel, and Michael Alexander. 2018. “Management of Neuropsychiatric Symptoms
of Dementia.” https://www.uptodate.com/contents/management-of-neuropsychiatric-symptomsof-dementia.
Richards, Michael R., and D. Sebastian Tello-Trillo. 2019. “Public Spillovers from Private
Insurance Contracting: Physician Responses to Managed Care.” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 11(4): 375–403.
Sacarny, Adam, Andrew R. Olenski, and Michael L. Barnett. 2019. “Association of Quetiapine Overuse Letters With Prescribing by Physician Peers of Targeted Recipients: A Secondary
Analysis of a Randomized Clinical Trial.” JAMA Psychiatry, 76(10): 1094–1095.
Sacarny, Adam, David Yokum, and Shantanu Agrawal. 2017. “Government-Academic Partnerships in Randomized Evaluations: The Case of Inappropriate Prescribing.” American Economic Review, 107(5): 466–470.
Sacarny, Adam, Michael L. Barnett, Jackson Le, Frank Tetkoski, David Yokum, and
Shantanu Agrawal. 2018. “Effect of Peer Comparison Letters for High-Volume Primary Care
29

Prescribers of Quetiapine in Older and Disabled Adults: A Randomized Clinical Trial.” JAMA
Psychiatry, 75(10): 1003–1011.
Skinner, Jonathan, and Douglas Staiger. 2015. “Technology Diffusion and Productivity Growth
in Health Care.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(5): 951–964.
Tukey, John Wilder. 1977. Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley Series in Behavioral Science, Reading, Mass:Addison-Wesley Pub. Co.
U.S. Department of Justice. 2010. “Pharmaceutical Giant AstraZeneca to Pay $520 Million for
Off-Label Drug Marketing.” https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/pharmaceutical-giant-astrazenecapay-520-million-label-drug-marketing.
Wilcock, Andrew D., Michael L. Barnett, J. Michael McWilliams, David C. Grabowski,
and Ateev Mehrotra. 2020. “Association Between Medicare’s Mandatory Joint Replacement
Bundled Payment Program and Post–Acute Care Use in Medicare Advantage.” JAMA Surgery,
155(1): 82.

30

Figures

Medicare

Control
Treatment

Private Insurance

5

Quetiapine Days Supply (log-scale)
10
15
20 25 30 35 40

Figure 1 – Quarterly Prescribing over Sample Period

-4

-2

0
2
4
6
Quarters Relative to Intervention

8

10

Notes: Figure plots the average days of quetiapine supplied by control (blue solid line) and treatment
(red dashed line) study prescribers. The series in the upper half of the figure count prescribing in
Medicare while the series in the lower half count prescribing in private insurance. The solid vertical
line denotes the start of the intervention and the arrowheads indicate when the treatment letters
were sent. The y-axis uses a log-scale to visualize differences in percent terms, given the large
difference in prescribing volume to private insurance and Medicare patients.

31

Figure 2 – Effects on Prescribing by Patient Age
30

Age
0-44

45-54

55-64

65+

20

Percent Eﬀect (%)

10
0

N/A*

-10
-20
-30
-40
Private Insurance

Medicare

Notes: Figure plots estimates of the effect of the intervention on prescribing to patients in varying
age bins. To facilitate comparisons of the effects across age bins with different baseline levels of
prescribing, we present percent effects (i.e. treatment effect divided by the control mean). Error
bars show 95% confidence intervals. See Table 3 for more details.
* No estimate presented because privately insured patients age 65 and up are omitted from the
sample.

32

Figure 3 – Effects on Prescribing by Patient Observable Appropriateness
25
20

Guideline
concordant

Intermediate
evidence

Low-Value

Unknown
value

15

Percent Eﬀect (%)

10
5
0
-5
-10
-15
-20
-25
-30
-35
Private Insurance

Medicare

Notes: Figure plots estimates of the effect of the intervention on prescribing to patients by observable
appropriateness for quetiapine according to clinical guidelines. Section 4.3 describes the algorithm
we use to classify patients into appropriateness categories. To facilitate comparisons of the effects
across appropriateness bins with different baseline levels of prescribing, we present percent effects
(i.e. treatment effect divided by the control mean). Error bars show 95% confidence intervals. See
Table 4 for more details.

33

Figure 4 – Quetiapine Prescribing of Outlier PCPs in Targeting Simulations

A. Medicare Prescribing

B. Private Insurance Prescribing
80%

Fraction of Prescribers

Fraction of Prescribers

80%

60%

40%

20%

0%

0 1

10
100
1000
Medicare Days Supplied

60%

40%

20%

0%

10000

0 1

10
100
1000
10000
Private Insurance Days Supplied

C. Medicare+Private Prescribing

Fraction of Prescribers

80%

Medicare Outliers
Private Insurance Outliers
Medicare+Private Outliers

60%

40%

20%

0%

0 1

10
100
1000
10000
Medicare+Private Days Supplied

Notes: Figure plots the distribution of quetiapine prescribing volume for PCPs selected in targeting simulations. It depicts three groups of outlier PCPs: Medicare (dashed yellow line), private
insurance (solid blue), and Medicare+private insurance (short dashed red). Each panel shows histograms of prescribing volume covered by the given insurer. The x-axis scale is produced by taking
log(1+days supply). The spikes above 0 indicate the share of PCPs in the group with no prescribing in that insurer. Panel A plots prescribing in Medicare. Panel B plots prescribing in private
insurance. Panel C plots prescribing in Medicare and private insurance combined. See Appendix
Table A6 and text for more details.

34

Tables

Table 1 - Summary Statistics of Study Prescribers
(1)
(2)
(3)
Characteristic
Control
Treatment
p-value
Female
17.8%
17.8%
0.936
Primary Specialty
Family Medicine
47%
49%
0.125
General Practice
4%
5%
0.156
Internal Medicine
49%
46%
0.027
Any Psychiatric Specialty
<1%
<1%
0.999
No Quetiapine Prescribing During Baseline Period
To Privately Insured Patients
74.2%
74.4%
0.853
To Medicare Patients
40.8%
43.1%
0.096
Days Supply of Quetiapine During Baseline Period
To Privately Insured Patients 65.0 (184.7)
64.7 (204.6)
0.963
To Medicare Patients
338.7 (723.1) 309.4 (543.5)
0.104
P-value, omnibus test of equality
0.317
N
2,528
2,527
Notes: This table reports summary statistics of the study prescribers.
Binary variables displayed as percentages and continuous variables
displayed as means (standard deviations). Data on prescriber sex and
specialization come from pre-intervention NPPES files. A small number
(<1%) of prescribers had a primary specialization outside the three
categories in the table. Quetiapine prescribing measures only consider the
baseline period (the year prior to the intervention).

35

Table 2 - Effects on Key Prescribing Outcomes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Insurer
Private Insurance
Medicare
Control Treatment Percent
Control Treatment
Outcome
Mean
Effect
Effect
Mean
Effect
Days Supply*
209.5
-24.5
-11.7%
1,094.5
-183.6
(10.5)
(5.0%)
(30.1)
New Fills
2.53
-0.45
-17.8%
11.24
-2.26
(0.15)
(5.9%)
(0.58)
Refills
3.61
-0.26
-7.3%
18.99
-2.79
(0.22)
(6.0%)
(0.66)
Days Supply
387.7
-28.2
-7.3%
2,002.1
-195.3
(14.8)
(3.8%)
(49.7)
(All Antipsychotics)

(6)
Percent
Effect
-16.8%
(2.7%)
-20.2%
(5.1%)
-14.7%
(3.5%)
-9.8%
(2.5%)

(7)
P-Val, %
Effects
Equal
[0.344]
[0.754]
[0.268]
[0.563]

N=5,055. Notes: Table reports estimates for prescriber-level outcomes for private insurance (columns 13) and Medicare (columns 4-6). All measures count prescribing during the outcome period (April 21,
2015 through December 31, 2017) and include only quetiapine, except the final measure which includes
all antipsychotics. See text for more detail. Columns 1 and 4 report the mean outcome for control
prescribers. Columns 2 and 5 report the treatment effect estimate from equation (1). Columns 3 and 6
divide the treatment effect by the control mean to produce a percent effect. Column 7 reports the pvalue from a test that the percent effects for private insurance and Medicare are equal. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. P-values in brackets.
* Pre-specified primary outcome.

36

Insurer
Age Bin
Age 0-17
Age 18-24
Age 25-34
Age 35-44
Age 45-54
Age 55-64
Age 65+

Table 3 - Effects on Prescribing by Patient Age
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
Private Insurance
Medicare
Control Treatment Percent
Control Treatment
Mean
Effect
Effect
Mean
Effect
2.0
0.7
37.6%
(1.1)
(55.8%)
9.1
0.4
4.7%
(1.7)
(18.5%)
19.3
0.0
0.1%
4.4
1.8
(2.6)
(13.4%)
(1.3)
39.7
-1.6
-4.0%
28.8
-2.1
(4.1)
(10.2%)
(3.4)
60.9
-6.5
-10.6%
98.3
-12.5
(4.7)
(7.8%)
(6.2)
78.4
-17.8
-22.7%
209.3
-31.0
(5.3)
(6.8%)
(9.9)
753.6
-143.8
(24.2)

(6)
Percent
Effect

40.3%
(30.0%)
-7.5%
(11.6%)
-12.7%
(6.3%)
-14.8%
(4.7%)
-19.1%
(3.2%)

(7)
P-Val, %
Effects
Equal

[0.216]
[0.820]
[0.824]
[0.310]

N=5,055. Notes: Table reports estimates for prescriber-level outcomes for private insurance (columns 13) and Medicare (columns 4-6). Each row counts quetiapine prescribing in days supply to patients in the
specified age range during the outcome period (April 21, 2015 through December 31, 2017). Commercial
insurance patients age 65+ are omitted here (and throughout the study) because their status as
Medicare patients is uncertain. Columns 1 and 4 report the mean outcome for control prescribers.
Columns 2 and 5 report the treatment effect estimate from equation (1). Columns 3 and 6 divide the
treatment effect by the control mean to produce a percent effect. Column 7 reports the p-value from a
test that the percent effects for private insurance and Medicare are equal. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. P-values in brackets.

37

Insurer
Appropriateness Group

Table 4 - Effects on Prescribing by Patient Appropriateness
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Private Insurance
Medicare
Control Treatment Percent
Control Treatment Percent
Mean
Effect
Effect
Mean
Effect
Effect

(7)
P-Val, %
Effects
Equal

GuidelineConcordant

104.4

-17.7
(6.7)

-17.0%
(6.4%)

638.2

-111.0
(21.5)

-17.4%
(3.4%)

[0.950]

Intermediate
Evidence

29.1

-0.4
(2.9)

-1.2%
(10.1%)

103.4

-17.9
(5.9)

-17.3%
(5.7%)

[0.149]

Low Value /
Inappropriate

29.1

-4.0
(2.8)

-13.9%
(9.7%)

200.5

-33.7
(9.5)

-16.8%
(4.7%)

[0.773]

Unknown

46.8

-3.0
(4.3)

-6.5%
(9.2%)

152.3

-27.3
(8.4)

-17.9%
(5.5%)

[0.254]

N=5,055. Notes: Table reports estimates for prescriber-level outcomes for private insurance (columns 13) and Medicare (columns 4-6). Each row counts quetiapine prescribing in days supply to patients in the
specified appropriateness group during the outcome period (April 21, 2015 through December 31, 2017).
See text for descriptions of the appropriateness groups and the algorithm used to classify patients.
Columns 1 and 4 report the mean outcome for control prescribers. Columns 2 and 5 report the
treatment effect estimate from equation (1). Columns 3 and 6 divide the treatment effect by the control
mean to produce a percent effect. Column 7 reports the p-value from a test that the percent effects for
private insurance and Medicare are equal. Robust standard errors in parentheses. P-values in brackets.

38

Patient Cohort
Outcome

Table 5 - Effects on Baseline Patients
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Private Insurance (N=1,980)
Medicare (N=7,384)
Control Treatment Percent
Control Treatment Percent
Mean
Effect
Effect
Mean
Effect
Effect

(7)
P-Val, %
Effects
Equal

Quetiapine Days
Received

260.7

-23.2
(13.3)

-8.9%
(5.1%)

441.0

-22.0
(10.0)

-5.0%
(2.3%)

[0.481]

Antipsychotics
Days Received

293.3

-27.3
(14.7)

-9.3%
(5.0%)

496.8

-23.9
(10.7)

-4.8%
(2.1%)

[0.408]

Inpatient Stays

0.39

-0.02
(0.05)

-4.4%
(12.3%)

0.87

0.04
(0.04)

4.0%
(4.6%)

[0.522]

ED Visits

0.99

-0.04
(0.10)

-4.4%
(9.8%)

1.75

0.07
(0.12)

3.9%
(6.6%)

[0.487]

Psychiatrist
Visits

1.16

-0.26
(0.16)

-22.2%
(13.7%)

1.14

0.07
(0.09)

6.4%
(7.7%)

[0.072]

Psychologist
0.33
0.24
71.2%
0.84
-0.07
-8.5%
[0.115]
Visits
(0.13)
(39.8%)
(0.26)
(30.9%)
Notes: Table reports estimates for outcomes for privately insured baseline patients (columns 1-3) and
baseline patients on Medicare (columns 4-6). See text for more details on the construction of the baseline
patient cohorts. Each measure counts health care use during the outcome period (April 21, 2015 through
December 31, 2017). Columns 1 and 4 report the mean outcome for baseline patients of control prescribers.
Columns 2 and 5 report the treatment effect estimate from equation (2). Columns 3 and 6 divide the
treatment effect by the control mean to produce a percent effect. Column 7 reports the p-value from a test
that the percent effects for the private insurance and Medicare cohorts are equal. Robust standard errors
clustered at the baseline prescriber level in parentheses. P-values in brackets.

39

Appendix To:
Common Practice: Spillovers from
Medicare on Private Health Care
Michael Barnett, Andrew Olenski, and Adam Sacarny
May 27, 2020

A1

A

Detailed Description of Patient Classification Algorithm

To develop an algorithm for classifying patients by clinical appropriateness, we studied the clinical
literature and guidelines for antipsychotics (Maglione et al., 2011; Painter et al., 2017; American
Psychiatric Association, 2016; American Geriatrics Society, 2019). The algorithm we ultimately
elected classifies each patient into one of four mutually exclusive and exhaustive categories using
diagnosis codes from the baseline and outcome periods (April 20, 2013 through December 31, 2017).
When patients fit in multiple categories, they are assigned in cascading order to the highest-value
one.
To make the approach as parsimonious as possible, the final algorithm was based on FDA
approvals and an evidence summary table in Maglione et al. (2011), a systematic review of off-label
prescribing of antipsychotics. Table A of that study displays the quality of evidence for each of a
multitude of off-label uses. In the resulting algorithm, one category contains FDA approved uses
and the remainder map to standards of evidence in Table A:
1. Guideline-concordant patients have a serious mental illness – bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, or major depression – for which quetiapine is approved by the FDA. If a patient has
major depression but not bipolar disorder or schizophrenia, quetiapine is FDA approved for
use alongside an antidepressant (called adjunctive therapy). For these patients, to match FDA
approvals, the prescribing must overlap with an antidepressant. In the systematic review, these
conditions are not listed because they are on-label, or in the case of major depression are listed
as “moderate or high evidence of efficacy” with FDA approval.
2. Intermediate evidence patients have a condition for which the clinical evidence is mixed
but has some support. We include patients with generalized anxiety disorder as well as those
with major depression who are not concurrently receiving an antidepressant (called quetiapine
monotherapy). In the systematic review, these conditions are listed as “moderate or high
evidence of efficacy” without FDA approval.
3. Low-value candidates have conditions for which the evidence suggests that quetiapine has
limited benefit or is even harmful. The most well known low-value condition is dementia,
reflecting the guidelines which strongly discourage the use of antipsychotics in this popula-

A2

tion. We also include insomnia, post-traumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder,
personality disorders, eating disorders, and alcohol use disorder. The systematic review states
these conditions as having “low or very low evidence of efficacy,” “mixed results,” or “low or
very low evidence of inefficacy.”
4. Unknown patients have no relevant diagnoses. We also include the small number of patients
under age 18 in this category because pediatric guidelines for antipsychotics are distinct and
study physicians rarely treat children and teenagers.
Appendix Table A7 provides a list of the ICD-9 and ICD-10 codes for each of these conditions.
For patients with major depression but not bipolar disorder or schizophrenia, the presence of
antidepressants is pivotal for classification. In the prescriber-level analyses, we consider a quetiapine
prescription to a major depression patient guideline-concordant if it overlapped with an antidepressant at the time it was dispensed and intermediate otherwise. In the patient-level analyses, we
consider patients with major depression guideline-concordant if at least one of their quetiapine fills
during the baseline period overlapped with an antidepressant on the day of dispense and classify
them as intermediate otherwise. Overlap is determined using the date of service and days supply
of the prescription fill.
While we pre-specified a classification algorithm, in practice we amended it in two ways to
produce the above approach. First, the original algorithm did not consistently map between the
systematic reviews and the guideline classifications. As a result, it mis-classified some indications:
for example, prescribing to patients with obsessive compulsive disorder was erroneously considered
to have “intermediate” support in the literature.5 The updated algorithm uses a consistent classification. Second, we anticipated only using diagnosis codes from the baseline period in case diagnosis
coding responded to the intervention. However, we found that most private insurance prescribing
could not be classified with this approach due to short pre-intervention coverage durations and a
lack of relevant diagnosis codes. We thus opted to include diagnosis codes from the outcome period.
Despite both of these changes, our results are robust to the pre-specified approach (Appendix Table
A8).
5

Specifically, the pre-specified algorithm uses the following classification. Guideline-concordant: bipolar disorder,
schizophrenia, major depression (irrespective of whether taken with antidepressant). Intermediate evidence: generalized anxiety disorder, depression (excluding major depression), obsessive-compulsive disorder, and personality
disorder. Low-value: insomnia, PTSD, eating disorder, alcohol use disorder, and dementia.

A3

B

Construction of Baseline Patient Cohort

The baseline patient cohort consists of patients who received at least one quetiapine prescription
from a study physician in the one year pre-intervention period (April 21, 2014 through April 20,
2015). Our initial dataset includes 12,418 patients meeting this criteria. The sample has three key
restrictions. First, since patients periodically churn out of HCCI coverage and become unobserved in
the data, they must still be enrolled in the month immediately prior to the intervention start, March
2015 (this excludes 2,546 patients). Second, we omit patients whose insurance type changes during
the sample (e.g., private insurance to Medicare) or who maintain private insurance after age 64,
since these patients are likely covered by both private insurance and Medicare (491 patients). Third,
to ensure treatment status is clear, we exclude any patients who received a quetiapine prescription
from more than one study prescriber during the year prior to the intervention (150 patients). These
restrictions leave us with N=1,980 private insurance patients and N=7,384 Medicare patients.

C

Measurement of Health Care Utilization

In addition to studying quetiapine prescribing to the baseline patient cohort, we also measure health
care utilization. We define several measures of utilization relevant to this patient population, using
three HCCI claims files: inpatient, outpatient, and physician. The inpatient and outpatient files
contain institutional billing in their respective settings, while individual provider billing is contained
in the physician file. We process claims from all three sources by reducing the these files to patientprovider-day level observations. Each patient-provider-day is considered one visit, so if a patient
has multiple claims with the same provider on the same day, we only count these records as one
encounter. Note that in HCCI data, claims and claim lines are already merged together.
We construct counts of inpatient, emergency department (ED), psychiatrist, and psychologist
visits for each baseline patient in the post-intervention period (to use as outcomes) and preintervention period (to use as statistical controls). Our methodology for processing the data is
as follows:
• Inpatient stays. We identify inpatient stays using the inpatient file and limiting to records
with a hospital type-of-bill code (codes beginning with 1 or 85). Further, we drop all records

A4

with zero allowed charges, missing DRGs, missing discharge status, or continuation discharge
status (i.e. discharge status code 30). In the case that after removing these records the
discharge date is not constant within a claim, we assign all records in the claim to the latest
discharge date among them; in the extremely rare case that scrambled provider NPI is not
constant within-claim, we pick the NPI in the first claim record. Finally, to remove duplicate
claims and/or multiple encounters on the same day, we collapse together any records with
the same patient, scrambled provider NPI, and discharge date. Each remaining record is
considered to be one inpatient stay. We use this data to produce counts of the number of
inpatient stays for each patient.
• ED visits. We identify ED visits using the outpatient file. We restrict to claims (i.e. claim
IDs) that have at least one record with emergency department revenue centers (revenue center
codes 450-459 or 981). Then we restrict to records with hospital or freestanding ED type-of-bill
codes (codes beginning with 1, 85, or 78) and we drop records with zero allowed charges. In
cases where the last date or scrambled NPI varies among records in the same claim, we mimic
the approach used for inpatient stays and use the latest last date and first NPI among those
records. Then, as with inpatient stays, we remove duplicate claims and/or multiple same-day
encounters by collapsing together records with the same patient, scrambled provider NPI, and
last date. Each remaining record is taken as one ED visit, and we use this data to generate
the counts.
• Psychiatrist or psychologist visits. Visits with psychiatrists or psychologists are defined
using the physician file. Only records with provider category 81 (psychiatrist) or 14 (psychologist) are loaded from this file. We exclude records with inpatient or ED place of service
codes (codes 21, 23, 51, or 61), zero allowed charges, or missing scrambled NPI. To avoid
double-counting visits that involve multiple claim lines or visits that are billed with multiple
claims, we collapse together records with the same patient, scrambled provider NPI, and last
date. If among records with the same patient-provider-date triple the provider is categorized
as both a psychiatrist and a psychologist, we consider the provider a psychiatrist for all of
those records. Each remaining record is taken as a visit with a psychiatrist or psychologist,
and we use these records to count encounters for the patients.
A5

D

Detailed Description of Targeting Simulation

Here we describe in more detail the methodology of Section 7 in which we implement the original
Medicare selection algorithm using HCCI data on Medicare and private insurance patients. For
consistency with the original intervention, we closely match the algorithm that was originally run
in Medicare, though in practice and by necessity our approach differs slightly. To match prior
analyses in this manuscript, we omit prescribing to patients with no valid age and prescribing to
privately insured patients 65 and up. We made four additional changes. First, if a patient filled
multiple quetiapine scripts from the same doctor on the same day, CMS only included the fill with
the longest duration, while we include all the fills; CMS previously found the two approaches were
highly correlated (≥95%). Second, CMS omitted long-term care pharmacies and patients but we
include them because HCCI data does not identify them in its data during the analysis period.
Third, CMS restricted its universe to PCPs with ≥10 quetiapine fills in a year but we relax the
restriction to ≥1 fills due to lower prescribing volume in HCCI. Fourth, CMS excluded PCPs with a
secondary specialty of psychiatry; we do not make this restriction because we only observe primary
specialty.
We seek to identify 5,055 prescribers for each insurer (Medicare alone, private insurance alone,
Medicare + private insurance). To ensure that when the algorithm is run it identifies the correct
number of prescribers, we modify the outlier method described in the main text so that we can
manipulate the threshold for outliers. Specifically, the new outlier threshold formula is:

75
25
Ts,t,m = Q75
s,t,m + κ(Qs,t,m − Qs,t,m ).

Where s indexes states, t indexes years, m indexes measures (quetiapine fills or days), Ts,t,m
is the threshold, and Qps,t,m is the pth percentile of measure m among prescribers in state s and
year t. κ can be manipulated to raise or lower the threshold and thus the number of prescribers
selected. In the original intervention, CMS searched κ to produce a sample of roughly 5,000 PCPs,
picking κ = 0.25 (the method noted in the main text) which yielded a sufficiently close sample of
N = 5, 055. In practice, we search κ seeking to select 5,055 physicians. If there exists no value of
κ that returns exactly 5,055 physicians, we choose the value that minimizes the absolute deviation
from 5,055.
A6

As in the CMS approach, to be selected, PCPs must be outliers relative to other prescribers in
their state and year on four measures of quetiapine prescribing as given by the above formula: days
supplied in 2013, days supplied in 2014, fills in 2013, and fills in 2014. The algorithm is run on just
Medicare prescribing data, just private insurance prescribing data, and the combined Medicare and
private insurance data. It yields three groups:
1. Outlier Medicare prescribers
2. Outlier private insurance prescribers
3. Outliers in combined Medicare and private insurance prescribing
In Figure 4 and Panels A and B of Appendix Table A6 we analyze and plot the distribution
of quetiapine days prescribed by physicians in each of the three groups during the period 20132014. We compute the total days supplied to Medicare patients, private insurance patients, and
Medicare+private insurance patients and compare the distributions across the providers in each
of the groups. The main text also reports the overlap between the three groups as the share of
prescribers in group g that are also in group g 0 .
Finally, using the three groups of providers and our point estimates of the percent effect of
the intervention given in Table 2, we project the effect of intervening on each group of PCPs on
national primary care quetiapine prescribing, reporting the results in Panel C of Appendix Table
A6. Specifically, we estimate the reduction in quetiapine days supplied in the post-intervention
period (April 21, 2015 – December 31, 2017) if an intervention were conducted in the given group of
PCPs and divide it by the national volume of PCP prescribing that would have prevailed absent the
intervention. Because we are analyzing prescribing that occurred after CMS actually intervened,
PCPs who were treated in the original CMS study have lower volume in this period than they would
absent CMS’s efforts. Many of these PCPs enter the numerator and denominator of the estimates,
biasing each downward relative to the counterfactual in which no intervention had truly occurred.
Thus we reweight any PCPs who were in the original study so that treated PCPs get no weight and
control PCPs are proportionately upweighted.
The projected reductions are given by the following formula:

A7

P
g n
n
ρ̂
i∈Pg ωi yi
n
rg = P
∗ n , n ∈ {Private, Medicare}
i∈P∗ ωi yi
Where n indexes insurers, i indexes PCPs, and g indexes the three outlier groups. In the
numerator, ρ̂n is the estimated percent effect of the intervention in insurer n, Pg is the set of PCPs
in outlier group g, ωig is the PCP’s numerator weight, and yin is the PCP’s prescribing in the outcome
period. In the denominator, P∗ is the set of all PCP prescribers of quetiapine nationally and ωi∗ is
the denominator weight. The weights are given by the following formulas:

ωig =





1




0







 NgT + NgC /NgC

if not in CMS study
if treated in CMS study
if control in CMS study





1




ωi∗ = 0







 N∗T + N∗C /N∗C

if not in CMS study
if treated in CMS study
if control in CMS study

Where NgT and NgC are the number of PCPs in group g who were in the treatment and control group respectively in the CMS study; N∗T and N∗C are the number of PCPs with any HCCI
quetiapine prescribing who were in the treatment and control group in the CMS study. Given
the randomization, the weights for control PCPs are approximately 2 in the numerator (ωig ) and
denominator (ωi∗ ).
These calculations yield projections for Medicare and private insurance. The projections for
Medicare + private insurance combined are produced by adding the private and Medicare numerators, adding the private and Medicare denominators, and taking the ratio of the two sums.

E

Additional Results from Analysis Plan

We pre-specified several additional analyses that we do not report in the main text. For completeness, we present and discuss them here.
Appendix Table A9 reports additional outcomes for prescribers. First we report effects on new
fills and refills using an alternative approach to the one used in the main text. In the approach
here, a new fill is the first fill by a patient from the prescriber using a one year lookback period,
and a refill is all other fills. While we pre-specified this approach, we found that churn in and out of
A8

private insurance coverage meant that many patients had incomplete lookback periods, leading to
misclassification of refills as new fills. In the main text we take a different approach that uses the
refill flag in the prescription dispense, which is reported by the pharmacy on the claim and is not
subject to misclassification if the patient has an incomplete lookback period. Consistent with churn
causing misclassification, we find smaller reductions in new fills here for private insurance than we
do with the approach in the main text. Next, to get a sense of effects on the typical daily dose
prescribed, we report effects on milligrams per day supply, dividing the former by the latter. This
outcome is only defined for PCPs who prescribed some quetiapine in the outcome period (N =1,895
in private insurance and N =3,512 in Medicare). We do not detect an effect in private insurance but
note a positive and significant effect in Medicare, consistent with prescribers curtailing relatively
low-dose prescriptions due to the letter.
The remaining rows of Appendix Table A9 report treatment effect estimates by quartiles of ex
ante quetiapine prescribing volume (defined as the total of private insurance and Medicare prescribing). We counted prescribing during the 1 year pre-intervention period, a post-hoc modification
from the analysis plan, which anticipated 9 months, because we sought to match our other analyses
which generally used a one year pre-intervention period. Because a large number of study PCPs
did not prescribe any quetiapine in HCCI data in the baseline period, quartile 1 contains all of
them and is larger than one-fourth of the sample; these PCPs are missing from quartile 2, which
is smaller than one-fourth. Across the quartiles absolute effect estimates are always negative and
they expand in magnitude at higher quartiles for both private insurance and Medicare prescribing.
Effects are only statistically significant for Medicare prescribing for quartiles 3 and 4. Percent effect
estimates peak at quartile 2 for private insurance and quartile 3 for Medicare.
Appendix Table A10 reports the remaining pre-specified patient outcomes. The first three
outcomes are alternative definitions of quetiapine receipt. As expected, the fills measure is similar
in percent terms to the days measure reported in the main text; fills differs only because it ignores
the days supply on fills, counting those with a short or long supply of medication equally. Effects
on quetiapine cost are noisily measured, a pattern we also observed at the prescriber level. While
effects on this outcome were not statistically significant, the confidence intervals on the percent
effects easily include the point estimates of the effects on days supply. A similar pattern occurs
for quetiapine milligrams where effects are negative, insignificant, and more noisily measured than
A9

effects on days supply.
The next two measures are indicators for discontinuation in 2016Q4, i.e. the patient had no
dispenses during this time, and dose reduction in 2016Q4, i.e. the patient received a lower dose
in milligrams per day during this quarter as compared to the quarter before the intervention. The
rate of dose reduction is lower than discontinuation because many patients already did not receive
quetiapine during the last quarter before the intervention and so their dose could not be further
reduced. Point estimates on these outcomes are all positive indicating less quetiapine receipt, but
only reach statistical significance for dose reduction for Medicare patients.
We further pre-specified tests of whether patients were substituted to quetiapine alternatives.
The next three outcomes report these tests for benzodiazepines, non-benzodiazepine insomnia drugs,
and antidepressants, and do not detect any changes.
The subsequent four outcomes measure hospital encounters for substance use disorder (defined as
visits with a principal diagnosis in AHRQ Clinical Classification Software categories 660 or 661) and
for mental health reasons (principal diagnosis in Clinical Classification Software categories 650-652,
655-659, 662, 663, or 670), looking separately at ED visits and inpatient stays. Of the 8 estimates,
we only detect a statistically significant effect (a reduction) on ED visits for mental health reasons
for Medicare patients.
Next, given that differential disenrollment between treatment and control would lead to potentially spurious findings of treatment effects, we conducted a simple test of whether treatment or
control patients remained enrolled in coverage at the same rate. By December 2016, only about
half of private insurance patients and two-thirds are Medicare patients remained covered. We did
not detect a difference in enrollment rates between treatment and control patients in either insurer
group, however.
The final rows of the table report effects dividing the outcome into three mutually exclusive and
exhaustive sources: the patient’s baseline prescriber to whom they were attributed, other prescribers
who did not have psychiatric specialization, and other prescribers who had psychiatric specialization.
The effects on receipt from the three sources sum to approximately the days supply treatment effect
in Table 5, but do not exactly sum to it because the baseline control is different in each regression
(the control is the patient’s quetiapine receipt from the given source during the baseline period).
The results show that in an accounting sense, for both private insurance and Medicare patients, the
A10

bulk of the cutback comes from the baseline prescriber with some compounding reductions from
other prescribers. None of these effects is significant at the 5% level, and only the reduction from
the baseline prescriber for Medicare patients is significant at the 10% level.

A11

Appendix Figures

Attachment 3 (Treatment Letter)

Figure A1 – Sample Intervention Letter

A12

Appendix Tables
Table A1
Effects on Additional Prescribing Volume Measures
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Insurer
Private Insurance
Medicare
P-Val, %
Effects
Control Treatment Percent
Control Treatment Percent
Outcome
Mean
Effect
Effect
Mean
Effect
Effect
Equal
Fills
6.1
-0.7
-11.6%
30.2
-4.9
-16.2%
[0.438]
(0.3)
(5.3%)
(1.0)
(3.2%)
Cost
403.1
-44.9
-11.1%
1,417.8
-188.2
-13.3%
[0.859]
(44.0)
(10.9%)
(80.1)
(5.7%)
ln(Cost+1)*
-0.217
-0.189
[0.031]
(0.058)
(0.065)
Total
35,199.4
-4,995.3
-14.2%
140,263.2 -14,330.0
-10.2%
[0.547]
Milligrams
(2,095.0)
(6.0%)
(5,019.0)
(3.6%)
135.3
-16.9
-12.5%
658.2
-108.1
-16.4%
[0.451]
Days (2015(6.5)
(4.8%)
(16.5)
(2.5%)
2016)
0.23
-0.03
-13.2%
0.66
-0.20
-30.0%
[0.073]
Unique
(0.02)
(8.3%)
(0.03)
(4.4%)
Patients (2015)
0.42
-0.04
-8.3%
1.16
-0.31
-26.7%
[0.029]
Unique
(0.03)
(7.7%)
(0.05)
(4.0%)
Patients (2016)
Unique
0.34
-0.02
-7.3%
1.21
-0.21
-17.0%
[0.333]
(0.03)
(9.1%)
(0.06)
(4.7%)
Patients (2017)
N=5,055. Notes: Table reports estimates for prescriber-level outcomes for private insurance (columns 1-3)
and Medicare (columns 4-6). Each row presents an alternative measure of quetiapine prescribing volume
during the outcome period (April 21, 2015 through December 31, 2017). See text for more detail.
Columns 1 and 4 report the mean outcome for control prescribers. Columns 2 and 5 report the
treatment effect estimate from equation (1). Columns 3 and 6 divide the treatment effect by the control
mean to produce a percent effect. Column 7 reports the p-value from a test that the percent effects for
private insurance and Medicare are equal. Robust standard errors in parentheses. P-values in brackets.
* Because the outcome is logged, these treatment effect estimates can be multiplied by 100 and
interpreted as the log-point effect of the intervention on the cost of quetiapine covered.
(1)

A13

Table A2
Summary Statistics of Baseline Patients
(1)
(2)
Private Insurance
Control
Treatment

(3)
(4)
Patient Cohort
Medicare
Characteristic
Control
Treatment
Age Band (Years)
0-17
1.6%
1.9%
18-25
9.5%
7.5%
25-34
12.5%
15.9%
0.6%
0.9%
35-44
20.9%
21.4%
3.2%
3.0%
45-54
27.1%
28.0%
10.2%
11.6%
55-64
28.2%
25.3%
18.7%
18.4%
65-74
25.6%
24.5%
75-84
24.3%
23.0%
85+
17.4%
18.3%
Dual (Medicare-Medicaid) Eligible*
N/A
N/A
25.0%
27.0%
Female
58.1%
57.3%
62.7%
64.0%
Days of Quetiapine, Baseline Period
164.2 (141.1) 152.4 (135.1)
233.3 (161.9) 234.8 (159.4)
Appropriateness for Quetiapine
Guideline-Concordant
51.1%
50.0%
57.6%
57.6%
Intermediate Evidence
11.9%
11.8%
7.5%
7.5%
Low-Value
16.0%
17.0%
20.8%
20.7%
Unknown
20.9%
21.2%
14.0%
14.2%
Enrolled December 2015
76.0%
74.0%
84.1%
83.8%
Enrolled December 2016
48.9%
51.5%
65.3%
66.0%
Months Enrolled, Outcome Period
18.8 (11.8)
18.9 (11.9)
23.4 (11.6)
23.6 (11.6)
N
974
1,006
3,837
3,547
P-value, omnibus test of equality
0.230
0.697
Notes: This table reports summary statistics of the baseline patients of the study prescribers.
Columns 1 and 2 consider baseline patients covered by private insurance who received quetiapine
from one control arm prescriber and one treatment arm prescriber, respectively. Columns 3 and 4
consider baseline patients on Medicare Advantage. Binary variables displayed as percentages and
continuous variables displayed as means (standard deviations). See text for more details on how
patients are classified into appropriateness categories.
* Among the 69.5% of Medicare patients for whom dual status was observed.

A14

Table A3
Drug Category
Quetiapine

List of Drugs Included in Each Category
Drugs Included
Quetiapine

Atypical Antipsychotics
(Excluding Quetiapine)

Aripiprazole, Asenapine, Brexiprazole, Cariprazine,
Clozapine, Iloperidone, Lurasidone, Olanzapine,
Paliperidone, Pimavanserin, Risperidone, Ziprasidone

First-generation Antipsychotics

Chlorpromazine, Fluphenazine, Haloperidol, Loxapine,
Molindone, Perphenazine, Pimozide, Thioridazine,
Thiothixene, Trifluoperazine

Antidepressants

Amitriptyline, Amoxapine, Bupropion, Citalopram,
Clomipramine, Desipramine, Desvenlafaxine, Doxepin,
Duloxetine, Escitalopram, Fluoxetine, Fluvoxamine,
Imipramine, Isocarboxazid, Maprotiline, Milnacipran,
Mirtazapine, Nefazodone, Nortriptyline, Paroxetine,
Phenelzine, Protriptyline, Selegiline, Sertraline,
Tranylcypromine, Trazodone, Trimipramine, Venlafaxine,
Vilazodone

Benzodiazepines

Alprazolam, Chlordiazepoxide, Clobazam, Clonazepam,
Clorazepate, Diazepam, Estazolam, Flunitrazepam,
Flurazepam, Halazepam, Lorazepam, Midazolam, Oxazepam,
Prazepam, Quazepam, Temazepam, Triazolam

Insomnia
Doxepin, Eszopiclone, Ramelteon, Suvorexant, Tasimelteon,
(Excluding Benzodiazepines)
Zaleplon, Zolpidem
We used the following sources:
Antipsychotics: all included in 2016 CMS data, https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Dataand-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-Reports/Medicare-Provider-Charge-Data/Part-DPrescriber.html
Antidepressants: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare-Medicaid-Coordination/FraudPrevention/Medicaid-Integrity-Education/Pharmacy-Education-Materials/Downloads/ad-adultdosingchart.pdf
Benzodiazepines: https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/resources/data.html
Insomnia: Non-benzodiazepine, non-barbituate prescription sleep aids according to
https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/PostmarketDrugSafetyInformationforPatientsandPro
viders/ucm101557.htm

A15

Table A4
Effects on Prescribing of Substitute or Alternative Medications
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Insurer
Private Insurance
Medicare
P-Val, %
Control Treatment Percent
Control Treatment Percent
Effects
Medication
Mean
Effect
Effect
Mean
Effect
Effect
Equal
Other Atypical
171.3
-4.0
-2.3%
782.8
-18.4
-2.3%
[0.995]
Antipsychotics
(8.7)
(5.1%)
(25.7)
(3.3%)
First-Gen
6.9
0.6
8.3%
124.9
-10.3
-8.2%
[0.404]
Antipsychotics
(1.3)
(19.2%)
(7.3)
(5.8%)
Benzodiazepines
2,367.6
28.6
1.2%
5,881.6
41.9
0.7%
[0.851]
(54.8)
(2.3%)
(131.4)
(2.2%)
Antidepressants
6,011.7
270.3
4.5%
13,883.3
232.2
1.7%
[0.181]
(107.4)
(1.8%)
(243.1)
(1.8%)
Insomnia (excl.
1,073.2
17.2
1.6%
1,128.3
-2.0
-0.2%
[0.577]
(26.6)
(2.5%)
(28.9)
(2.6%)
Benzo.)
N=5,055. Notes: Table reports estimates for prescriber-level outcomes for private insurance (columns 13) and Medicare (columns 4-6). Each row presents prescribing of a potential substitute or alternative
drug class during the outcome period (April 21, 2015 through December 31, 2017). See text for more
detail. Columns 1 and 4 report the mean outcome for control prescribers. Columns 2 and 5 report the
treatment effect estimate from equation (1). Columns 3 and 6 divide the treatment effect by the control
mean to produce a percent effect. Column 7 reports the p-value from a test that the percent effects for
private insurance and Medicare are equal. Robust standard errors in parentheses. P-values in brackets.

A16

Table A5

Patient Cohort
Appropriateness Group

Effects on Baseline Patients' Receipt of Quetiapine, by Appropriateness Group
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Private Insurance
Medicare
Control Treatment Percent
N
Control Treatment Percent
Mean
Effect
Effect
Mean
Effect
Effect

N

(7)
P-Val, %
Effects
Equal

GuidelineConcordant

317.3

-39.0
(20.9)

-12.3%
(6.6%)

1,001

484.9

-22.7
(13.0)

-4.7%
(2.7%)

4,255

[0.284]

Intermediate
Evidence

213.2

-2.5
(32.8)

-1.2%
(15.4%)

235

433.3

-15.9
(31.5)

-3.7%
(7.3%)

552

[0.883]

Low Value /
Inappropriate

228.5

-15.1
(28.4)

-6.6%
(12.4%)

327

361.6

-38.4
(19.2)

-10.6%
(5.3%)

1,536

[0.766]

Unknown

174.1

1.6
0.9%
417
383.1
0.2
0.1%
1,041
[0.949]
(22.0)
(12.6%)
(23.6)
(6.2%)
Notes: Table reports estimates for outcomes for different appropriateness groups of privately insured baseline patients
(columns 1-3) and baseline patients on Medicare (columns 4-6). See text for more details on the construction of the
baseline patient cohorts and the approach to assigning patients to groups. Each measure counts the days of quetiapine
received by patients in the specified appropriateness group during the outcome period (April 21, 2015 through
December 31, 2017). Columns 1 and 4 report the mean outcome for baseline patients of control prescribers. Columns 2
and 5 report the treatment effect estimate from equation (2). Columns 3 and 6 divide the treatment effect by the
control mean to produce a percent effect. Column 7 reports the p-value from a test that the percent effects for the
private insurance and Medicare cohorts are equal. Robust standard errors clustered at the baseline prescriber level in
parentheses. P-values in brackets.

A17

Table A6
Prescribing of Outlier PCPs in Targeting Simulations and Projected Effects
(1)
Prescriber Group

Medicare Outliers

A. No Quetiapine Prescribing, 2013-2014,
in Medicare
in Private Insurance
in Medicare+Private Combined

%
0.0
71.9
0.0

B. Quetiapine Days Supplied, 2013-2014, average
in Medicare
1,580.8
in Private Insurance
105.2
in Medicare+Private Combined
1,686.0

(2)
Private Ins.
Outliers

(3)
Medicare + Private
Outliers

56.2
0.0
0.0

9.6
50.9
0.0

286.6
640.0
926.6

1,441.0
334.3
1,775.3

C. Projected National Change in Primary Care Quetiapine Days from Intervening on Outliers, %
in Medicare
-4.67
-1.39
-4.42
in Private Insurance
-1.13
-3.43
-2.24
in Medicare+Private Combined
-3.88
-1.84
-3.93
N
5,076
5,054
5,075
Notes: Table reports statistics or projections for physicians in each group. Groups are defined as
physicians who are outliers in prescribing to Medicare patients (column 1), to privately insured
patients (column 2), and to Medicare and private insurance combined (column 3). Panel A
reports the percent of prescribers with no prescribing in the given insurer in 2013-2014, the
period used by the algorithm to identify outliers. Panel B reports the average level of quetiapine
days supplied during the 2013-2014 period. Finally, Panel C reports the projected national
percent reduction in quetiapine days supplied by all PCPs in the given insurer during the
outcome period (April 2015 to end-2017) if the entire outlier population were treated with
letters. All calculations done using HCCI data only. See text for more details.

A18

Table A7
List of Diagnosis Codes by Condition
Condition

ICD-9

ICD-10

Bipolar Disorder

Multi-Level CCS Code 5.8.1

Schizophrenia

Multi-Level CCS Code 5.10

F30.10-F30.13, F30.2, F30.3, F30.4, F30.8, F30.9,
F31.0, F31.10-F31.13, F31.2, F31.30, F31.31,
F31.32, F31.4, F31.5, F31.60-F31.64, F31.70F31.78, F31.81, F31.89, F31.9, F33.8, F34.81,
F34.89, F34.9, F39
Multi-Level CCS Code 5.10

Guideline-Concordant Conditions

Guideline-Concordant or Intermediate Value Depending on Presence of Antidepressant
Major Depression

293.83, 296.2X, 296.3X

F06.30, F32.9, F32.0, F32.1, F32.2, F32.3, F32.4,
F32.5, F33.9, F33.0, F33.1, F33.2, F33.3, F33.41,
F33.42

300.02

F41.1

331.0, 331.1, 331.11, 331.19, 331.2, 331.7, 290.0,
290.10-290.12, 290.20, 290.21, 290.3, 290.40-290.43,
294.0, 294.1, 294.10, 294.11, 294.20, 294.21, 294.8,
797, 290.13
327.0, 327.01, 327.02, 327.09, 307.41, 307.42,
291.82, 292.85, 780.51, 780.52

F01.50, F01.51, F02.80, F02.81, F03.90, F03.91,
F04, F05, F06.1, F06.8, G13.8, G30.0, G30.1,
G30.8, G30.9, G31.1, G31.2, G31.01, G31.09, G94,
R41.81, R54
F10.182, F10.282, F10.982, F11.182, F11.282,
F11.982, F13.182, F13.282, F13.982, F14.182,
F14.282, F14.982, F15.182, F15.282, F15.982,
F19.182, F19.282, F19.982, F51.02, F51.09,
F51.01, F51.03, G47.01, F51.04, F51.05, G47.30,
G47.00
F43.10, F43.12

Intermediate Value Condition
Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Low-Value Conditions
Dementia / Alzheimer's

Insomnia

PTSD
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Personality Disorder

309.81

Eating Disorder

Multi-Level CCS Code 5.15.2

Alcohol Use Disorder

Multi-Level CCS Code 5.11

300.3, 301.4
301.X, 301.XX

F42.2, F42.3, F42.8, F42.9, F60.5
F21, F34.0, F34.1, F60.0-F60.7, F60.9, F60.81,
F60.89, F68.10, F68.11, F68.12, F68.13, F69
F50.00, F50.9, F50.2, F98.3, F98.21, F50.89,
F50.81, F50.82, F50.89, F98.29
Multi-Level CCS Code 5.11

Additional Intermediate Value Condition (only used in pre-specified algorithm)
Depression (Ex. Major)

311, 300.4, 309.0, 309.1. 309.28, 298.0

F34.1, F43.21, F43.23, F32.9

Notes: When possible, we deferred to AHRQ Clinical Classification Software (CCS) groups. When the appropriate CCS
group was a level 2 category, we used the ICD-9 and 10 codes from that group. Because level 3 categories are not yet
available for ICD-10, when the group was a level 3 category (bipolar disorder, eating disorders), we used the given ICD-9
codes and found the relevant ICD-10 codes using equivalency mapping tables. ICD-9 and 10 codes for Dementia/Alzheimer's
and Personality Disorder were taken from the Chronic Conditions Warehouse. For the other conditions, we sought out
relevant academic literature and performed internet searches; this process typically identified ICD-9 codes which we then
mapped to ICD-10 codes using equivalency tables.

A19

Table A8
Effects on Prescribing by Patient Appropriateness (Pre-Specified Approach)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Insurer
Private Insurance
Medicare
AppropriateControl Treatment Percent
Control Treatment Percent
ness Group
Mean
Effect
Effect
Mean
Effect
Effect

(7)
P-Val, %
Effects
Equal

GuidelineConcordant

39.2

-7.4
(3.4)

-18.9%
(8.7%)

297.9

-51.4
(11.3)

-17.2%
(3.8%)

[0.858]

Intermediate
Evidence

29.7

-4.8
(3.0)

-16.1%
(10.1%)

145.4

-11.2
(7.4)

-7.7%
(5.1%)

[0.454]

Low Value /
Inappropriate

14.0

-0.5
(2.1)

-3.5%
(14.9%)

126.3

-19.4
(7.2)

-15.4%
(5.7%)

[0.453]

Unknown

126.6

-8.1
-6.4%
524.9
-117.9
-22.5%
[0.039]
(8.8)
(6.9%)
(24.4)
(4.7%)
N=5,055. Notes: This table repeats Table 4 but uses the pre-specified approach to assign patients to
appropriateness groups rather than the preferred (post-hoc) approach. See appendix for more details on
how the approaches differ.
The table reports estimates for prescriber-level outcomes for private insurance (columns 1-3) and
Medicare (columns 4-6). Each row counts quetiapine prescribing in days supply to patients in the
specified appropriateness group during the outcome period (April 21, 2015 through December 31, 2017).
The text provides more details on the preferred approach to assigning patients to groups and footnote 1
describes how the approach used here differs from it. Columns 1 and 4 report the mean outcome for
control prescribers. Columns 2 and 5 report the treatment effect estimate from equation (1). Columns 3
and 6 divide the treatment effect by the control mean to produce a percent effect. Column 7 reports the
p-value from a test that the percent effects for private insurance and Medicare are equal. Robust
standard errors in parentheses. P-values in brackets.

A20

Table A9
Additional Prescriber-Level Outcomes from Analysis Plan
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Insurer
Private Insurance
Medicare
P-Val, %
Control Treatment Percent
Control Treatment Percent
Effects
Outcome
Mean
Effect
Effect
Mean
Effect
Effect
Equal
1.0
-0.1
-8.6%
3.2
-0.7
-22.4%
[0.071]
New Fills
(0.1)
(7.0%)
(0.1)
(3.5%)
(Lookback)
Refills
5.1
-0.6
-12.2%
27.1
-4.3
-15.9%
[0.564]
(Lookback)
(0.3)
(5.7%)
(0.9)
(3.4%)
MG /
145.5
-0.6
-0.4%
125.3
11.5
9.2%
[0.031]
Days Supply*
(5.3)
(3.6%)
(3.6)
(2.9%)
Quetiapine Days by Quartiles of Ex Ante (1-Year Baseline Period) Private + Medicare Prescribing
Quartile 1
38.2
-4.3
-11.4%
159.7
-25.1
-15.7%
[0.819]
(N=1,778)
(6.4)
(16.8%)
(17.5)
(10.9%)
Quartile 2
115.7
-19.8
-17.1%
500.1
-69.7
-13.9%
[0.847]
(N=782)
(17.8)
(15.4%)
(42.4)
(8.5%)
Quartile 3
187.3
-25.0
-13.3%
960.8
-202.6
-21.1%
[0.438]
(N=1,245)
(17.2)
(9.2%)
(50.8)
(5.3%)
Quartile 4
521.3
-52.9
-10.2%
2,859.8
-457.3
-16.0%
[0.421]
(35.8)
(6.9%)
(104.0)
(3.6%)
(N=1,250)
N=5,055. Notes: Table reports estimates for prescriber-level outcomes for private insurance (columns 1-3)
and Medicare (columns 4-6) that were defined in the analysis plan but were not otherwise reported in the
main text. Each row presents prescribing of a different quetiapine measure during the outcome period
(April 21, 2015 through December 31, 2017). See appendix and analysis plan for more details. Columns 1
and 4 report the mean outcome for control prescribers. Columns 2 and 5 report the treatment effect
estimate from equation (1). Columns 3 and 6 divide the treatment effect by the control mean to produce a
percent effect. Column 7 reports the p-value from a test that the percent effects for private insurance and
Medicare are equal. Robust standard errors in parentheses. P-values in brackets.
* N =1,895 for private insurance and N =3,512 for Medicare because this outcome is only defined for
physicians with quetiapine prescribing in the outcome period.

A21

Table A10
Additional Patient-Level Outcomes from Analysis Plan
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Patient Group
Private Insurance (N=1,980)
Medicare (N=7,384)
P-Val, %
Control Treatment Percent
Control Treatment Percent
Effects
Outcome
Equal
Mean
Effect
Effect
Mean
Effect
Effect
7.3
-0.7
-9.6%
11.7
-0.8
-6.9%
[0.665]
Quetiapine Fills
(0.4)
(5.5%)
(0.3)
(2.6%)
Quetiapine Cost
794.9
-88.7
-11.2%
711.8
-1.2
-0.2%
[0.423]
(93.5)
(11.8%)
(48.8)
(6.9%)
Quetiapine MG
54,019.6
-5,936.7
-11.0%
68,052.3
-1,044.5
-1.5%
[0.206]
(3,662.3)
(6.8%)
(2,225.3)
(3.3%)
Indicator for Discontinued
0.76
0.00
0.1%
0.62
0.02
3.2%
[0.316]
2016Q4
(0.02)
(2.5%)
(0.01)
(1.9%)
Indicator for Dose Reduced
0.50
0.02
4.0%
0.50
0.03
5.8%
[0.731]
2016Q4
(0.02)
(4.6%)
(0.01)
(2.6%)
Benzodiazepine Days
162.5
0.8
0.5%
239.4
1.4
0.6%
[0.992]
(10.3)
(6.3%)
(6.9)
(2.9%)
Non-Benzodiazepine
62.8
-0.8
-1.3%
42.3
3.2
7.7%
[0.449]
Insomnia Drug Days
(6.0)
(9.6%)
(2.9)
(6.9%)
Antidepressants Days
318.4
2.6
0.8%
522.6
4.8
0.9%
[0.987]
(16.9)
(5.3%)
(11.8)
(2.3%)
ED Visits for Substance
0.04
0.01
22.2%
0.03
-0.01
-19.8%
[0.369]
Use Disorder
(0.01)
(36.3%)
(0.01)
(29.7%)
ED Visits for Mental
0.04
0.01
26.5%
0.07
-0.05
-78.3%
[0.038]
Health Reasons
(0.01)
(35.2%)
(0.02)
(36.2%)
Inpatient Stays for
0.07
0.02
33.7%
0.02
0.00
6.1%
[0.528]
Substance Use Disorder
(0.03)
(34.6%)
(0.00)
(26.2%)
Inpatient Stays for Mental
0.04
0.01
14.6%
0.07
0.00
2.6%
[0.727]
Health Reasons
(0.01)
(31.1%)
(0.01)
(15.4%)
Enrolled December 2016*
0.49
0.03
0.65
0.01
p=0.264
p=0.595
Quetiapine Days by Source of Receipt
Baseline Prescriber
188.5
-17.4
-9.2%
296.5
-17.0
-5.7%
[0.599]
(11.3)
(6.0%)
(8.9)
(3.0%)
Non-Psych Prescribers (ex
56.4
-4.5
-8.1%
120.2
-3.0
-2.5%
[0.662]
Baseline)
(6.7)
(11.8%)
(6.1)
(5.1%)
Psych Prescribers
15.7
-1.9
-12.1%
24.3
-2.1
-8.7%
[0.892]
(3.7)
(23.5%)
(2.6)
(10.7%)
(ex Baseline)
Notes: Table reports estimates for outcomes for privately insured baseline patients (columns 1-3) and baseline
patients on Medicare (columns 4-6) that were defined in the analysis plan but were not otherwise reported in the
main text. See text for more details on the construction of the baseline patient cohorts. See appendix and analysis
plan for more details on the outcomes. Each measure counts health care use during the outcome period (April 21,
2015 through December 31, 2017) unless otherwise stated. Columns 1 and 4 report the mean outcome for baseline
patients of control prescribers. Columns 2 and 5 report the treatment effect estimate from equation (2). Columns 3
and 6 divide the treatment effect by the control mean to produce a percent effect. Column 7 reports the p-value
from a test that the percent effects for the private insurance and Medicare cohorts are equal. Robust standard
errors clustered at the baseline prescriber level in parentheses. P-values in brackets.
* Reports simple difference in means and p-value of test of equality of means between treatment and control, p-value
of test clustered at baseline prescriber level.

A22

