                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    EFFECTS OF SOCIAL DISTANCING POLICY ON LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES

                                         Sumedha Gupta
                                        Laura Montenovo
                                        Thuy D. Nguyen
                                       Felipe Lozano Rojas
                                         Ian M. Schmutte
                                          Kosali I. Simon
                                       Bruce A. Weinberg
                                           Coady Wing

                                       Working Paper 27280
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27280


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     May 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27280.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sumedha Gupta, Laura Montenovo, Thuy D. Nguyen, Felipe Lozano Rojas, Ian M.
Schmutte, Kosali I. Simon, Bruce A. Weinberg, and Coady Wing. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Social Distancing Policy on Labor Market Outcomes
Sumedha Gupta, Laura Montenovo, Thuy D. Nguyen, Felipe Lozano Rojas, Ian M. Schmutte,
Kosali I. Simon, Bruce A. Weinberg, and Coady Wing
NBER Working Paper No. 27280
May 2020
JEL No. I1,J08,J1

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impact of the social distancing policies states adopted between March
and April of 2020 in response to the COVID-19 epidemic. These actions, together with voluntary
social distancing, appear to have reduced the rate of new COVID-19 cases and deaths, but raised
concerns about the costs experienced by workers and businesses. Estimates from difference-in-
difference models that leverage cross-state variation in the timing of business closures and stay-
at-home mandates suggest that the employment rate fell by about 1.7 percentage points for every
extra 10 days that a state experienced a stay-at-home mandate during the period March 12-April
12, 2020; select business closure laws were associated with similar employment effects.

Our estimates imply that about 40% of the 12 percentage point decline in employment rates
between January and April 2020 was due to a nationwide shock while about 60% was driven by
state social distancing policies. The negative employment effects of state policies were larger for
workers in "non-essential" industries, workers without a college degree, and early-career workers.
Policy caused relatively modest changes in hours worked and earnings among those who remain
employed. We find no concerning evidence of pre-trends in the monthly (low-frequency) CPS
data, but use high-frequency data on work-related mobility measured from cellphones, job-loss-
related internet searches, and initial unemployment claims to investigate the possibility that the
large employment effects experienced in April could have occurred after the March CPS but but
before policy adoption. In those analyses, we find pre-trends for some outcomes but not others.
Thus we cannot fully rule out that some employment effects shortly predated the policies. As
states relax business closures, ensuring gains in labor market activities in ways that continue to
mitigate COVID-19 "surges" and public health risks will be key considerations to monitor.

Sumedha Gupta                     Felipe Lozano Rojas Indiana       Bruce A. Weinberg
Department of Economics           University                        Department of Economics
Indiana University-Purdue         2451 E. 10th Street               Ohio State University 410
University Indianapolis           Bloomington, IN 47408             Arps Hall
425 University Blvd.              flozanor@indiana.edu              1945 North High Street
Indianapolis, IN 46202                                              Columbus, OH 43210
sugupta@iupui.edu                 Ian M. Schmutte                   and NBER
                                  Terry College of Business         weinberg.27@osu.edu
Laura Montenovo                   University of Georgia
Indiana University                Athens, GA 30602                  Coady Wing
2451 E. 10th Street               schmutte@uga.edu                  Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47408                                               1315 E 10th St
lmonten@iu.edu                    Kosali I. Simon                   Bloomington, IN 47401
                                  O’Neill School of Public and      cwing@indiana.edu
Thuy D. Nguyen                    Environmental Affairs
Indiana University                Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47401             1315 East Tenth Street
thdnguye@indiana.edu              Bloomington, IN
                                  47405-1701 and NBER
                                  simonkos@indiana.edu
1     Introduction
To slow the transmission of SARS-COV-2, state governments have adopted social distancing
policies that effectively shut down large sectors of the economy. The combined effects of
the COVID-19 epidemic and associated policy responses have been massive and sudden.
More jobs have been lost during the first three months of COVID-19 than during the
entire Great Recession (Montenovo et al., 2020). Evidence from the first three weeks of the
epidemic suggested that most of the shock was nationwide, and that state and local policy
measures did not appear to accentuate or moderate the economic impacts (Lozano-Rojas
et al., 2020). In this paper, we study the effects of state social distancing policies on labor
market outcomes using more recent data from several different sources, including cell phone
data measuring work-related mobility, state-level data on initial unemployment insurance
claims, unemployment-related internet searches, and person-level data from the monthly
Current Population Surveys from January 2015 to April 2020.
    Although state governments adopted various social distancing policies during March and
April of 2020 (Gupta et al., 2020), we focus on the two measures of social distancing policy
that most directly lead to cessation of business activity. The first measure is the timing of
restaurant and any other (non-essential) business closures (“any business closures”, or ABC
for short), which happened early. These laws are likely more exogenous with respect to
changes in consumer demand and labor markets as these policies happened rather suddenly.
The second measure is the timing of stay-at-home mandates (SAH), which happened toward
the end of a state’s shutdown sequence and almost always at the same time as states’ closures
of all non-essential businesses (Gupta et al., 2020). These laws occurred after large reductions
of mobility, but not necessarily after substantial changes in employment rates, as large-scale
business closures had not occurred until then. As Figure 1 shows, there is substantial variation
in the timing of these two policies across states.
    To study the effects of social distancing policies on labor market outcomes, we use
difference-in-differences (DID) and event-study designs. Some of our data sources are at
the day or week by state level and allow us to focus on event studies in the immediate
short run around the policy events. However, these high frequency data do not measure the
conventional labor market outcomes that are of central interest to policy discussions. We
use data from the monthly Current Population Survey (CPS) to study employment, work
absence, earnings, and hours worked overall and in selected sub-populations. We use a DID
method that allows us to compare labor market outcomes in mid-April 2020 to those in
mid-March 2020. This technique leverages differences in the amount of time that states were



                                               1
subject to social distancing policies, essentially comparing states that acted earlier to states
that acted later. We include data from previous years to control for seasonality. By April,
most states had adopted ABC and SAH mandates, but some states took these steps before
others, so their economies were subject to these constraints for a longer period of time.
    Labor markets experienced large declines from January to April, with employment rates
falling by about 12 percentage points nationally. We use our DID estimates to assess how
much of this change appears due to national forces that operate independently of each state’s
specific business closure and stay at home policies. We find that about 40% of the decline
was driven by a nationwide shock and about 60% of the decline was driven by state social
distancing policies. The negative employment effects of state policies were larger for workers
in “non-essential” industries, workers without a college degree, and early-career workers.
Policy caused relatively modest changes in hours worked and earnings among those who
remain employed. These results suggest that social distancing policies are beginning to
have important economic effects on labor market outcomes. However, the results must be
interpreted with caution.
    The credibility of the DID analysis method revolves around the common trend and the
non-anticipation assumptions. When examining data on work related mobility, internet search
activity, and initial unemployment claims, we use a high-frequency event history specification
to explore pre-trends in key labor market outcomes and to trace out the timing of the policy
effects. In the case of the CPS, we examine a low-frequency (monthly) event study approach.
We find no evidence of pre-trends in the CPS data. While that is reassuring, the CPS data
are measured on monthly intervals, which makes it hard to rule out the possibility that
employment effects experienced in April happened before the social distancing policies were
adopted but after the March CPS data were collected. There is a somewhat more mixed
picture in the high-frequency data series, with some of the high frequency outcome measures
exhibiting pre-trends while other do not.
    Data on unemployment insurance (UI) claims, work-related cell phone mobility measures,
and Google Trends internet searches related to unemployment are all imperfect proxies for
the conventional labor market outcomes of interest (i.e. employment, hours, and earnings)
that are more traditionally and more reliably measured in the CPS. Our results show that
UI claims, workplace mobility measures of cell data, and internet search behavior related to
unemployment all suggest that the state policies have some causal effects. Even where we
observe different trends prior to policy implementation, there is evidence of a change in slope
after the policy takes effect.
    This paper provides an early assessment of the economic effects of social distancing policies


                                               2
adopted across the country. Since the time period covered by the April CPS, most states
have commenced gradual re-opening of businesses. Understanding how the shutdown affected
labor markets may provide a useful guide to the effects of reopening. As new CPS data
and data from other sources become available, it will be important to gauge whether and
under what conditions re-opening policies rapidly erase the job losses that occurred during
the shutdown phase, while minimizing public health harms.
    Section 2 summarizes the existing literature and provides a context for our study. Section
3 outlines the labor and policy data we use. Section 4 lays out our regression models to
separate effects according to the nature of the policies pursued by states in March and April.
We present the results in section 5, and offer a discussion and some tentative conclusions in
section 6.


2    Related Research
The social science literature on COVID-19 is evolving rapidly, thus an attempt at a literature
review is likely incomplete. However, this paper relates to several themes that have already
emerged in other articles. One line of work examines the way in which the epidemic and social
distancing policy responses have affected labor market outcomes overall, although none we are
aware of have used CPS data through April to study the impact of social distancing. Lozano-
Rojas et al. (2020) show that the historically unprecedented increase in initial unemployment
claims in March 2020 was largely across the board, occurring in all states regardless of local
epidemiological conditions or policy responses. Baek et al. (2020) come to a broadly similar
conclusion with UI records, examining a longer time period. Campello et al. (2020) provide
evidence on labor demand using job postings data from Linkup, although not as a function
of state policy. They find that job postings decline about 2 weeks before the large rise in UI
claims. They also find that job postings by small firms decline much more than job postings
by large firms, that job postings decline more for high- than low-skilled jobs, and that job
postings drop more in concentrated labor markets. Kahn et al. (2020) show a large drop in
job vacancy postings in the second half of March. They report that, by early April, there
were 30% fewer job postings than at the beginning of the year. These declines also largely
happened across states, regardless of state policies or infection rates.
    Our analysis of CPS data in this paper through April 12th shows a strong connection
between labor market outcomes and state policies. It is not surprising that analysis using
March CPS data (Lozano-Rojas et al., 2020) did not find such a result, as very few closure
policies had gone into effect by the CPS reference week (March 12). However, even with data


                                              3
through mid April, we find that there is a large across-the-board reduction in labor market
outcomes including in states that did not institute strong stay-at-home policies. While their
primary focus is on expectations and consumer spending, Coibin et al. (2020) use custom
data to show that lockdowns are related to worse labor markets, controlling for COVID-19
cases. Similar work is underway to analyze the economic effects of the epidemic in other
countries (Adams-Prassl et al., 2020; Dasgupta and Murali, 2020; Rothwell and Van Drie,
Rothwell and Van Drie).
    Recent work studies the effects of the epidemic (but not social distancing policy specifically)
on particular sub-populations, with emphasis on the role of job characteristics. Montenovo
et al. (2020) study early labor market outcomes during the epidemic using CPS data from
April 2020. They find high rates of recent unemployment that vary across groups, with
particularly high job losses among younger workers, Hispanic workers, workers in non-essential
industries, workers in jobs that are harder to perform remotely, and workers in jobs that
require more face-to-face contact. Furthermore, they show a hump-shaped pattern in job
losses by education. Dingel and Neiman (2020) and Mongey and Weinberg (2020) also study
high work-from-home occupations. Leibovici et al. (2020) takes a similar approach to measure
occupations with high interpersonal contact. Alon et al. (2020) find that the COVID-19
epidemic may have a larger economic effect on women than men, unlike in a “regular” recession.
A number of researchers have sought to provide results at a higher frequency than the CPS.
Blick and Blandin (2020) provide information on a number of demographic groups using data
from the Real-Time Population Survey, which is conducted every other week. Cajner et al.
(2020) use the payroll microdata from Automatic Data Processing, Inc (commonly known as
ADP). Aaronson et al. (2020) build a forecasting model that uses Google searching activity
for unemployment-related terms to predict weekly unemployment insurance claims, and find
that unemployment insurance claims and Google searches for unemployment insurance both
peak prior to stay-at-home orders. In this spirit, we draw on UI claims data as well as cell
phone mobility to workplaces to provide high-frequency information to augment our CPS
analyses. However, note that Coibion et al. (2020) use data from an early-April household
survey and find that unemployment rate may greatly exceed unemployment insurance claims.
    Another line of work examines the effects of state and local social distancing policies on
measures of mobility and interaction. Using cell phone data, Gupta et al. (2020) document a
massive, nationwide decline in multiple measures of mobility outside the home. They also
find evidence that early and information-focused state policies did lead to larger reductions
in mobility. These reductions in time spent outside the home suggest that many people are
experiencing work disruptions, and that those who can work remotely may be more able to


                                                4
maintain employment during the crisis. Relative to this work, we focus on mobility related to
the workplace in particular. We also connect our work directly to a range of labor market
outcomes for several demographic groups.


3       Data
3.1     Current Population Survey
We use data from the Basic Monthly CPS from January 2015 to April 2020, including all
individuals aged 21 and above. There are between 76,000 and 97,000 observations per month,
and our total sample is approximately 5.9 million observations. These surveys ask respondents
about their labor market activities during a reference week that includes the 12th of the
month (U.S. Census Bureau, 2019). Our primary measure of employment status is the share
of the population that the CPS codes as being employed and at work. This measure excludes
people who have a job but were temporarily absent1 . Lozano-Rojas et al. (2020); Bogage
(2020); Borden (2020) highlight the importance of properly coding people who are employed
but absent for measuring employment status during the COVID-19 epidemic2 . When we
construct our outcome measure of employment, we include only those who are employed and
at work. Given the importance that absence from work has gained during the epidemic, we
also consider the outcome “Absent - Employed,” which only includes those workers classified
as absent from work but still employed during the Basic Monthly CPS.
    Further, we examine hours worked to characterize changes in employment along the
intensive as well as extensive margin. Our measure is actual hours worked during the week
before the survey. In parts of our analysis we include individuals who are not employed by
assigning them zero hours, which provides a comprehensive measure of hours of work and
combines changes along the intensive and extensive margins. We also show estimates that
treat people who are not at work as having missing hours. This measure isolates the intensive
    1
     The CPS defines as “absent from job” all workers who were “temporarily absent from their regular jobs
because of illness, vacation, bad weather, labor dispute, or various personal reasons, whether or not they were
paid for the time off” (U.S. Census Bureau, 2019).
   2
     First, some employers released workers intending to rehire them. Second, some workers may have
requested leave from their schedule to provide dependent care or to care for a sick household member. Third,
there was a misclassification problem during the data collection of the March and April 2020 CPS. Specifically,
the BLS instructed surveyors to code those out of work due to the epidemic as recently laid off or unemployed,
but U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020a) and U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020b) explain that surveyors
appeared to code at least some of them in the employed-but-absent category. These factors contribute to a
massive increase in the share of workers coded as employed but absent from work between February and April.
In our sample, the employed-but-absent share group rose by almost 150% from February to April, 2020.



                                                      5
margin for those who remain employed.
   We also study COVID-19 policy effects on earnings, which are nuanced in terms of
expectations. On the one hand, reduced demand for many commercial activities imply that
earnings are likely to fall. There may be reductions in hourly wages, including overtime
payments. On the other hand, a number of high-exposure jobs may have provided workers
with additional compensation for the added risk incurred by COVID-19. Thus, it is possible
that for some, earnings may have increased rather than decreased as state policies change in
response to the epidemic. As with hours of work, we report results including people with
zero earnings as “zeros”. These estimates are comprehensive, combining the intensive and
extensive margins. Given that there has been a large reduction in employment, we also
provide estimates that consider outcomes only among those who continue to be employed.
These estimates isolate changes along the intensive margin for people who remain employed.
When we use earnings as outcome variable, our sample is limited to people in the outgoing
rotation groups of the CPS sample because only these individuals are asked questions about
earnings.


3.2       Homeland Security Data on Essential Work
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) issued guidance about critical infrastructure
workers during the COVID-19 epidemic3 . The DHS guidance outlines 14 categories that are
defined as essential critical infrastructure sectors. We follow Blau et al. (2020)’s definition
of essential industries, which matches the text descriptions to the NAICS 2017 four-digit
industry classification from the U.S. Census Bureau4 , and to the CPS industry classification
system. From the 287 industry categories at the four-digit level, 194 are identified as essential
in 17 out of 20 NAICS sectors.


3.3       Weekly Initial Unemployment Insurance Claims
In addition to the monthly CPS, we also study the number of initial UI claims in each U.S.
state, including Washington, DC, and Puerto Rico, from the first week of 2019 to the week
ending in May 16, 2020. We focus on the number of new UI claims per covered worker, using
the number of covered workers in January 2020 as a fixed denominator to avoid changes in
rates driven by changes in covered employment.
  3
      The list of critical infrastructure jobs is available at: https://www.cisa.gov/
  4
      North American Industry Classification System. Available at https://www.census.gov/




                                                    6
3.4     Social Distancing Policy Data
We use data on state social distancing policies that were previously reported in Gupta et al.
(2020). Basic information about the timing of state policy actions was originally collected by
Washington University researchers (Fullman et al., 2020) and Boston University researchers
(Raifman and Raifman, 2020).


3.5     Work-Related Mobility Data
We extract work-related mobility from two cell signal aggregators: Google and Safegraph.
In the Google mobility data, we use a day-by-state-level index of activity detected in work
locations. In the Safegraph data, we focus on a state-by-day measure of the fraction of
devices detected at locations that Safegraph has defined as likely to be the device owner’s
work location. The advantage of these data is that they are available at the daily level, and
provide a way for us to investigate whether employment followed a different trend in states
with early social distancing policies, a challenge in the CPS data given its monthly schedule.
However, cell phone mobility data have not been widely used in labor economics research
and their properties are not well understood. We view them as a proxy for time spent at
a person’s typical work location. These measures will not capture remote work, which has
become more common during the epidemic. It is also likely that the quality of these measures
could deteriorate when overall unemployment rates and job disruptions are high. After a
protracted period of working from home or unemployment, many people will no longer have
a meaningful, distinct workplace to serve as a reference point for work-related cell phone
mobility measures. In the CPS, our concept of employment does not depend on whether it is
done physically at a work location. Thus, we view the mobility data as supplementary to the
CPS data.


3.6     Google Trends Data
We obtain information on internet search behavior by day by state through the Google Health
API, which allows us to follow internet search queries across different terms, topics, and
geographies, in a way that allows comparisons across time and place5 . We pull data from
queries related to unemployment and unemployment benefits as suggested in the Google
Trend webpage, and we present it as such in Figure 6. Each sub-figure represents a series of
the total number of searches in a state per each 10 million searches.
   5
    We access this using the apiclient.discovery package for Python and its function getTimelinesForHealth.
For a thorough explanation of the different information available with Google Trends see www.medium.com


                                                    7
4     Econometric Methods
We conduct three broad empirical analyses. First, we examine the connection of state social
distancing policies with both cell-phone-based measures of work-related physical mobility
and Google trends data on work-related internet search activity. The cell-phone-based data
provide information at the day-by-state level; we use an event study model to analyze the
immediate changes in work related mobility following ABC and SAH orders. Second, we
examine the relationship between initial unemployment claims and state policies using an
event study model at the week-by-state level. These first two sets of analysis provide relatively
high-frequency measures of labor-market-related activity, and they allow us to assess pre-
trends and anticipation effects in considerable detail. However, the mobility data and the
initial unemployment insurance claims data are both aggregate analyses, providing little
opportunity to assess effects across sub-populations. As such, they are not the conventional
measures of labor market performance–mobility measures are fairly new to the literature and
their properties are not fully understood; Google search behavior reflects only the extent
to which job changes cause altered internet search patterns; and UI claims are known to
substantially underestimate the extent of job losses. To address these concerns, we turn to
the CPS and use a generalized difference-in-difference strategy and a low-frequency event
study based on monthly data.


4.1    Analyses of High-Frequency Data: Work-Related Mobility,
       Google Trends, and Unemployment Insurance Claims
Throughout this paper, we focus on Stay-at-Home (SAH) mandates and Any Business Closure
(ABC) mandates. States adopted these measures at different times, and this creates variation
across states in how long the mandates have been in place. Let EP s be the adoption date of
policy P ∈ {SAH, ABC} in state s. T SEP st = t−EP s measures the elapsed time between the
period t and the policy adoption date. In the analysis of work-related mobility and internet
search data, the data are measured at the daily level: the elapsed time is measured as the
number of days. The initial unemployment insurance (UI) claims are weekly: we consider
weeks since adoption in those data. We set lower (l) and upper limits (u) for the event time
coefficients following the availability of periods. For the daily analyses of mobility data and
Google Trends data, we allow for a window of 21 days before and after policy. In the weekly
analyses for UI claims we follow up to 10 weeks prior to the policy change and 7 weeks after.
We fit event study regression models that allow for concurrent effects of both policies with
the following structure:


                                               8
                                    −2                              u
                                                                                                  !
                       X            X                               X
           yst =                          αP a 1 (T SEP st = a) +         βP b 1 (T SEP st = b)
                   P ∈{SAH,ABC}    a=−l                             b=0

                                  + θs + γt + st

In the model, θs is a set of state fixed effects, which are meant to capture fixed differences
in the level of outcomes across states that are stable over the study period. γt is a set of
daily or weekly time fixed effects, which capture trends in the outcome that are common
across all states. st is a residual error term. αP a and βP b are event study coefficients that
trace out deviations from the common trends that states experience in the days leading
up to and following the stay-at-home orders and business closures. Specifically, αP a traces
out differential pre-event trends in the outcome that are associated with states that go on
to experience policy P ∈ {SAH, ABC} examined in the model. βP b traces out differential
post-event trends in the outcome that occur after a state adopts policy P ∈ {SAH, ABC}.
    In addition to the state-level event study analysis, we also block the sample into states
with longer and shorter SAH orders and ABC, expecting that early adopting states may
have larger effects on work-related mobility. Longer stay-at-home orders are defined as those
that were in effect for at least 18 days (the median implementation period) at the end of our
observation window. Similarly longer business closures are defined as those that were in effect
for at least 26 days on April 12, 2020.


4.2    Monthly CPS Analysis
We analyze the CPS data at the individual level using monthly data from January 2015 to
April 2020. We examine a dichotomous variable for being employed at work, employed but
absent from work, weekly earnings, and hours worked last week. We present two versions of
the weekly earnings and hours worked variables. First, we examine intensive margin responses
using the sample of people who are employed and therefore have positive earnings and positive
hours worked. Second, we examine earnings and hours concepts are set to zero for people
who are not employed. In the regression models, we apply an inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS)
transformation to the earnings variable; a regression of IHS(Earningsismt ) on covariates is
comparable to a conventional log-linear regression specification, but the IHS transformation
is defined for people who have zero earnings as well as for people who have positive earnings.
    Let Yismt be a labor market outcome associated with person i in state s in month m
and year t. Xismt is a vector of individual demographic and human capital characteristics.


                                                    9
Following the notation above, let ESAHs and EABCs be the adoption dates of the stay-at-home
(SAH) and any business closure (ABC) mandates in state s, and let t∗ = April 12, 2020 be
the focal date of the April CPS. Then SAHs = t∗ − ESAHs be the number of days that the
SAH policy had been in place by the April CPS focal date. Likewise, ABCs = t∗ − EABCs is
the number of days that ABC laws had been in place in a state as of the April CPS focal
date. Finally, let Aprilmt be an indicator variable equal to 1 if the observation is from the
April 2020 CPS and set to 0 otherwise. We use a generalized difference in difference model to
study the effects of the policies on labor market outcomes:



      yismt = δ1 (SAHs × Aprilmt ) + δ2 (ABCs × Aprilmt ) + Xismt β + θs + γmt + ismt .

In the model, θs is a state fixed effect that captures time invariant differences across states,
and γmt is a month × year fixed effect that captures time trends that are common across
states. ismt is an error term that we assume is strictly exogenous of the policy variables and
the covariates. The interaction terms SAHs × Aprilmt and ABCs × Aprilmt are analogous to
the Treat × Post terms in a conventional DID framework, except that the treat variable here
is a continuous (dosage) measure of how long a given social distancing policy has been in
place. δ1 and δ2 represent the effects of one additional day of exposure to the SAH and ABC
policies. The main effects associated with SAHs , ABCs , and Aprilmt are absorbed by the
fixed effects. We estimate the model using OLS regressions with fixed effects and we compute
standard errors using a cluster robust variance matrix that allows for heteroskedasticity and
for dependence between observations from the same state.
    This version of the DID model relies on the common trends and strict exogeneity
assumptions (Wing et al., 2018). The common trend assumption implies that, after adjusting
for covariates and state fixed effects, average labor market outcomes in a state would have
followed a common time trend in the absence of state social distancing policies. The strict
exogeneity assumption implies that state policy decisions in one period are not associated
with labor market outcomes in other time periods. The strict exogeneity assumption might
fail if patterns of employment, compensation, or hours worked change in anticipation of
downstream policy changes. These are strong assumptions that are not easy to test.
    To assess concerns about pre-trends at the monthly level in the CPS data, we estimate an
event study model using multiple waves of the CPS.




                                              10
                yismt = δ1 (SAHs × Aprilmt ) + δ2 (ABCs × Aprilmt )
                      + σ1 (SAHs × M archmt ) + τ1 (ABCs × M archmt )
                      + σ2 (SAHs × F ebruarymt ) + τ2 (ABCs × F ebruarymt )
                      + σ3 (SAHs × Januarymt ) + τ3 (ABCs × Januarymt )
                      + Xismt β + θs + γmt + ismt

In this model, the δ1 and δ2 coefficients continue to represent the effect of days of policy
exposure in April, 2020. But this time, the model includes interaction terms between the
(time invariant) days of SAH and ABC policy exposure and dummy variables for each of the
three months preceding the adoption of the policy. σ1 , σ2 , and σ3 provide estimates of the
difference in labor market outcomes between states that will go on to have more vs fewer
days of SAH exposure in March, February, and January of 2020. Since the SAH policies had
not been implemented in these earlier months, a significant coefficient on these SAH policy
leads would cast doubt on the strict exogeneity assumption due to differential pre-trends. τ1 ,
τ2 , and τ3 have a similar interpretation for the ABC mandates. These tests are one way to
assess the empirical credibility of the DD research design at the core of our CPS analysis.
     Although this kind of event study analysis seems like the recommended approach to
probing the validity of some key DID assumptions, it is unclear how well the method applies
in the context of the COVID-19 epidemic. The speed of the epidemic and recent changes in
labor market conditions really are unprecedented. An important and somewhat surreal worry
is that a gap of one month between labor market outcome measures could actually be too
slow to assess assumptions about pre-trends in the period leading up to state social distancing
policy changes. The specific concern is that much of the large decline in employment observed
in the April CPS could have taken place in a narrow interval of time after the March CPS
but before the adoption of state social distancing policies. In that case, the monthly event
study analysis would not detect evidence of pre-trends, and the DID estimator could deliver
biased estimates of the causal effects of the social distancing policies.
     There is no compelling way to fully resolve uncertainty on this issue with available data.
The best we can do is examine the CPS data in conjunction with high-frequency measures
of imperfect proxies for labor market activity. Our approach is to present evidence on
high-frequency measures of work-related mobility, employment-related internet search activity,
and initial unemployment claims.



                                              11
4.2.1   Interactions Between Social Distancing Policies and Essential Work

Recent work suggests that a large fraction of workers are involved in the delivery of essential
services and tha, during the epidemic, workers in essential industries entered unemployment
at lower rates than non-essential workers (Montenovo et al., 2020). It is plausible that the
economic effects of social distancing policies may have had a different effect on essential
and non-essential workers. To estimate different effects for people employed in essential and
non-essential industries, we estimate models that include an indicator for whether a person
is employed in an essential industry and interactions between that indicator and the social
distancing policy variables. Formally, we estimate



                     yismt = δ1 (SAHs × Aprilmt ) + δ2 (ABCs × Aprilmt )
                          + π1 (Essentialismt × SAHs × Aprilmt )
                          + π1 (Essentialismt × ABCs × Aprilmt )
                          + ρEssentialismt + Xismt β + θs + γmt + ismt .

In these models, δ1 and δ2 represent DD effects of additional days of policy exposure for
non-essential workers, and π1 and π2 represent differential policy effects for essential workers.
In most cases, we expect the policy effects to generate larger reductions in employment,
earnings, and hours worked for workers employed in non-essential industries than for those in
essential industries.

4.2.2   Disparate Impacts of Social Distancing Policies

To assess the extent to which social distancing policies impose a different burden on key sub-
populations, we augment the basic DID model and the essential industries model to include
a series of interaction terms that allow the policy effects to differ by gender, race/ethnicity,
and education. In a separate analysis, we fit an augmented version of the basic DID model to
allow for heterogeneous effects in narrowly defined age groups.




                                               12
5     Results
5.1    Trends in labor market outcomes
In Figure 2, we examine the pattern of our focal CPS labor market outcome variables from
January to April, in each of the years 2015-2020. The top left panel of the figure plots the
employment rate. The red line shows that employment rates from January through March
2020 are similar to the pattern observed over the same months in other years. The 2020 line
begins declining slightly between February and March, and then employment falls sharply
from March to April 2020. The employment rate in April 2020 is only 50%, far lower than
the rate in the same month in earlier years. The temporarily absent from work rate also
rose substantially during the early months of 2020, which may indicate a combination of
measurement error challenges in the recent waves of the CPS and genuine increases in work
absenteeism (Montenovo et al., 2020).
    The middle panel reports earnings, which are measured only for the CPS outgoing rotation
groups. The earnings graph on the left displays an apparently counterintuitive result: average
weekly earnings among employed workers increases in April 2020 (left panel). The rise in
earnings likely reflects a composition change in the employed population. That is, it may
be that workers who remained employed during the very first months of the epidemic were
disproportionately those with higher earnings. However, it is also possible that earnings rose
among employed workers because of wage increases that reflect new job risks and demand for
scarce labor, or increases in hours worked and overtime pay for some workers who remained
employed. In the middle-right panel, we plot earnings over time, setting the earnings of the
non-employed to zero in order to combine extensive and intensive margin changes in earnings.
The graph now shows a large fall in weekly earnings of close to $300 a week between March
and April 2020, indicating that job losses have, in aggregate, translated into substantial
declines in labor market earnings.
    The bottom panel shows that average hours worked last week also decreased from February
to March in 2020 relative to other years, and then they experienced a sharp downturn in
April. Among people who are employed, the fall in hours is only about 1 hour a week. Similar
to our exercise on weekly earnings, in the panel to the bottom right we set hours worked last
week for the non-employed to zero, rather than missing. Now, the change in hours worked
during the week before the survey represents a drop of close to 6 hours between March 2020
and April 2020. This also makes it clear that job losses are the key driver of overall labor
market outcomes at the moment. Intensive margin responses are much smaller in comparison.



                                             13
5.2    Work-Related Mobility Patterns
We next turn to our high-frequency data series, starting with Figure 3 showing the basic time
series of outcomes by state. The study window runs from February 15 2020 to April 12 2020
for Google mobility and January 1 2020 to April 12 2020 for SafeGraph, which keeps the end
date of the study period the same as in the CPS analysis. In the left panel, the grey lines
turn red when each state issues a SAH mandate. In the right panel, the lines turn red when
the state adopts an ABC ordinance. ABC policies tend to happen earlier than SAH policies.
    Work related mobility falls in the Google series, about at the same time in all states with
an ABC policy, although some of the change in slope appears to happen a few days before the
policy effective date. In the case of the Safegraph work mobility measure, there also appears
to be a large fall in workplace mobility (fraction who are detected at a workplace) around the
time of the ABC laws, although there too it appears that the drops appear slightly before
the policy change date. In both Google and Safegraph cases, SAH laws appear to go into
place later in the month, after a lot of the decline in workplace mobility already happened.
There also appears some decreases that happen nevertheless after the SAH laws, but these
reductions in mobility also occur in the states that did not implement SAH laws.
    In order to examine parallel trends assumptions and effect size magnitudes, we next turn
to Figure 4 which shows event study estimates from models that examine both SAH and
ABC policies simultaneous for the two measures of work related mobility. The effects for
SAH mandates are in the left column. The right column reports the effects of the ABC
closures. The top row is Google mobility’s index of work transport, and the bottom row
is for Safegraph’s measure of the fraction of devices that are recorded as being at work on
any given day. The notes in each figure show the dependent variable means as of baseline
(February 15th 2020 in all graphs).
    Google mobility data presented in the top left panel suggest a moderate downward pre-
trend prior to the implementation of a SAH order, followed by a sizeable decline at the point
of a SAH order and then the continuation of moderate downward trends. The SafeGraph
estimates of the fraction of people at work (reported in the bottom left panel) show a slight
upward trend more than 10 days before the implementation of a SAH order, but is flat in
the 10 days preceding the order. It displays little change until roughly 15 days after the
implementation of the SAH order. The right panels of the figure exhibit the timing of changes
around ABC policies. The Google Mobility estimates (again in the top right panel) are
striking, trending slightly upward prior to the implementation of ABCs, but then showing
a small downward break followed by a steep, sustained downward trend. The SafeGraph
estimates of the fraction at work (in the bottom right panel) show an upward pre-trend


                                              14
(especially in the 10 days prior to the implementation of ABCs) with a slight downward fall
right at implementation and then the continuation of an uptrend. Thus, the estimates from
Google Mobility show rather clear adverse effects on workplace mobility while the estimates
for SafeGraph do not show a clear story. Note, of course, that the mobility measures can only
pick up work behavior as defined by physical travel to locations. Also, they do not shed light
on more specific job-related outcomes. For example, they do not reveal information about
job losses, earnings changes, or work disruptions.
    Figure 5 shows event study analysis of the work-related mobility measures when the data
are stratified into early adopting states and late adopting states (based on above and below
median), as early adopting states might have acted before the potential impact of the policy
was lessened by nationwide sentiment and sheltering responses. In these graphs, the left
panel shows the event study for states that implemented SAH and ABC mandates early, and
the right panel shows event studies for states that adopted the policies later. The results
again show that the Google workplace mobility measure did seem to respond to the social
distancing policies, with effects that are larger in states that adopted the policies earlier. The
Safegraph measure does not clearly respond to the policy changes in either group of states.


5.3    Google Search Trends for Unemployment Related Terms
Another high-frequency measure of job-market-related behavior is Google search trends for
unemployment topics (not related to the Google mobility to workplace measure above). We
next turn to this measure as further data we examine to understand whether the changes in
employment patterns happened in the days prior to passage of the state policies. Unlike with
the mobility data, the search queries data are available for multiple years. Choi and Varian
(2012) show that Google searches for unemployment-related terms queries are predictive
of downstream unemployment insurance claims, and Aaronson et al. (2020) apply the idea
to the COVID-19 epidemic. Figure 6 shows the national time series of Google searches
for several different search terms for the first 150 days of the calendar year in each year
from 2015 through 2019. The separate graphs display trends for several different terms.
The 2020 data are shown in orange. There is a large and sudden increase in the volume
of unemployment-related searches starting in the first half of March, which corresponds to
the beginning of the epidemic in the U.S. No such changes in searches are observed for the
previous years, indicating no confounding seasonality issues in seeking for resources available
for unemployment. Interestingly, searches of the term and topic “Job” actually decrease
during the beginning of the outbreak. This might indicate a labor-supply-related change



                                               15
unique to this recession: individuals looking for a job might slow their job search, possibly
due to fear of virus exposure or recognition of business closures.
    Figure 7 shows estimates from event study regressions related to SAH and ABC policies
based on state level versions of the Google trends data. The outcome variable is an index of
searches for multiple unemployment related terms combined.
    There is some evidence of a pre-trend in the share of Google searches on unemployment
topics before the SAH ordinance. After the implementation of SAH mandates, searches
for unemployment-related terms seem to stabilize after the passage of the law. This may
indicate that people reduced job search effort during the lockdown, or that job losses grew
rapidly in the days leading up to SAH ordinances in most states and then stabilized at a new
level over the next 20 days. The story is different when we consider ABC mandates. There
is less evidence of a strong pre-trend, and there is a substantial increase in the volume of
unemployment-related search activity in the days following the ABC mandates.
    A possible explanation for the difference in the Google search trends we observe (as with
the other high-frequency data) in SAH vs ABC is the timing of the policies’ implementation.
While stay-at-home laws occurred well into the trajectory of movement slowdowns, ABCs
occurred relatively early: they were fairly unexpected and more likely to have occurred before
anticipatory behaviors.


5.4    Recent Unemployment Claims
The last of our high-frequency job-market-related series is weekly-by-state unemployment
claims data. Figure 8 plots the log number of UI claims nationally for the first 25 weeks of
the years 2015-2019 in dashed lines. The orange line gives the same figures for 2020. During
the first ten weeks of 2020, the average level of UI claims across the country was the lowest
in the last 6 years. From that week onwards, the level of the UI claims has been the highest.
Week ten ended on March 7, 2020, and the number of initial UI claims reached its highest
spike two weeks later. This is – essentially – the time when the epidemic exploded and states
began to implement social distancing policies.
    Figure 9 presents results from an event study analysis of the effects of SAH and ABC
mandates using state-by-week-level data on initial UI claims per covered worker. Prior to
the adoption of social distancing policies, there is no clear difference in trends, especially
for SAH. The initial UI claims rates increase in the days following SAH mandates. There is
also an increase following the ABC mandates, but the effects are noisier and not statistically
significant. These effects can be seen in more detail in Table 7, where the coefficients for ABC



                                              16
in weeks zero and one are statistically significant. Considering as a baseline the mean of 1.37
UI claims per 1000 workers during the first week of March, in week zero the coefficient for
business closures (8.23) represents at least an eight-fold increase. The short-term coefficient
for SAH order is equally high (9.78 in week zero), however it is not statistically significant.
    Taken together, these high-frequency data on labor market outcomes indicate a mixed
picture regarding the timing of policy changes vs behavioral changes. In some cases, there
is evidence that labor-market-relevant outcome measures start to change to some degree in
advance of future policy changes, although in those cases there are also typically large changes
in level and slope that tend to occur after the policy date, suggesting that the policies do have
some causal effects. In other cases, there is no evidence of a pre-trend, but also not much
evidence of a treatment effect. We caution that none of these outcome measures are likely to
correspond directly to conventional measures of labor market activity, such as employment,
earnings, and hours worked.


5.5     Effects of Social Distancing on Employment, Earnings, and
        Hours Worked
We turn to the CPS data to study the effects of state social distancing policies on a range
of labor market outcomes and to compare the magnitude of the policy effects across sub-
populations defined by essential work designations, gender, race/ethnicity, education, and age.
We focus on a set of six labor market outcomes: (i) employment; (ii) absent but employed;
(iii) earnings among the employed; (iv) earnings in the full sample, including people with
zero reported earnings; (v) hours worked among the employed; and (vi) and hours worked in
the full sample, including people with zero hours of work. The earnings analysis is limited
to people in the outgoing rotation groups of the CPS sample because only these groups are
asked questions about earnings. All regressions are weighted using the appropriate CPS
sampling weights.6
     Table 1 shows that our sample consists of observations on 5,899,185 CPS responses from
individuals ages 21 and older, including all observations in the monthly samples from January
2015 to April 2020. 60% of respondents are employed. Earnings are reported only for
outgoing rotation groups, thus the sample size is smaller for those outcomes. The share of
all individuals who are deemed essential workers is 70.4%. The sample is reflective of the
workforce in terms of demographics: for example 51.88% of workers are female, the average
   6
    We use the earnings study weights for analysis based on the earnings outcome, and the final CPS sampling
weight for all other analyses.



                                                    17
age is 49, 29% are high school graduates, 28% have some college education, and 34% have a
college degree or higher.

5.5.1   Difference in Difference Models

Table 2 Panel A reports estimates from two-way fixed effects regressions of CPS labor market
outcomes on the DID policy interactions, individual covariates, state fixed effects, month
fixed effects, and month-by-year fixed effects. The stay-at-home (SAH) measure records the
number of days that a SAH order was in place as of April 12, 2020, and the any business
closure (ABC) measure records the number of days that restaurants or other businesses
closure mandates were in place as of April 12, 2020. The DID estimate is the coefficient on
the interaction of these policy variables with a dummy variable for April 2020.
    The first column of table 2 suggests that both SAH policies and ABC policies are associated
with reduced employment levels. An additional 10 days of the SAH mandate is associated
with a 1.7 percentage point decline in the employment rate, which is statistically significant
at the p=0.05 level. The employment rate in the United States averaged 60% over the study
period (see Table 1). Thus, adopting a SAH law for an extra 10 days reduced employment
levels by about 2.83% relative to the mean. For ABCs, the effect on the employment rate
is a 1.8 percentage point decline for every 10 days that state laws mandated ABC. The
demographics variables have reasonably sized and signed coefficients (not presented, available
upon request): for example, employment peaks in the (excluded) 41-50 age group and is
monotonically increasing in education.
    As there is concern that those coded as absent but employed actually reflects a form of
unemployment, the second column tests whether this measure increases due to state policy.
We do not find statistically significant effects here, and coefficients are correct-signed but
small. The third and fourth columns show estimates of the effects of social distancing policies
on earnings. The point estimates in column (4), which include zero earnings for people who
are not employed, are negative and not small. 10 extra days under a SAH policy is associated
with 3% lower earnings, and 10 extra days of ABC is associated with 5% lower earnings.
At the same time, because the sample is reduced substantially when studying earnings,
neither estimate is statistically significant. Column (3) reports estimates for earnings that
are restricted to people with positive earnings. These estimates differ markedly from the
ones that include people with zero earnings. They actually show a small and statistically
significant increase in earnings for those who are employed while social distancing. Though
these estimates do not account for selection on the basis of unobservable characteristics, they
suggest that there may not be large reductions in earnings for those who remain employed.


                                              18
Based on these point estimates, it is impossible to rule out the possibility that compensation
is increasing due to supplementary pay for people who continue to work and experience risk
of infection during the epidemic.
     The fifth and sixth columns report estimates of the effects of the policies on measures of
hours worked. In column (6), which includes people who are employed and people who are not
employed (zero hours worked), the results indicate that SAH orders are associated with lower
hours of work. Thus, 10 additional days of a SAH order are associated with about a 0.5 hour
reduction in hours worked. The estimate for ABCs is similar, but less precise. Column (5)
reports estimates that are restricted to people with positive hours. These estimates indicate
that both policies are associated with higher hours of work among those who remain employed,
but the point estimates are quite noisy. While it is entirely possible that increases in hours
for some workers (e.g. those in essential jobs) may have been associated with an increase
in hours among all people who remain employed, it is possible that this estimate reflects
selection on the basis of unobservable characteristics. Either way, the estimates suggest that
there may not have been large reductions in hours for those who retained their jobs.
     Panel B of Table 2 separates effects of policies for essential and non essential workers. The
results indicate that, all else equal, people employed in essential jobs had substantially higher
employment rates, lower rates of absence from work, higher earnings, and hours worked. In
the case of employment, 10 days of SAH mandates is associated with a 1.9 percentage point
fall in employment rates among non-essential workers. In contrast, among essential workers a
period of 10 additional days of state-at-home mandates is associated with a 1.2 percentage
point increase in employment rates (-1.9 plus 3.1). Thus, SAH orders had a substantially
less adverse effect on the employment of essential workers compared to non-essential workers.
ABCs appear to reduce employment for non-essential workers; the interaction term is small
and statistically insignificant, suggesting that business closures had similar effects on essential
and non-essential workers. The estimates for absent from work (in column (2)) continue to
be small.
     As in the base specification, we find little evidence that social distancing policies affect
earnings among people who continue to be employed, regardless of whether they were working
in an essential industry. In contrast, we do find that, when we code earnings as zero for
non-employed people, the adoption of ABC mandates reduces earnings substantially among
non-essential workers and the effect is not offset for essential workers. In contrast, SAH
mandates have little effect on earnings among non-essential workers, but the coefficient on the
Essential × SAH × April interaction term is positive. This suggests that SAH mandates were
actually associate with increses in earnings among essential workers, although these estimates


                                                19
do not account for selection on unobservables. In column (5), there is also some evidence
that SAH mandates increased hours worked among non-essential who remain employed. In
Column (6), there is evidence of an overall increase in hours among workers in essential
industries.
    Although it is not possible to estimate high-frequency event studies of CPS outcomes,
we are able to investigate whether there were differential monthly trends in employment
outcomes among states with early versus late adoption of ABC and SAH laws. Table 3 shows
estimates from the event study specification, which provides a test for differential pre-trends
that would violate the strict exogeneity assumption and common trend assumption of the
basic DID model. Figure 10 shows the event study coefficients for each the coefficients on
employment and on earnings, while Figure 11 shows the analogous plots for the coefficients
on hours worked last week. The coefficients on the April DD interaction terms for being
treated remain essentially unchanged in these specifications. Across the 5 models, all but
one of the pseudo-DID pre-trend interaction terms are small and statistically insignificantly
different from zero. Overall, the results in the table of coefficients and the corresponding
graph provide support to the core assumptions of the DID framework we use throughout
our analysis, with the only exception of the anticipation effect on the effect of ABC on the
employed variable.

5.5.2   Sub-population Effects

To study the differential impact of policies across demographic groups, we re-estimated the
basic DID model presented in table 2 Panel A, but this time included interactions to allow
the policy effects to differ by gender, race/ethnicity, and education. These results are in
table 4. Table 4 shows that the effects of the social distancing policies are not substantially
different by gender. There are two marginally significant gender interaction terms –for being
absent but employed, and for hours worked. These coefficients suggest that SAH laws are
associated with slightly better outcomes for women than for men. There are no statistically
significant differences in outcomes for black workers relative to other workers for SAH laws,
but more negative effects for blacks from ABC orders. Instead, SAH laws are associated with
slightly better employment outcomes for Hispanics, while ABC ordinances significantly worsen
employment rates and hours worked among Hispanics relative to other workers. Notably,
there are also some opposite signed differential effects for Hispanic workers in hours and
earnings derived from SAH versus ABC laws. The last set of interactions in Table 4 relate
to education background. The results indicate some statistically significant differences by
education from the SAH and ABC laws. SAH laws are associated with increases in hours


                                              20
and ABC laws are associated with higher earnings for high education workers (college degree
and post graduate), relative to workers with high school (columns 5 & 6). We observe some
negative differential effects of ABC laws on these high education workers relative to those of
low education workers, although the magnitude is marginal.
    Table 5 reports the differential policy effects for essential workers on labor outcomes. The
results are consistent with our hypothesis for ABC laws that this policy tends to generate
more negative impacts on labor outcomes for non-essential workers. Relative to non-essential
workers, ABC laws are associated with increases in employment, overall earnings, and working
hours of essential workers. There are no statistically significantly different outcomes for black
essential versus other race essential workers. We observe some positive differential effect of
SAH on female essential vs. male essential workers. In addition, SAH laws are associated with
better outcomes (earnings) for essential workers with Bachelor’s degree versus non-essential
workers with this level of education. We find evidence of some negative differential effects of
ABC laws on essential workers with higher education relative to the peers in the non-essential
industries.
    Table 6 presents estimates from models that allow the effects of the social distancing
policies to vary with age groups of the workers. While the estimates for each individual age
group can be noisy, overall they suggest that it was mostly younger workers who experienced
negative labor market outcomes as a result of the social distancing policies, particularly ABCs.
However, when considering only the employed sample, workers between 21 and 25 see their
earnings and hours worked increase after the implementation of ABC policies. For workers
between 31 and 40 years old the results are ambiguous, as ABCs increase their employment
while SAH decreases it (by a greater magnitude). For workers of older ages, the estimates are
mostly imprecise, although we do find positive labor outcomes arising as a result of the ABC
policy among workers of at least 71 years old.


6     Conclusion
Although the initial unemployment insurance claims have shown steep increases from mid
March onwards, there are still questions remaining on how much of the employment losses
are due to state policy as opposed to federal policy (such as the CARES Act; (Humphries
et al., 2020; Faria-e Castro, 2020)) or personal responses to the perceived risks. Personal
responses to protect oneself from virus spread could occur on the part of cautious employers
and employees, due to state shut-down policies that prohibit businesses from conducting
business in person, or from reductions in consumer demand due to perceived risks. It is also


                                               21
partially a result of economic activities that are difficult to translate to an online or otherwise
modified format that avoid high risks of disease transmission.
    The main aim of this paper is to look at the link between state social distancing policies
and unemployment, hours and earnings. The Current Population Surveys are arguably
the best large-scale, fast-release, public data for such analyses. However, the CPS survey
frequency is only monthly and the current crisis has led to extremely sudden changes in both
labor market activity and state level public policy. Consequently, we start by examining
several proxy indicators of job market activity and relate them to social distancing policies
around closings.
    We look first at what can be learned from work activities using cell signal data. Here, we
use data from Google Mobility and Safegraph that pertain to work. The Google mobility
index on movement in workplaces shows clearly that there was a decrease in levels and trends
in work activity after states adopted stay at home mandated and business closures. While
there appear to be some pre-policy trends in our Google Mobility data, the break in trend
clearly suggests that policies exerted some causal effect on outcomes. Our estimates using
Safegraph measures of whether a cell phone was in a workplace do not show clear breaks
around policy changes. We see larger effects on mobility measures in states that adopted
closures earlier. This could be because the later adopters were the more reluctant adopters
or because activity had already slowed considerably before the late adoptions (i.e. the orders
did not bind). In the case of both data sources, a considerable amount of work is being
conducted remotely which would not be picked up as employment that involved travelling to
a work location outside the home, so neither is a perfect measure of work activity. While
the SafeGraph data on workplace mobility have been used by Andersen et al. (2020), to the
best of our knowledge, Google Mobility data on work activities have not yet used in the
labor literature. We also examine measures of unemployment insurance claims and a leading,
high-frequency proxy for unemployment insurance claims - Google Trends data on searches
related to unemployment (see Aaronson et al. (2020)). These estimates for work-related
Google mobility, UI claims, and Google Trends search data on unemployment generally
suggest that on top of nationwide disruption of employment, state social distancing policies
themselves added to these effects. We anticipate additional work reconciling the SafeGraph
and Google Mobility data and addressing pre-trends, but we believe that these data are
informative in their current form.
    Our main analysis is built around the Current Population Survey because it allows us to
analyze a range of outcomes and specific groups. To study the effects of state policies, we
leverage differences in the time at which social distancing policies occurred and, hence, the


                                                22
amount of time that states are subject to closures between March 12 and April 12. Our DID
estimates suggest that social distancing policies have had clear employment effects: being
under social distancing policies longer leads to lower employment. We assess pre-trends
using a month-by-month event study framework and do not find much evidence that social
distancing policies were anticipated by differential labor market outcomes at the monthly
scale. We also used the CPS to examine the effects of state policies on hours worked and
earnings. For the most part, we found effects on hours and earnings were driven by extensive
margin changes associated with employment losses. We see considerably smaller effects along
the intensive margin among those who remain employed.
    When we look at subgroups, we see changes in employment are concentrated in non-
essential jobs. These findings are intuitive given that closings (especially of businesses)
targeted non-essential industries. In models that allow for effect heterogeneity by essential
industry and demographic groups, men in non-essential jobs fare worse than women. People
with a college degree or a graduate/professional degree fare better in non-essential industries
than their less educated counterparts. Younger workers are more affected by closure policies
than older workers. These larger adverse effects on younger workers raise concerns about the
long term consequences on these workers.
    It is obvious by now that the COVID-19 epidemic has had enormous consequences for
the level of economic activity in the United States and other countries around the world. It
also seems clear that much of the decline in employment and the decline in economic activity
is caused by the public health shock itself. However, the social distancing policies adopted
by state governments trying to control the epidemic are quite dramatic. Stay-at-home and
business closure mandates almost certainly affect the level of economic activity at some
point and on some margin. A basic question is how much of the economic disruption of the
epidemic comes from individual and group responses to the public health threat posed by the
virus, and how much comes from the public policies that governments are using to control
the epidemic? Analysis of cross-state variation in new unemployment insurance claims in
early March suggested that spike in job losses was nationwide and that differences in state
school closure policies and in the severity of state epidemics had a comparatively small effect
(Lozano-Rojas et al., 2020).
    In this work, we examine labor market outcomes using richer data with a longer follow
up time. Our DID estimates suggest that state social distancing policies did have important
effects on employment outcomes. To put our DID estimates in context, we used the model
to compare realized employment rates with estimates of employment rates in April in the
absence of state social distancing policies. The green line in figure 12 shows our estimates of


                                              23
realized national employment rates from January 2019 to April 2020. The line shows that
from January 2020 to April 2020, the employment to population ratio for people over age 20
fell from 61% to 49%, a drop of 12 percentage points. The orange line in the graph shows our
estimates of the employment rate in the absence of state stay-at-home and business closure
mandated. (The two lines are identical until the social distancing policies are implemented
in April 2020.) The counterfactual line shows that if state social distancing policies were
not in place, employment rates would have only fallen from 61% to 56% from January to
April. This implies that state social distancing policies explain about 60% of the realized 12
percentage point decline in employment from January to April. The remaining 40% of the
drop in employment comes from a secular time period shock that was shared across all states.
These estimates are contingent on strong assumptions about common trends and the absence
of pre-trends in labor market activity. Monthly event study analysis of the CPS data provide
some support for these assumptions, but monthly data cannot rule out the possibility of very
rapid differential pre-trends that could have occurred after the March CPS but before state
policy actions. High frequency data on other outcome measures suggest pre-trends in some
instances and not others.
     Even if we judge the DID estimates as indicating that social distancing policies have
contributed substantially to recent job losses, it is not fully clear what to expect from state
reopening plans. For example, there is a great deal of uncertainty surrounding the effects of
reopening policy on consumer demand or labor supply among people who have recently lost
their jobs. Nevertheless, the large employment effects from our DID analysis are one reason
to think that state reopening policies may begin to have a major effect on labor market
outcomes. Research shows that social distancing reduced disease transmission and deaths,
thus it is important to understand the ways that states will be successful in their re-start
plans of ensuring that labor markets and economies recover while balancing public health
risks.




                                              24
References
Aaronson, D., S. A. Brave, R. A. Butters, and M. Fogarty (2020). The stay-at-home labor
 market: Google searches, unemployment insurance, and public health orders. Technical
 report, Chicago Fed Letter, No. 436.

Adams-Prassl, A., T. Boneva, M. Golin, and C. Rauh (2020). Inequality in the impact of
 the coronavirus shock: New survey evidence for the uk. Cambridge-INET Working Paper
 Series (2020/09).

Alon, T. M., M. Doepke, J. Olmstead-Rumsey, and M. Tertilt (2020). The impact of covid-19
  on gender equality. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Andersen, M., J. C. Maclean, M. F. Pesko, and K. I. Simon (2020). Effect of a federal paid
 sick leave mandate on working and staying at home: Evidence from cellular device data.
 Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Baek, C., P. B. McCrory, T. Messer, and P. Mui (2020). Unemployment effects of stay-at-home
  orders: Evidence from high frequency claims data. Technical report, IRLE Working Paper
  101-20.

Blau, F. D., J. Koebe, and P. A. Meyerhofer (2020, April). Essential and frontline workers in
  the covid-19 crisis. Econofact.

Blick, A. and A. Blandin (2020). Real-time labor market estimates during the 2020 coronavirus
  outbreak. Technical report, Arizona State University.

Bogage, J. (2020, April). Coronavirus unemployment guide: What to do if you get laid off or
  furloughed. The Washington Post.

Borden, T. (2020, April). The coronavirus outbreak has triggered unprecedented mass layoffs
  and furloughs. Business Insider .

Cajner, T., L. D. Crane, R. A. Decker, A. Hamins-Puertolas, and C. Kurz (2020). Tracking
  labor market developments during the covid-19 pandemic: A preliminary assessment.
 Technical report, Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2020-030. Washington: Board
  of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, https://doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2020.030.

Campello, M., G. Kankanhalli, and P. Muthukrishnan (2020). Tracking labor market
  developments during the covid-19 pandemic: A preliminary assessment. Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 27208, DOI: 10.3386/w27208.


                                             25
Choi, H. and H. Varian (2012). Predicting the present with google trends. Economic record 88,
 2–9.

Coibin, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2020). The cost of the covid-19 epidemic:
  Lockdowns, macroeconomic expectations, and consumer spending. Technical report,
  University of Texas.

Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2020, April). Labor markets during the
  COVID-19 Crisis: A preliminary view. Technical Report w27017, National Bureau of
  Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Dasgupta, K. and S. Murali (2020). Pandemic containment and inequality in a developing
 economy.

Dingel, J. I. and B. Neiman (2020). How many jobs can be done at home? Technical report,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Faria-e Castro, M. (2020). Fiscal policy during a pandemic. FRB St. Louis Working Paper
  Series 2020-006E.

Fullman, N., T. Bang-Jensen, K. Amano, C. Adolph, and J. Wilkerson (2020). State-level
  social distancing policies in response to COVID-19 in the US [Data file]. Technical Report
  Version 1.04.

Gupta, S., T. D. Nguyen, F. Lozano Rojas, S. Raman, B. Lee, A. Bento, K. I. Simon, and
 C. Wing (2020). Tracking public and private response to the covid-19 epidemic: Evidence
 from state and local government actions. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

Humphries, J. E., C. Neilson, and G. Ulyssea (2020). The evolving impacts of covid-19 on small
 businesses since the cares act. COWLES FOUNDATION DISCUSSION PAPER (2230).

Kahn, L. B., F. Lange, and D. G. Wiczer (2020). Labor demand in the time of covid-19:
 Evidence from vacancy postings and UI claims. Technical report, National Bureau of
 Economic Research.

Leibovici, F., A. M. Santacreu, and M. Famiglietti (2020). Social distancing and contact-
  intensive occupations. On the economy, St. Louis FED.




                                             26
Lozano-Rojas, F., X. Jiang, L. Montenovo, K. I. Simon, B. Weinberg, and C. Wing (2020).
  Is the cure worse than the disease? Immediate labor market effects of covid-19 case rates
  and school closures in the US. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mongey, S. and A. Weinberg (2020). Characteristics of workers in low work-from-home
 and high personal-proximity occupations. Becker Friedman Institute for Economic White
 Paper .

Montenovo, L., X. Jiang, F. L. Rojas, I. M. Schmutte, K. I. Simon, B. A. Weinberg, and
 C. Wing (2020). Determinants of disparities in covid-19 job losses. Technical report,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Raifman, M. and J. Raifman (2020). Disparities in the population at risk of severe illness
 from covid-19 by race/ethnicity and income. American Journal of Preventive Medicine.

Rothwell, J. and H. Van Drie. The effect of covid-19 and disease suppression policies on
 labor markets: A preliminary analysis of the data. Data retrieved on May 24, 2020 from
 wwww.brookings.edu.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020a). Frequently asked questions: The impact of the
  coronavirus (covid-19) pandemic on the employment situation for april 2020. Document
  retrieved on May 6, 2020 from www.bls.gov.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2020b). Frequently asked questions: The impact of the
  coronavirus (covid-19) pandemic on the employment situation for march 2020. Document
  retrieved on May 6, 2020 from www.bls.gov.

U.S. Census Bureau (2019, October). Current population survey: Design and methodology,
  technical paper 77. Technical report.

Wing, C., K. Simon, and R. A. Bello-Gomez (2018). Designing difference in difference studies:
 best practices for public health policy research. Annual review of public health 39.




                                             27
Tables and Figures




                     28
Figure 1: Timing of any business closures (ABC) and stay-at-home orders (SAH).
                       (a) Mandatory or recommended SAH




                             (b) Any business closures




             Notes: Authors’ compilations based on Fullman et al. (2020).




                                          29
Figure 2: Deviation from Historical Trends: Labor market outcomes series,
                       January-April, 2015-2020.




              Authors’ calculation based on the Current Population Survey.




                                          30
                                     Figure 3: Trends in mobility changes.
     (a) Mobility to workplace following SAH.                      (b) Mobility to workplace following ABC.




        (c) Fraction at work following SAH.                           (d) Fraction at work following ABC.




Author’s calculation based on data Google Mobility and SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility Metrics smart device data. Each
grey line represents a state. Grey lines turn red once SAH/ABC orders turn on in the state. The thick black line represents a
“smoothed” 7 day moving average of the states.




                                                             31
                   Figure 4: ABC and SAH laws on workplace related mobility.




Authors’ calculation based on smart device movement data from Google Mobility and SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility
Metrics. Estimates for each outcome are from a single regression, which estimates event studies for both policies
simultaneously. Estimation sample window is 15 February 2020 - 12 April 2020 for Google Mobility and 01 January 2020 - 12
April 2020 for SafeGraph cellphone aggregate data. Baselines means as of 15 February 2020.




                                                           32
Figure 5: Effects of restaurant/business closures and stay-at-home orders on workplace related
mobility. State-level heterogeneity analysis by duration of policy.




Authors’ calculation based on smart device movement data from Google Mobility and SafeGraph Aggregated Mobility Metrics.
Each panel is a separate regression. Longer/shorter Stay-at-home orders are defined as those implemented more/less than the
7 days (median) 01 April 2020. Longer/shorter business/restaurant closures are defined as those implemented more/less than
the 15 days (median) on 01 April 2020. Estimation sample window is 15 February 2020 - 12 April 2020 for Google Mobility
and 01 January 2020 - 12 April 2020 for SafeGraph cellphone aggregate data. Baselines means as of 15 February 2020.




                                                           33
                                           Figure 6: Deviation from Historical Trends: Google Trends Queries per 10 Million searches

                                                                       Google Searches - ln(Seven Days Moving Average)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Unemployment benefits (topic)
                                                                                                                                                     Unemployment benefits
                                                                                                                                                                             9




                                                                        Unemployment (topic)
                              11                                                               11                                                                                                                                                                      9




               Unemployment
                              10                                                               10                                                                            8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8
                               9                                                                9                                                                            7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       7
                               8                                                                8                                                                            6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6
                               7                                                                7                                                                            5


                                    1
                                  15

                                               -1



                                                                 -1




                                                                                                          1
                                                     15




                                                                 -1




                                                                                                                 -1



                                                                                                                                   -1




                                                                                                                                   -1




                                                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1
                                                                  5




                                                                   5




                                                                                                         15




                                                                                                                       15




                                                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                     5




                                                                                                                                                                                     15

                                                                                                                                                                                               -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                     15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                 n-




                                                                                                 n-




                                                                                                                                                                               n-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         n-
                                                               -1




                                                                -1




                                                                                                                                 -1




                                                                                                                                  -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1
                                                b



                                                           ar




                                                              pr




                                                                                                                  b



                                                                                                                             ar




                                                                                                                                pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                b



                                                                                                                                                                                                            ar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            b



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pr
                                n-




                                                    b-




                                                                                                       n-




                                                                                                                      b-




                                                                                                                                                                                   n-




                                                                                                                                                                                                    b-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                b-
                               Ja



                                             Fe




                                                                                               Ja




                                                                                                                                                                             Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                             Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Fe
                                                             ar




                                                            pr




                                                                                                               Fe




                                                                                                                               ar




                                                                                                                              pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                              ar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ar




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pr
                                                          M




                                                                                                                            M




                                                                                                                                                                                                           M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                            A




                                                                                                                              A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                              Ja



                                                    Fe




                                                                                                     Ja



                                                                                                                      Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Fe
                                                             M




                                                                                                                               M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M
                                                           A




                                                                                                                             A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                     Day of the year                                                   Day of the year                                                               Day of the year                                                                             Day of the year



                              7.5                                                              7.5                                                                               11                                                                                        11
                               7                                                                7                                                                                                                                                                      10.8
                                                                                                                                                                             10.8




                                                                        DoL (Topic)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Job (Topic)
                              6.5                                                              6.5
               DoL




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10.6




                                                                                                                                                     Job
                                                                                                                                                                             10.6
                               6                                                                6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       10.4
                              5.5                                                              5.5                                                                           10.4
                                                                                                5                                                                                                                                                                      10.2
                               5                                                                                                                                             10.2
                                    1

                                        5

                                                1




                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                     15


                                                          M 1



                                                                -1




                                                                                                     1
                                                                 5



                                                                  5




                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                       15


                                                                                                                            M 1



                                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                                   5



                                                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                                                                                                                    1



                                                                                                                                                                                                          M 1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                                                              15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            15


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M 1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                 n-

                                        -1

                                              b-




                                                                -




                                                                                                  n-




                                                                                                                                                                                   n-
                                                              -1



                                                               -1




                                                                                                         -1

                                                                                                                b-




                                                                                                                                  -
                                                                                                                                -1



                                                                                                                                 -1




                                                                                                                                                                                          -1

                                                                                                                                                                                                b-



                                                                                                                                                                                                               -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n-



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            b-
                                                                                                                                                                                                             -1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          -1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -1
                                                             ar



                                                             pr




                                                                                                                               ar



                                                                                                                               pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                            ar



                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ar



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         pr
                                                     b-




                                                                                                                       b-




                                                                                                                                                                                                        b-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    b-
34




                               Ja

                                       n

                                             Fe




                                                                                                Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                 Ja
                                                            ar



                                                            pr




                                                                                                          n

                                                                                                               Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                         n

                                                                                                                                                                                               Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ja
                                                                                                                              ar



                                                                                                                              pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                           ar



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ar



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        pr
                                                           M




                                                                                                                             M




                                                                                                                                                                                                           M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       M
                                                           A




                                                                                                                             A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                    Ja



                                                    Fe




                                                                                                       Ja



                                                                                                                      Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                      Ja



                                                                                                                                                                                                     Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ja



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Fe
                                                          A




                                                                                                                            A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                     Day of the year                                                   Day of the year                                                                   Day of the year                                                                             Day of the year



                              12                                                               9.6                                                                               8                                                                                     5.6

                              10                                                               9.4                                                                                                                                                                     5.4




                                                                                                                                                     Assistance
               Stimulus




                                                                                                                                                                             7.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Postings
                                                                        Benefits




                                                                                               9.2                                                                                                                                                                     5.2
                               8
                                                                                                9                                                                                                                                                                          5
                               6                                                                                                                                                 7
                                                                                               8.8                                                                                                                                                                     4.8
                               4                                                               8.6                                                                           6.5                                                                                       4.6
                                     1
                                   15


                                                     1




                                                                                                          -1
                                                   15

                                                   -1




                                                   -1
                                                     5




                                                     5




                                                                                                         15


                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                       15


                                                                                                                            M 1



                                                                                                                                            -1




                                                                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                   5



                                                                                                                                              5




                                                                                                                                                                                      15


                                                                                                                                                                                                       1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                     15


                                                                                                                                                                                               M 1



                                                                                                                                                                                                     -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                       5



                                                                                                                                                                                                       5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   15


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 15


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           M 1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                  n-




                                                  b-




                                                                                                                 b-
                                                  -1




                                                  -1




                                                                                                                                 -




                                                                                                                                                                                     n-



                                                                                                                                                                                                    b-
                                                                                                                                -1



                                                                                                                                           -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                     -




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                b-
                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1



                                                                                                                                                                                                    -1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -1



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -1
                                                ar




                                                pr




                                                                                                   n




                                                                                                                              ar



                                                                                                                                          pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                  ar



                                                                                                                                                                                                  pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ar



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              pr
                                n-




                                                b-




                                                                                                       n-



                                                                                                                       b-




                                                                                                                                                                                   n-



                                                                                                                                                                                                  b-




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n-



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              b-
                               Ja



                                              Fe




                                                                                                Ja



                                                                                                               Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                  Ja



                                                                                                                                                                                                Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ja



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Fe
                                               ar




                                               pr




                                                                                                                             ar



                                                                                                                                         pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                 ar



                                                                                                                                                                                                 pr




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ar



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             pr
                                              M




                                                                                                                             M




                                                                                                                                                                                                M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M
                                              A




                                                                                                                                         A




                                                                                                                                                                                                A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
                              Ja



                                             Fe




                                                                                                     Ja



                                                                                                                      Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                 Ja



                                                                                                                                                                                               Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ja



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fe
                                             M




                                             A




                                                                                                                                             A




                                                                                                                                                                                               A




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                     Day of the year                                                   Day of the year                                                                   Day of the year                                                                             Day of the year




                                                                                                                                                  Year
                                                                                                                                    2020                                     2015-2019

     Note: Seven days moving average of Google Trends log of queries per 10 Million searches on unemployment terms and topics. The related topics
     were selected as suggested by the Google Trend webpage. We illustrate main terms and topic whenever a term had a topic trend series in Google
     Trends. Query accessed May 27th using Google Trends API, getTimelinesForHealth function of apiclient.discovery in Python.
Figure 7: Effects of restaurant/business closures and stay-at-home orders on internet search
about unemployment topics.




Notes: The outcome is the measure of state-level daily search activity for unemployment-related terms from
Google Trends API between January 1 and May 25. The terms include unemployment, stimulus, benefits,
assistance, CARES Act, jobs postings, Department of Labor, insurance claims, and claims. This index
reflects the daily share of all Google queries in a state that corresponds to unemployment-related terms (the
index has been multiplied by 10 million by Google).




                                                     35
Figure 8: Deviation from Historical Trends: Unemployment Insurance Claims per Worker
2015-2020

                                                          New Unemployment Insurance Claims (per 1000 workers)
                                                                                       Year
                                                                               2020           2015-2019


                                               40
     New UI Weekly Claims (per 1000 workers)




                                               30




                                               20




                                               10




                                                0
                                                January             February             March            April


Note: Weekly Unemployment Insurance Claims per Worker 2015-2020. For any given year
the denominator is fixed on the the covered employment during the first week of that year.




                                                                                  36
Figure 9: Effects of social distancing policies on Unemployment Insurance Claims per Worker

                                                            Effects of Social-distance inducing policies/events on Unemployment Insurance Claims
                                                                                          (State Level Analysis Controlling for Both Policies)

                                                Restaurant/business closures:
                                                Unemployment Claims (1000 workers)
     Unemployment Claims (1000 workers)




                                          30

                                          20

                                          10

                                           0

                                          -10

                                          -20

                                                -10              -8                  -6                   -4                    -2               0   2   4



                                                Stay-at-Home:
                                                Unemployment Claims (1000 workers)
     Unemployment Claims (1000 workers)




                                          30


                                          20


                                          10


                                           0


                                          -10


                                                -10              -8                  -6                   -4                    -2               0   2   4


                                                                                                    Weeks relative to event
  Baseline dependent variable mean (Mar - 1st Week) =1.37, std. dev.=0.61
  Source: Department of Labor

Note: Authors’ calculation based on weekly reports on insurance claims from the Department of Labor. The
results of the two panels come from the same regression analysis. The top panel represents the event time
coefficients for the Any Business Closures measure. The bottom panel represents the coefficients for the
Stay-At-Home orders.




                                                                                                               37
Figure 10: Effects of Any Business Closure and Stay-At-Home orders on CPS Labor Outcomes:
Employment and Earnings
                                       A. Employed
                                                  SAH Effect on Employed                                                                      ABC Effect on Employed
                            .001
                                                                                                                        .001



                                   0                                                                                           0
      ∆ Employed




                                                                                                  ∆ Employed
                                                                                                                        -.001
                            -.001


                                                                                                                        -.002

                            -.002

                                                                                                                        -.003



                            -.003
                                                                                                                        -.004
                                        Jan          Feb                    Mar        Apr                                          Jan          Feb                    Mar   Apr
                                                           Months of 2020                                                                              Months of 2020




                                                                                  B. Earnings Employed
                                              SAH Effect on Earnings Employed                                                             ABC Effect on Earnings Employed
                            .015                                                                                          .01




                                                                                                                        .005
                              .01
      ∆ Earnings Employed




                                                                                                  ∆ Earnings Employed




                                                                                                                               0
                            .005



                                                                                                                        -.005
                                   0



                                                                                                                         -.01

                            -.005
                                        Jan          Feb                    Mar        Apr                                          Jan          Feb                    Mar   Apr
                                                           Months of 2020                                                                              Months of 2020




                                                                                   C. Earnings Overall
                                              SAH Effect on Earnings Overall                                                              ABC Effect on Earnings Overall
                            .02                                                                                         .02




                            .01                                                                                         .01
      ∆ Earnings Overall




                                                                                                  ∆ Earnings Overall




                              0                                                                                           0




                            -.01                                                                                        -.01




                                                                                                                        -.02
                            -.02
                                       Jan          Feb                    Mar         Apr                                         Jan           Feb                    Mar   Apr
                                                          Months of 2020                                                                               Months of 2020




Notes: Coefficients from the regression of CPS outcomes variables presented in Table 3. The left panel of each
row shows the coefficients for time indicators interacted with the number of days of State-at-Home orders in
April. The panel on the right shows the analogous interaction for Any Business Closure. Observations from
2019 used as reference.




                                                                                             38
Figure 11: Effects of Any Business Closure and Stay-At-Home orders on CPS Labor Outcomes:
Hours Worked
                              D. Hours Worked Employed
                                                 SAH Effect on Hours Worked Last Week Employed                                                     ABC Effect on Hours Worked Last Week Employed
                                          .05                                                                                                 .1
      ∆ Hours Worked Last Week Employed




                                                                                                        ∆ Hours Worked Last Week Employed
                                                                                                                                            .05



                                            0



                                                                                                                                              0




                                          -.05                                                                                              -.05
                                                 Jan           Feb                    Mar    Apr                                                   Jan           Feb                    Mar   Apr
                                                                     Months of 2020                                                                                    Months of 2020




                                                                                       E. Hours Worked Overall
                                                  SAH Effect on Hours Worked Last Week Overall                                                      ABC Effect on Hours Worked Last Week Overall
                                          .05                                                                                               .05
      ∆ Hours Worked Last Week Overall




                                                                                                        ∆ Hours Worked Last Week Overall




                                            0                                                                                                 0




                                          -.05                                                                                              -.05




                                           -.1                                                                                               -.1
                                                 Jan           Feb                    Mar    Apr                                                   Jan           Feb                    Mar   Apr
                                                                     Months of 2020                                                                                    Months of 2020




Notes: Coefficients from the regression of CPS outcomes variables presented in Table 3. The left panel of each
row shows the coefficients for time indicators interacted with the number of days of State-at-Home orders in
April. The panel on the right shows the analogous interaction for Any Business Closure. Observations from
2019 used as reference.




                                                                                                   39
                                               Figure 12: Differential in Employment rates due to Policy

                                                  Employment Rates, Social Distancing Policies, and Secular Trends
                                    .65
   Employment to Population Ratio




                                     .6




                                    .55




                                     .5


                                      2019m1         2019m4            2019m7            2019m10              2020m1      2020m4

                                                       Realized Employment Rates        Counterfactual Employment Rates




Notes: In this figure we plot the counterfactual Employment corresponding to the baseline model presented
in Table 2.




                                                                                   40
                                   Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
                                                           Mean     St. Dev.   Observations

              Employed                                     0.6000    0.4899      5,899,185
              Weekly Earnings (Employed)                    983.5    691.80       814,123
              Weekly Earnings (Overall)                    584.92    719.57      1,395,521
              Tot. Hours Worked Last Week (Employed)        39.39     12.47      3,482,958
              Tot. Hours Worked Last Week (Overall)         24.16     21.52      5,768,210
              Stay at Home (Days)                          0.2417    2.0607      5,899,185
              Business Closed (Days)                       0.3937    3.1358      5,899,185
              Essential Personnel                          0.7042    0.4564      3,790,991
              Female                                       0.5188    0.4996      5,899,185
              Less Than High School                        0.1017    0.3023      5,899,185
              High School                                  0.2866    0.4522      5,899,185
              Some College                                 0.2754    0.4467      5,899,185
              Bachelor’s Degree                            0.2155    0.4112      5,899,185
              Graduate Degree                              0.1208    0.3259      5,899,185
              Age                                            49        17        5,899,185
              African-American                             0.1244    0.3300      5,899,185
              Hispanic                                     0.1573    0.3641      5,899,185
              Metropolitan                                 1.1322    0.3387      5,841,310
Note: The sample size for the Earnings variables is smaller because questions on earnings are asked only
to the CPS outgoing rotation groups. The HIS Weekly Earnings (Overall) and the Tot. Hours Worked
Last Week (Overall) have more observations than the HIS Weekly Earnings (Employed) and the Tot. Hours
Worked Last Week (Employed) variables because the former replace zeros instead of missing values for all
those individuals who are not employed. The weighted statistics for the employment and socio-demographic
variables are obtained from the observations in the basic monthly CPS from January 2015 to April 2020, and
are weighted. For the earnings outcomes which only refer to the CPS outgoing rotations a different set of
weights is applied.
                            Table 2: Effects of social distancing policies on labor market outcomes
                                                     (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
                                                   Empl.            Absent -            Earn -           Earn -           Hrs Last          Hrs Last
                                                                     Empl.              Empl.            Overall            Wk               Wk -
                                                                                                                                            Overall
 Panel A: Baseline Analysis
 SAH x April                                     -0.0017**           0.0002            0.0025            -0.0031            0.0147          -0.0497**
                                                  (0.0007)          (0.0003)          (0.0020)          (0.0056)           (0.0172)          (0.0197)
 ABC x April                                     -0.0018**           0.0006            0.0026            -0.0050            0.0262            -0.0375
                                                  (0.0009)          (0.0004)          (0.0025)          (0.0071)           (0.0245)          (0.0292)
 Controls                                             X                 X                 X                  X                 X                 X
 R-squared                                         0.2624            0.0073             0.2305           0.3126            0.0732            0.2799
 N                                               5,841,310         5,841,310           806,951          1,382,220         3,450,531         5,711,496

 Panel B: Essn. vs Non-Essn.
 SAH x April                                      -0.0019*           0.0004            0.0019             -0.0053         0.0584**            -0.0150
                                                  (0.0011)          (0.0006)          (0.0055)           (0.0086)         (0.0254)           (0.0397)
 ABC x April                                     -0.0042**          0.0014**           0.0037           -0.0212**          -0.0036          -0.1155**
                                                  (0.0013)          (0.0005)          (0.0046)           (0.0099)         (0.0246)           (0.0437)
 Essential x ABC x April                           -0.0005           -0.0000            0.0011            -0.0038         -0.0593*           -0.0681*
                                                  (0.0011)          (0.0005)          (0.0069)           (0.0110)         (0.0331)           (0.0405)
 Essential x SAH x April                          0.0031**           -0.0004           -0.0020           0.0187**           0.0389           0.1312**
                                                  (0.0007)          (0.0003)          (0.0050)           (0.0074)         (0.0238)           (0.0241)
 Essential Personnel                             0.0196**          -0.0111**          0.1504**           0.2410**         1.7990**           2.0614**
                                                  (0.0010)          (0.0006)          (0.0075)           (0.0148)         (0.0743)           (0.0876)
 Controls                                             X                 X                 X                  X                 X                 X
 R-squared                                         0.0164            0.0103             0.2368           0.0885            0.0774             0.0717
 N                                               3,755,517         3,755,517           806,951           876,962          3,450,531         3,625,703

Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. The Table presents the CPS analysis as described in Section 4 including interactions of policy
exposure with Essential job classification. In the case of earnings and hours, the first in the pair of columns reports estimates conditional on employment,
while the ”overall” estimates treat people who are not employed as zeros. The set of control variables is: Female, Having Child under 6 years old, Female
x Having Child under 6 years old, Black, Hispanic, Age 21-25, Age 26-30, Age 31-40, Age 51-60, Age 61-70, Age 71+, Less than High School, Some
College, Bachelor’s Degree, Post Graduate Degree, Metropolitan Status. Significance levels: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05.
          Table 3: Effects of social distancing policies on labor market outcomes - Anticipated Responses
                                 (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)                   (5)                  (6)
                               Empl.                Absent -         Earn - Overall        Hrs Last Wk -         Hrs Last Wk          Hrs Last Wk -
                                                     Empl.                                                                               Overall
 SAH x April                 -0.0017**                0.0003              0.0026               -0.0028                0.0140             -0.0494**
                              (0.0007)              (0.0003)             (0.0020)             (0.0057)              (0.0174)              (0.0195)
 SAH x March                   -0.0004                0.0002              0.0054*               0.0025               -0.0182               -0.0175
                              (0.0004)              (0.0002)             (0.0029)             (0.0052)              (0.0144)              (0.0168)
 SAH x February                -0.0000                0.0002              0.0024              0.0102**                0.0020                0.0080
                              (0.0003)              (0.0002)             (0.0017)             (0.0046)              (0.0138)              (0.0124)
 SAH x January                  0.0004                0.0000               0.0014              -0.0011               -0.0053                0.0117
                              (0.0003)              (0.0001)             (0.0016)             (0.0046)              (0.0158)              (0.0147)
 ABC x April                 -0.0018**                0.0006              0.0024               -0.0054                0.0266               -0.0389
                              (0.0009)              (0.0004)             (0.0025)             (0.0071)              (0.0249)              (0.0297)
 ABC x March                    0.0005             -0.0011**             -0.0058*              -0.0066               0.0218                -0.0030
                              (0.0004)              (0.0003)             (0.0030)             (0.0071)              (0.0234)              (0.0222)
 ABC x February                -0.0001               -0.0001              -0.0003              -0.0065                0.0002               -0.0103
                              (0.0005)              (0.0001)             (0.0021)             (0.0052)              (0.0214)              (0.0267)
 ABC x January                  0.0000               -0.0001              -0.0022               0.0020               0.0046                -0.0017
                              (0.0005)              (0.0001)             (0.0024)             (0.0063)              (0.0188)              (0.0251)
 Controls                         X                     X                    X                     X                     X                    X
 R-squared                     0.2570               0.0067                 0.2296              0.3066                 0.0716              0.2728
 N                           5,841,310             5,841,310              806,951             1,382,220             3,450,531            5,711,496

Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. The table presents the CPS analysis as described in Section 4, including time event for the
first three months of 2020 to assess any anticipatory effect. In the case of earnings and hours, the first in the pair of columns reports estimates
conditional on employment, while the ”overall” estimates treat people who are not employed as zeros. The set of control variables is: Female, Having
Child under 6 years old, Female x Having Child under 6 years old, Black, Hispanic, Age 21-25, Age 26-30, Age 31-40, Age 51-60, Age 61-70, Age 71+,
Less than High School, Some College, Bachelor’s Degree, Post Graduate Degree, Metropolitan Status. Significance levels: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05.
           Table 4: Effects of social distancing policies on labor market outcomes by Socio-Demographics
                                                  (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)
                                                Empl.            Absent -             Earn -            Earn -            Hrs Last           Hrs Last
                                                                  Empl.               Empl.             Overall             Wk                Wk -
                                                                                                                                             Overall
 SAH x April                                 -0.0025**             0.0006            -0.0057*             0.0001          -0.0710**          -0.1174**
                                              (0.0011)           (0.0004)            (0.0031)           (0.0114)           (0.0263)           (0.0409)
 ABC x April                                 -0.0024**           0.0010**            0.0075**            -0.0115            0.0525*            -0.0450
                                              (0.0009)           (0.0004)            (0.0029)           (0.0083)           (0.0284)           (0.0298)
 Female x SAH x April                           0.0000           -0.0007*              0.0037             0.0011            0.0536*             0.0235
                                              (0.0015)           (0.0004)            (0.0027)           (0.0150)           (0.0310)           (0.0549)
 Female x ABC x April                           0.0005             0.0002             -0.0015             0.0032             0.0016             0.0396
                                              (0.0009)           (0.0002)            (0.0017)           (0.0087)           (0.0208)           (0.0326)
 Black x SAH x April                            0.0004            -0.0007              0.0057             0.0095            -0.0254            -0.0183
                                              (0.0013)           (0.0007)            (0.0051)           (0.0180)           (0.0490)           (0.0544)
 Black x ABC x April                           -0.0008            0.0007*             -0.0034            -0.0055             0.0172            -0.0057
                                              (0.0007)           (0.0004)            (0.0036)           (0.0107)           (0.0334)           (0.0303)
 Hispanic x SAH x April                       0.0030*             -0.0010             -0.0038             0.0052          0.0553**            0.1126*
                                              (0.0018)           (0.0007)            (0.0026)           (0.0117)           (0.0247)           (0.0641)
 Hispanic x ABC x April                      -0.0038**          0.0010**             0.0033**            -0.0100           -0.0352*          -0.1432**
                                              (0.0010)           (0.0004)            (0.0016)           (0.0072)           (0.0179)           (0.0383)
 Less than HS x SAH x April                    -0.0006           0.0015**           0.0157**              0.0069            -0.0038            0.0153
                                              (0.0013)           (0.0006)            (0.0067)           (0.0147)           (0.0469)           (0.0512)
 Some College x SAH x April                    -0.0001           0.0005*              0.0005              0.0022            0.0215              0.0209
                                              (0.0011)           (0.0003)            (0.0039)           (0.0081)           (0.0326)           (0.0460)
 Bachelor’s x SAH x April                      0.0007              0.0001           0.0116**           -0.0230**           0.0936**             0.0734
                                              (0.0015)           (0.0004)            (0.0025)           (0.0112)           (0.0292)           (0.0648)
 Post Grad x SAH x April                        0.0015            0.0002               0.0126            -0.0080          0.1404**            0.1437*
                                              (0.0021)           (0.0008)            (0.0077)           (0.0132)           (0.0382)           (0.0737)
 Less Than HS x ABC x April                     0.0015          -0.0014**            -0.0093*            0.0008             -0.0252             0.0254
                                              (0.0009)           (0.0003)            (0.0055)           (0.0098)           (0.0341)           (0.0372)
 Some College x ABC x April                    -0.0001          -0.0005**             0.0009             -0.0036            -0.0123            -0.0240
                                              (0.0008)           (0.0002)            (0.0026)           (0.0061)           (0.0240)           (0.0345)
 Bachelor’s x ABC x April                       0.0013          -0.0008**           -0.0077**          0.0181**            -0.0401*             0.0023
                                              (0.0011)           (0.0002)            (0.0017)           (0.0075)           (0.0223)           (0.0465)
 Post Grad x ABC x April                        0.0025          -0.0015**            -0.0099*           0.0173*           -0.0734**             0.0002
                                              (0.0016)           (0.0006)            (0.0056)           (0.0088)           (0.0243)           (0.0538)
 R-squared                                     0.2571             0.0068              0.2296            0.3066              0.0716             0.2729
 N                                           5,841,310           5,841,310           806,951           1,382,220          3,450,531          5,711,496

A */** next to the coefficient indicates significance at the 10/5% level. In the case of earnings and hours, the first in the pair of columns reports
estimates conditional on employment, while the ”overall” estimates treat people who are not employed as zeros.
Table 5: Effects of social distancing policies on labor market outcomes by Socio-Demographics in Essential
Industries
                                                              (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
                                                            Empl.          Absent -          Earn -          Earn -         Hrs Last         Hrs Last
                                                                            Empl.            Empl.           Overall          Wk              Wk -
                                                                                                                                             Overall
 SAH x April                                               -0.0042*          0.0005           0.0043         -0.0049          -0.0345         -0.1705
 ABC x April                                              -0.0085**        0.0038**           0.0035       -0.0485**          -0.0112       -0.2198**
 Female x SAH x April                                        0.0019         -0.0007           0.0070          0.0347         0.1130**        0.1478**
 Female x ABC x April                                     -0.0023**          0.0005          -0.0053         -0.0247          -0.0310        -0.0822*
 Black x SAH x April                                         0.0007          0.0014          -0.0014          0.0089          -0.1404         -0.0498
 Black x ABC x April                                        -0.0017         -0.0006           0.0020         -0.0180           0.0912         -0.0089
 Hispanic x SAH x April                                      0.0015         -0.0000         -0.0138*          0.0120           0.0062          0.0785
 Hispanic x ABC x April                                     -0.0022         0.0000          0.0104*          -0.0175          -0.0078       -0.1025**
 Less than HS x SAH x April                                  0.0021          0.0019           0.0189          0.0633           0.1119          0.1836
 Some College x SAH x April                                 -0.0022         0.0025*          -0.0171         -0.0077          -0.0425         -0.0521
 Bachelor’s x SAH x April                                   -0.0015         -0.0001          -0.0113       -0.0744**           0.0724         -0.0059
 Post Grad x SAH x April                                     0.0019          0.0003           0.0094         -0.0181           0.0690          0.1439
 Less Than HS x ABC x April                                 -0.0014         -0.0018          -0.0150         -0.0460          -0.1036         -0.1458
 Some College x ABC x April                                  0.0029       -0.0024**           0.0105          0.0083           0.0388          0.0755
 Bachelor’s x ABC x April                                  0.0093**       -0.0031**           0.0081        0.0891**           0.0050        0.2598**
 Post Grad x ABC x April                                   0.0109**       -0.0046**          -0.0094        0.0721**           0.0262        0.2815**
 Essential x SAH x April                                     0.0002          0.0008          -0.0123         -0.0311          -0.0462         -0.0205
 Essential x ABC x April                                   0.0066**       -0.0026**           0.0048        0.0554**           0.0738        0.2348**
 Female x Essential x SAH x April                           -0.0014         -0.0002          -0.0043         -0.0109          -0.0888        -0.1330*
 Female x Essential x ABC x April                            0.0014          0.0000           0.0046          0.0091           0.0480         0.0914*
 Black x Essential x SAH x April                             0.0027         -0.0027           0.0092          0.0147           0.1508          0.1464
 Black x Essential x ABC x April                            -0.0004          0.0018          -0.0072          0.0032          -0.0987         -0.0386
 Hispanic x Essential x SAH x April                          0.0015        -0.0027*          0.0138          -0.0060           0.0616         0.0163
 Hispanic x Essential x ABC x April                         -0.0009         0.0019*          -0.0098          0.0090          -0.0336         0.0077
 Less than HS x Essential x SAH x April                     -0.0059         0.0014           -0.0054         -0.0474          -0.1312         -0.2360
 Some College x Essential x SAH x April                      0.0032         -0.0025         0.0217*           0.0346           0.0828         0.1362
 Bachelor’s x Essential x SAH x April                        0.0031         -0.0001         0.0315**       0.0821**            0.0233          0.1464
 Post Grad x Essential x SAH x April                        -0.0009         -0.0004          -0.0014          0.0450           0.1101          0.0548
 Less than HS x Essential x ABC x April                      0.0033         -0.0002           0.0080          0.0297           0.0880         0.1436
 Some College x Essential x ABC x April                     -0.0023        0.0017*           -0.0119         -0.0212          -0.0626         -0.0970
 Bachelor’s x Essential x ABC x April                     -0.0068**       0.0019**         -0.0220**       -0.0803**          -0.0450       -0.2409**
 Post Grad x Essential x ABC x April                      -0.0070**       0.0029**            0.0031       -0.0740**        -0.1386**       -0.2931**
 R-squared                                                  0.0167         0.0097            0.2363          0.0878           0.0757         0.0702
 N                                                        3,755,517       3,755,517         806,951         876,962         3,450,531       3,625,703

A */** next to the coefficient indicates significance at the 10/5% level. For reasons of space, we omit standard errors, and just show the confidence level
of the estimates through the asterisks. In the case of earnings and hours, the first in the pair of columns reports estimates conditional on employment,
while the ”overall” estimates treat people who are not employed as zeros.
        Table 6: Effects of social distancing policies on labor market outcomes by age
                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)
                                 Employed        Earnings        Earnings      Hrs Last Wk     Hrs Last Wk
                                                 Employed         Overall       Employed         Overall

 SAH x April                       -0.0017         -0.0006         -0.0081         0.0395         -0.0180
                                  (0.0016)        (0.0027)        (0.0126)       (0.0290)        (0.0564)
 ABC x April                      -0.0025*         0.0049*         -0.0046        -0.0040        -0.1029*
                                  (0.0015)        (0.0027)        (0.0100)       (0.0284)        (0.0515)
 Age (21-25)                     -0.0850**       -0.5801**       -1.0018**      -4.4640**       -6.9262**
                                  (0.0064)        (0.0081)        (0.0485)       (0.0633)        (0.2343)
 Age (26-30)                     -0.0128**       -0.2600**       -0.2386**      -1.1672**       -1.5113**
                                  (0.0025)        (0.0049)        (0.0203)       (0.0580)        (0.1008)
 Age (31-40)                     -0.0061**       -0.0941**       -0.0794**      -0.5865**       -0.6435**
                                  (0.0014)        (0.0032)        (0.0119)       (0.0548)        (0.0500)
 Age (51-60)                     -0.0726**         0.0007        -0.5845**      -0.3261**       -3.2563**
                                  (0.0023)        (0.0040)        (0.0169)       (0.0461)        (0.1198)
 Age (61-70)                     -0.3787**       -0.2173**       -3.1213**      -4.1014**       -17.505**
                                  (0.0045)        (0.0093)        (0.0319)       (0.1742)        (0.2704)
 Age (71+)                       -0.6355**       -0.6414**       -4.9771**      -10.247**       -27.617**
                                  (0.0039)        (0.0249)        (0.0332)       (0.3983)        (0.2569)
 Age (21-25) x SAH x April          0.0014         -0.0043          0.0212        -0.0589         0.0045
                                  (0.0020)        (0.0039)        (0.0278)       (0.0401)        (0.0852)
 Age (21-25) x ABC x April       -0.0041**        0.0056**         -0.0270       0.0553**         -0.0894
                                  (0.0014)        (0.0026)        (0.0180)       (0.0246)        (0.0587)
 Age (26-30) x SAH x April          0.0007         -0.0008         -0.0049        -0.0430         -0.0246
                                  (0.0008)        (0.0054)        (0.0245)       (0.0325)        (0.0428)
 Age (26-30) x ABC x April       -0.0013**          0.0004          0.0005         0.0281         -0.0105
                                  (0.0006)        (0.0033)        (0.0181)       (0.0198)        (0.0284)
 Age (31-40) x SAH x April        -0.0021*          0.0045         -0.0107         0.0245        -0.1062*
                                  (0.0011)        (0.0033)        (0.0168)       (0.0499)        (0.0533)
 Age (31-40) x ABC x April         0.0014*        -0.0039*          0.0030        -0.0052        0.0735**
                                  (0.0007)        (0.0022)        (0.0120)       (0.0303)        (0.0358)
 Age (51-60) x SAH x April          0.0002         0.0038           0.0103        -0.0446         -0.0297
                                  (0.0013)        (0.0038)        (0.0156)       (0.0307)        (0.0537)
 Age (51-60) x ABC x April         0.0004          -0.0038         -0.0043        0.0397*         0.0440
                                  (0.0009)        (0.0028)        (0.0100)       (0.0233)        (0.0398)
 Age (61-70) x SAH x April          0.0008         0.0167*          0.0152        -0.0730         -0.0083
                                  (0.0015)        (0.0096)        (0.0161)       (0.0592)        (0.0581)
 Age (61-70) x ABC x April         0.0015         -0.0122*         -0.0004       0.0912**        0.1172**
                                  (0.0010)        (0.0064)        (0.0112)       (0.0401)        (0.0425)
 Age (71+) x SAH x April            0.0014         -0.0048         0.0155         -0.1176          0.0323
                                  (0.0019)        (0.0085)        (0.0160)       (0.0952)        (0.0741)
 Age (71+) x ABC x April          0.0026**          0.0102          0.0102       0.1685**        0.1537**
                                  (0.0013)        (0.0063)        (0.0102)       (0.0631)        (0.0505)
 Constant                         0.8056**        7.5375**        6.0632**      42.2309**       34.6322**
                                  (0.0053)        (0.0088)        (0.0400)       (0.1345)        (0.2384)
 Additional Covariates               X               X               X               X               X
 R-squared                         0.2572          0.2296          0.3067          0.0716          0.2729
 N                               5,841,310        806,951        1,382,220       3,450,531       5,711,496


Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. The Table presents the CPS analysis as described
in Section 4 displaying interactions by age group. The set of control variables is: Female, Having Child under
6 years old, Female x Having Child under 6 years old, Black, Hispanic, Age 21-25, Age 26-30, Age 31-40, Age
51-60, Age 61-70, Age 71+, Less than High School, Some College, Bachelor’s Degree, Post Graduate Degree,
Metropolitan Status. Significance levels: * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05
Table 7: Effects of social distancing policies on Unemployment Insurance Claims per Worker
                             UI Claims (per 1000 Workers)
                                            Coefficients  Standard Errors
           Model A. Difference in Difference
                  Days since Stay-At-Home      0.180           (0.256)
                  Days since Business Close   0.0838           (0.335)
                                   Constant  3.716***          (0.375)
           Model B. Event Study
           SAH (t=More than 10 weeks prior)    8.594           (5.937)
                    SAH (t=10 weeks prior)     7.729           (5.810)
                     SAH (t=9 weeks prior)     7.128           (5.555)
                     SAH (t=8 weeks prior)     6.282           (5.216)
                     SAH (t=7 weeks prior)     5.611           (4.888)
                     SAH (t=6 weeks prior)     4.820           (4.462)
                     SAH (t=5 weeks prior)     3.976           (3.922)
                     SAH (t=4 weeks prior)     3.101           (3.231)
                     SAH (t=3 weeks prior)     2.158           (2.422)
                     SAH (t=2 weeks prior)     0.952           (1.504)
                     SAH (t=0 weeks after)     4.213           (5.120)
                     SAH (t=1 weeks after)     10.61           (8.682)
                     SAH (t=2 weeks after)     3.473           (11.07)
                     SAH (t=3 weeks after)     3.987           (12.53)
                     SAH (t=4 weeks after)     9.704           (10.56)
           ABC (t=More than 10 weeks prior)   -0.162           (4.582)
                    ABC (t=10 weeks prior)     0.379           (4.700)
                     ABC (t=9 weeks prior)     0.448           (4.740)
                     ABC (t=8 weeks prior)     0.583           (4.824)
                     ABC (t=7 weeks prior)     0.628           (4.950)
                     ABC (t=6 weeks prior)     0.651           (5.129)
                     ABC (t=5 weeks prior)     0.642           (5.456)
                     ABC (t=4 weeks prior)     0.737           (5.649)
                     ABC (t=3 weeks prior)     0.504           (7.042)
                     ABC (t=2 weeks prior)     0.324           (4.605)
                     ABC (t=0 weeks after)    8.054*           (4.113)
                     ABC (t=1 weeks after)     12.47           (7.594)
                     ABC (t=2 weeks after)     7.344           (7.194)
                     ABC (t=3 weeks after)     3.387           (7.611)
                                   Constant   -4.115           (7.288)
                         Baseline UI Claims              1.370
                                          N              3536
                                  R-Squared              0.856
           Standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses. Observations at the week and
           state level. Data covers UI claims series from 2019 and up to the week ending on April 18,
           2020. The key regressor, days since SAH,ABC is calculated assuming the job losses of the
           week reflects policy as of the 3rd day of the week. The Table presents two sets of regressions,
           Model A includes the number of days since the implementation of the policy (counting to
           the the third day of the week). Model B presents the event coefficients for each week. All
           regressions include state and week fixed effects Significance * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, ***
           p < 0.01
