                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      INDIA'S LOCKDOWN:
                                      AN INTERIM REPORT

                                             Debraj Ray
                                           S. Subramanian

                                        Working Paper 27282
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27282


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2020




This report is based on a longer version by the same authors, available at https://debrajray.com/
wp-content/uploads/2020/05/RaySubramanian.pdf. We thank Bishnupriya Gupta, Rajeswari
Sengupta, Lore Vandewalle and especially James Poterba for helpful comments. Ray
acknowledges funding under National Science Foundation grant SES-1851758. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Debraj Ray and S. Subramanian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
India's Lockdown: An Interim Report
Debraj Ray and S. Subramanian
NBER Working Paper No. 27282
May 2020
JEL No. I12,I15,O38,O53

                                               ABSTRACT

We provide an interim report on the Indian lockdown provoked by the covid-19 pandemic. The main
topics — ranging from the philosophy of lockdown to the provision of relief measures — transcend
the Indian case. A recurrent theme is the enormous visibility of covid-19 deaths worldwide, with Governments
everywhere propelled to respect this visibility, developing countries perhaps even more so. In advanced
economies, the cost of achieving this reduction in visible deaths is “merely” a dramatic reduction in
overall economic activity, coupled with far-reaching measures to compensate those who bear such
losses. But for India, a developing country with great sectoral and occupational vulnerabilities, this
dramatic reduction is more than economic: it means lives lost. These lost lives, through violence, starvation,
indebtedness and extreme stress (both psychological and physiological) are invisible. It is this conjunction
of visibility and invisibility that drives the Indian response. The lockdown meets all international standards
so far; the relief package none.


Debraj Ray
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10003
and University of Warwick
and also NBER
debraj.ray@nyu.edu

S. Subramanian
36-H, North Parade Road
St Thomas's Mount
Chennai, TN 600016
India
ssubramanianecon@gmail.com
            An Interim Report on India’s Lockdown†

                        Debraj Ray and S. Subramanian‡

                                       May 20, 2020

Abstract. We provide an interim report on the Indian lockdown provoked
by the covid-19 pandemic. The main topics — ranging from the philosophy
of lockdown to the provision of relief measures — transcend the Indian case.
A recurrent theme is the enormous visibility of covid-19 deaths worldwide,
with Governments everywhere propelled to respect this visibility, developing
countries perhaps even more so. In advanced economies, the cost of achieving
this reduction in visible deaths is “merely” a dramatic reduction in overall
economic activity, coupled with far-reaching measures to compensate those who
bear such losses. But for India, a developing country with great sectoral and
occupational vulnerabilities, this dramatic reduction is more than economic: it
means lives lost. These lost lives, through violence, starvation, indebtedness
and extreme stress (both psychological and physiological) are invisible. It is this
conjunction of visibility and invisibility that drives the Indian response. The
lockdown meets all international standards so far; the relief package none.


1. The Lockdown

On January 30, 2020, a brief press release issued by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare in India read:

 “One positive case of novel coronavirus patient, of a student studying in Wuhan
 University, has been reported in Kerala. The patient has tested positive for novel

   † This  report is based on a longer version by the same authors, available at https://debraj
ray.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/05/RaySubramanian.pdf. We thank Bishnupriya Gupta,
Rajeswari Sengupta, Lore Vandewalle and especially James Poterba for helpful comments. Ray
acknowledges funding under National Science Foundation grant SES-1851758.
    ‡ Ray: New York University and University of Warwick, debraj.ray@nyu.edu. Subramanian:

Independent researcher, ssubramanianecon@gmail.com.
2

    coronavirus and is in isolation in the hospital. The patient is stable and is being
    closely monitored."



By February 3, this had risen to three cases, all students at Wuhan University. An
ominous silence then prevailed for all of February, until March 4 when a further
22 cases came to light. It took till March 6th for the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare to launch its covid-19 awareness program (see Somdeep Sen’s report [69]
on the timeline leading to the lockdown announcement). Matters accelerated
after that, as the infection moved into community transmission: by mid-March
there were over a hundred confirmed cases, and over 1000 by the end of March.
Countries all over the world were entering lockdown. On March 11, the World
Health Organization stated that covid-19 represented a global pandemic. The
pressure was on.

The Indian government appeared to be located, to put it baldly, between a rock
and a hard place. The preceding months and weeks had been far from placid. The
Citizenship Amendment Act, which sought to grant citizenship to all refugees of
non-Muslim origin from Pakistan, Bangladesh and Afghanistan, had met with
sustained protest around the country. The Act and the groundswell of response
had generated recurrent tensions. One of these protest sites was threatened by a
Hindu nationalist BJP leader and subsequently attacked, leading to communal
riots in Delhi starting February 23 that left 53 people dead, of whom more than
two-thirds were Muslims. These riots coincided, perhaps not coincidentally,
with Donald Trump’s visit to India on February 24th-25th. Most recently, on
March 16, the Congress Government had lost its majority in the state of Madhya
Pradesh, and the BJP was about to install a government in that state (on March
23rd).

So India was behind the curve. To be scrupulously fair, it wasn’t far behind the
responses of many Western countries, but that is neither here nor there. Kerala,
with its recent history of dealing with the Nipah outbreak, had already been
getting its act together. In a report [56] filed on March 29th, the columnist Supriya
Nair writes: “Since February, opposition politicians have been warning of the
                                                                                           3

approaching risks. The southern state of Kerala, the first to start widespread
testing and quarantine measures, has prevented uncontrolled outbreak within
its borders for several weeks." In an interview [91] with Karan Thapar for The
Wire on March 19th, the epidemiologist Ramanan Laxminarayan, Director of
the Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics and Policy in Washington, D. C.,
“. . . disagree[d] with the Indian Council of Medical Research’s official stand that
India is still in Stage 2 of the epidemic and has not entered Stage 3 [community
transmission]."

A morning-to-evening 14-hour “Janata Curfew" — a Curfew of the People —
was announced for March 22nd, at the end of which, at 9 p.m., people were
invited to assemble on their balconies and together bang their pots and pans
as a gesture of appreciation for functionaries involved in running essential
services. This preceded a full lockdown that was announced on March 24th
for a period of 3 weeks, till April 14th. On April 14th, the lockdown was
extended for another 19 days, till May 3rd, and then extended again till May
18, with provision for relaxation of the shutdown for selected agricultural
businesses, cargo transportation and sale of farming supplies, from April 20th,
in those areas of the country in which the infection was perceived to have been
contained. (At the time of writing, a further extension of the lockdown appears
to be extremely likely.) On April 16th, the government resorted to a three-fold
classification of districts — the so-called red zones assessed as hotspots with
quick case-doubling times, orange zones which were assessed as having some
infection, and green zones which were assessed as being free of infection in
the last 21 days.1 Activities such as personal travel by rail, air or metro (with
some execeptions), hospitality services such as restaurants, schools and colleges,
cinema halls and sports complexes, and large gatherings are prohibited in all
zones. Some manufacturing and industrial activities remain open in all zones.
Then there are gradations that depend on the particular zone.



   1 Government of India information; https://static.mygov.in/rest/s3fs-public/mygov_1588844
65251307401.pdf.
4

According to some views, the government’s abrupt declaration of a lockdown
without a gradual leading up to it was perhaps a symptom of panic under
pressure. Vivek Menezes [52] describes the moment in an “Opinion" piece for
The Guardian written on April 8th:

    “At 8 pm on 24 March, Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced that India would
    shut down in four hours. As he spoke, chaos erupted. Panicked mobs besieged
    the shops. Then, as buses and trains were cancelled, millions of migrant workers
    took to the roads on foot, streaming towards home in scenes that recall the partition
    photographs of Margaret Bourke-White."


After weeks of dithering, India had just been served with four hours of notice.
In contrast, the government did nothing for all of February by way of testing,
tracing and quarantining. A Kerala-type preliminary operation would have
prepared the ground for a much mellower transition to lockdown.

For many citizens, the Prime Minister’s announcements were frustratingly short
on detail with respect to concrete steps that would be taken by the government
to alleviate distress during the lockdown: a report by The Wire [86] on the
announcement made on March 24th states: “The lack of details in Modi’s speech
. . . resulted in an almost nationwide spike in panic . . . As soon as the speech
ended, neighbourhoods and markets across the country saw a sudden rise in
traffic and footfalls as people rushed to stock up on supplies, with concerns about
social distancing — the goal of the lockdown in the first place — temporarily
being ignored." There were similar reactions to the lockdown extensions. An
April 14th report [82] by The Scroll on the lockdown-extension announcement
observes: “Several Twitter users were indignant about Modi failing to make any
mention of plans to rejuvenate a falling economy, help the poor, or boost India’s
attempts to fight the novel coronavirus.”

But as the lockdown settled, the cessation of normal activity was remarkably
comprehensive. In the initial phase, apart from essential services (principally
banks, ATMs, petrol bunks and emergency services), and shops selling or home-
delivering medicines and food, vegetables and dairy products, other services
                                                                                  5

and activities were stopped . In fact, the police enforced the shutdown with a
surprising excess of enthusiasm: to begin with, even “essential commodities"
could not be transported through the supply chain, as both agricultural mandis
and urban distribution points for food items were shut down in several states.
The lockdown decree did allow for the movement of essential commodities,
but as Sudha Narayanan has observed, “the word ‘essential’ comes from the
Essential Commodities Act, [and] there is no good reason to expect . . . the police
to know what these are”[58]. Since April 20, there has been some easing as
described above. We will return to supply chains in Section 6.3.

In summary, a mammoth population of 1.3 billion people has been restricted to
their homes, and transport services, schools, factories and business establish-
ments have been closed. This state of affairs will continue into the proximate
future. If nothing else — though we will need to see what else — this in itself
is an achievement (if that word can be employed neutrally), the implementation
of which could not have been foreseen.


2. The Philosophy of Lockdown

India’s lockdown is an instance of the dominant global policy response to
the covid-19 pandemic. It entails the observance of physical distancing and
isolation in a context of widespread suspension of normal human mobility and
economic activity. With some exceptions in severity (such as Sweden where
the government has been reluctant to impose measures other than guidelines,
or Belarus, where there don’t seem to be guidelines either), this is very much
the model that has been adopted by economically advanced European, North
American and English-speaking countries like Australia and New Zealand.
Indeed, India’s lockdown, now to run for an overall two months and more at the
time of writing, is a prime example of the global approach, and the stringency of
its implementation is reputedly unsurpassed by the record of any other country.

The normative philosophy for any policy is a social externality relative to some
welfare objective. By this criterion, the core externality underlying an epidemic
6

is obvious — individuals will generally underemphasize the negative contagion
that their actions impose on others. But ours is not an exercise in welfare
economics: rather, we seek to understand the positive, not normative, philosophy
underlying the response to the epidemic. The externality notion is also useful
in this context, but we additionally need to ask: an externality relative to which
viewpoint or welfare function?

The dominant policy response has been dictated by a largely epidemiological
view of the problem. This is hardly surprising as the medical profession has
been at the vanguard of those advising governments on the matter. A standard
epidemiological model is pretty mechanical. An interactive stochastic process
takes individuals through “states”: susceptive, infected, recovered, and so on.
An array of parameters that govern contagion, fatality, recovery, or re-infection
can be fed into these equations, which can then be solved (sometimes analytically,
more often numerically) to generate estimates of a time path of infections and
fatalities. Because this baseline model is devoid of behavioral responses, an
enormous externality is present, by definition.

This reliance on mechanical “parameters" is easy to criticize. Every behavioral
social scientist would know that even without a government to urge them along,
individuals will react to an epidemic, adjusting their own behavior to avoid
infection—at the very least out of narrow self-interest. The extent to which they
react will, in turn, influence the “parameters” of the model, thereby generating
non-linear responses that will go some way towards “flattening the curve”
on its own. That said, this more sophisticated variant of the epidemiological
policy view would still say that spontaneous reactions are still not enough,
and intervention is needed. Even the modified behavioral models would not
necessarily yield socially optimal outcomes.2


    2 There has been a veritable epidemic of papers on behavioral models of epidemiology, some

more explicit than others in modeling individual responses, and all studying optimal lockdowns
under various scenarios. For a tiny sample, see (pre-pandemic) Geoffard and Philipson [29],
Fenichel [25] and Fenichel et al [26], and (post-pandemic) Farboodi, Jarosch and Shimer [24],
Garibaldi, Moen, and Pissarides [28], and Jones, Philippon and Venkateswaran [43].
                                                                                       7

The lockdown response is further bolstered by the fact that organized services
form a large share of the occupational structure of economically advanced
societies, so there is substantial scope to move work activities online. If we factor
in the demographic age distribution in these societies, and the concentration of
resources and lobbying power in the upper reaches of that age distribution,
it is not hard to see why the epidemiological view has come to dominate the
debate, though not without substantial opposition. That opposition comes from
a motley crew of interest groups. There are libertarians, mask-spurners and
freedom junkies whose only goal is to exercise their right to free choice without
heed to the consequences of their actions. There are religious groupings of all
stripes who feel that human injunctions to fight the coronavirus are powerless —
or unnecessary, or worse, a heresy — in the shadow of an omniscient God. And
there are immensely powerful corporate and business interests, which not only
feed off the freedom-loving/god-fearing/libertarian mishmash, but also inject
the more insidious (and yet more serious) argument that the price of life has its
limits, and that human souls can be placed on the same weighing scale as goods
and services, at some possibly large but finite price.

Support for the lockdown is therefore seen as emanating from those who are
high-minded enough to understand that life must be valued above commodities,
those who understand the need for regulation to combat unwanted externalities.
In contrast, those who would leave their societies unregulated are viewed with
emotions ranging from amused contempt to outright suspicion and high outrage.
It is a bit of a caricature, but only a bit, that support for the lockdown is associated
with being “left," or “progressive," while those in favor of rapid relaxation are
associated with being to the “right," or “individual-choice-oriented."

There is just one uncomfortable hole in the above seemingly tidy argument. It is
that the motley crew of libertarians and capitalists are beginning to be joined by
an increasingly desperate and vocal working class who live in unceasing fear of
their livelihoods never returning. For this reason and others, a nuanced reading
of these contrasting philosophies reveals doubts: doubts that are significantly
heightened as we switch our focus to developing countries. While welfare
8

economics is conducted in the pristine glow of a single, undisputed objective
function, positive political economy is not: whose welfare is often a far more
important question that the textbook criteria of market failures relative to some
universally accepted social welfare function.


3. Lives Versus Lives: The Visible and the Invisible

The covid-19 pandemic has created a laser focus on lives lost from the virus.
No other epidemic in living memory has done this in economically advanced
societies, with the possible exception of HIV-AIDS. Not Ebola, nor SARS, not
MERS, not even the H1N1 pandemic has generated this level of red alert; and
certainly not malaria or dengue, those stalwart relics safely locked away in the
developing world. It isn’t that these advanced societies haven’t had first-hand
experiences in some of these epidemics. But SARS-CoV-2 is different—it comes
with a combination of contagiousness and fatality risk that has now taken over a
quarter of a million lives worldwide, and this time the developed world accounts
for the vast bulk of these deaths. The international visibility of covid-19 deaths,
heightened by their predominance in “the West,” plays no small role in our story.

The visibility of covid-19 deaths is greatly bolstered by the epidemiological
perspective described in the previous section. It is further heightened by two
additional considerations.

The first is the lack of information. The initial response to the pandemic has been
reactive testing, with only ill — often desperately ill — patients being tested and
others being told to wait until their symptoms worsened. This approach does
not serve (and is not intended to serve) any statistical purpose: its sole purpose
is to confirm positive cases among severely ill patients and then isolate and treat
them. However, as a consequence, while we might have a pretty good idea of
covid-19 deaths — though there are issues here to be resolved3 — we only have
    3 Excess
           deaths has been a feature of this pandemic period, leading to the possibility that we
may be undercounting covid-19 deaths; see, for instance, Galeotti, Hohmann and Surico [27] The
opposing argument has also been made: that we may be ascribing too many deaths to covid-19,
                                                                                               9

rough bounds on covid-19 infections. Table 1 displays country-level statistics on
tests, positive cases, and the case fatality rate (CFR), which is the death rate from
known positive cases. These rates are frighteningly high, often—as in the case
of Spain, Italy or the United Kingdom—reaching well into double digits. For
the world as a while we have around 4.7m cases with around 310,000 deaths (as
of May 17, 2020), a CFR of around 6.7%.

    Country            Tests Confirmed Deaths Case Fatality         Tests
                         [1]        [2]    [3]   Rate [3/2] (per million)
    U.S.          8,412,095       1,334,280     79,254               5.94           25,628
    Spain         2,467,761         223,578     23,822              10.65           52,805
    U.K.          1,728,443         215,260     31,587              14.67           25,589
    Italy         2,514,234         218,268     26,478              12.13           41,654
    Germany       2,755,770         170,979       7510               4.39           33,142
    France          724,574         138,421     26,230              18.95           10,811
    India         1,759,579          74,219      2,415               3.25            1,300

  Table 1. Tests, Cases and Deaths for Selected Countries. Notes: Figures accurate
  as of May 10, 2020. Figures in the first three columns for India (May 12) are
  from https://www.covid19india.org/, and elsewhere from Wikipedia; see https://en
  .wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID- 19_testing and https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Template:
  COVID-19_pandemic_data.



It is not uncommon for commentators even today, well into the pandemic, to
use these rates as rough proxies for the true fatality rate from covid-19, but of
course that is a far cry from the truth.4 The last column of Table 1 shows that
there are wide inter-country variations in the number of tests conducted per
million population, with France, the UK and the USA lagging behind among the
advanced countries, and India revealing a severely depressed record of testing
intensity, with additional peculiar features to which we return below; see Section

simply because individuals dying of other morbidities may have been been found to have been
infected; see, for instance, Lee [49].
    4 Even months into the crisis, there is confusion among observers and certainly the general

public regarding how deadly covid-19 really is; see, for instance, Caroline Chen’s report [16] in
ProPublica.
10

4. But the point is that we are very far from universal testing. Every country
predominantly tests the very ill, with the obvious outcome that the CFR is
nowhere close to the true death rate from covid-19.

The fact of the matter is that the public does not know what the mortality rate
from covid-19 is. Indeed, no one knows, and we won’t know in a definitive
way until our samples cease to be biased, where the word is invoked not in the
context of treatment but in the sense of access to statistical knowledge. This
brings into relief the usefulness of conducting tests on completely unbiased and
random national samples, a point widely appreciated at a very early stage by a
multitude of statisticians and economists. At the time of writing, the samples
we have may be too small to yield statistical confidence, or too prone to bias
(such as asking for volunteers or sampling from a biased sub-population, such
as shoppers). In “natural experiments” such as the covid-19 infection on the
Princess Diamond cruise ship, age distributions are not well-represented either
in composition or in size. This situation will change very quickly over the coming
weeks or months. What we do know without a doubt is that infection mortality
rates are orders of magnitude lower than the case fatality rates reported in Table
1, and there is every likelihood that these rates will be somewhere between 0.5%
and 0.8%, higher than the rate of 0.1% commonly ascribed to the flu, but not
stratospherically so. For more discussion, see Section 4.

A corollary of the above argument is that we also do not know the contagion
rate for the virus.5 We can (tentatively) treat the total number of covid deaths as
accurate information, but if we do not know what the total number of infections
is, it is not possible to factorize deaths/population into the accounting expression:

Deaths/population = [Deaths/infections]*[Infections/population],

where the first term on the right would reflect the true fatality rate, and the
second would be a proxy for how contagious the disease is. The missing culprit
is “infections,” on which we do not yet have accurate data.
     5 The
         word “contagious" is invoked relative to some non-behavioral baseline. As already
noted, behavioral reactions by the population would alter the effective pace of propagation of
the disease.
                                                                                                   11

For instance, compare a mildly contagious but highly fatal disease to a highly
contagious but flu-mortality-like illness. Both could multiply out to the same
death/population number, but they would affect our behavior in very disparate
ways—your authors, for instance, would probably be terrified of the first
scenario and more accepting of the second. But from an overall public health
perspective the two scenarios are very similar; if anything, given the behavioral
reactions just outlined, the highly contagious but mildly fatal illness could wreck
the public health system to a greater degree than the low-contagion high-fatality
disease.

Any competent epidemiologist knows (or should know) these things, but is
deeply concerned that the public — left to its own selfish devices — will not do
enough to protect society. That concerned epidemiologist would love to say that
both contagion and fatality rates are high, and often does. She might focus, for
instance, on the exponential growth of reported cases (contagion? not really) and
simultaneously on the case fatality rate (the death rate? not really). She might
say that a great majority of the afflicted are young — which will be generally true
as long as a great majority of the population is young, or that the disease causes
irreversible damage even if it does not kill. All of this has enough partial truth
to it to carry the ring of truth, and represents a well-meaning attempt to drag
individual behavior towards the social optimum. Therefore, the vast majority of
the public remains imperfectly informed about some salient features of covid-
19, even to the extent that such information may be available.6 The one feature
that is made highly visible is that we are locked in mortal combat with a killer
disease.

The second consideration that works to highlight the visibility of epidemic deaths
is the view that a disease such as covid-19 claims lives in a predatory manner that
the suspension of economic activity cannot. In short, a welfare contest between

    6 Certainly,  with a public that seeks out its own independent information and in particular is
fully and intelligently informed about aggregate deaths, the epidemiologist cannot successfully
manipulate both contagion and fatality rates, but even here there is no incentive for a government
policing a lockdown to credibly reveal the correct statistics to the public. This is not a conspiracy
theory. It is a simple fact that can be associated even with benevolent (if paternalistic) governance.
12

lives and the disruptions caused by a cessation or reduction in economic activity
should be no contest at all. This no-contest view is soundly supported by the
epidemiologists. No contest, echoes any Government which has thrown its
weight behind a lockdown. For instance, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo,
whose empathetic daily briefings have gained a wide following, and not just in
New York, had this to say:

 “How much is a human life worth? That is the real discussion that no one is
 admitting, openly or freely. That we should. To me, I say the cost of a human life, a
 human life is priceless. Period."


We can see arguments for or against this position. An economist could estimate
a value of life for you in twenty different ways, ranging from private decisions
to cross a busy street, or expenditure on airline safety, or the extent of public
smoking bans. Each of these would return a finite price of life. But there
are counterarguments. I might get on a plane because I (correctly) attach
infinitesimally low probabilities to a fatal crash. I might drive a car or cross
a busy street because I (incorrectly) attach arbitrarily high probability to being a
better-than-average driver, or to being nimble enough to avoid getting run over.
These mind games so beloved to revealed-preference economists do not prevent
us from attaching extremely high value to otherwise healthy life, especially
when confronted explicitly to make the choice — and only with the prospect of
monetary loss.

Ingenuous though his words might sound, that is why we would agree with
Governor Cuomo. Faced with a lockdown that destroys some economic value
and protects lives, we would take the lockdown; which is to say, a lockdown
with extensive welfare measures in place. This is a clearly enough articulated
position, in principle.

But this position-in-principle inevitably also provokes the pragmatic question:
what if the State is unable to implement the first-best option just outlined—for
reasons that could range from financial constraints to lack of expertise to
ignorance to incompetence? Even more to the point, what if the State were
                                                                                        13

unwilling to do so — for reasons of being unprepared to make the effort
to overcome the shortfalls in State capacity just mentioned, or, additionally,
unprepared to disturb the settled weight of vested interests by engaging in
redistributive policy? (The notion of “redistributive policy" is here interpreted
broadly as an orientation tilting in favour of alleviating the burden of the
poor laboring classes at the possible cost of some benefit—fiscal or health-
related—to the relatively affluent classes.) In the remainder of this essay, we
will demonstrate just how important these questions are in the Indian context.

The problem is that in India, and without the shadow of a doubt, an economic
lockdown will entail the widespread loss of life. There are lives that will be lost
by lockdown-induced conditions of starvation, ill-health, violence, a rise in
indebtedness, and persistent loss of incomes and livelihoods. Without sustained
and comprehensive protection to those at risk, the entire philosophical question
of whether a human life has finite value or not is far less relevant. In India
especially—and in poor countries more generally — it is a not a question of lives
versus economics, it is a question of lives versus lives. Or more pertinently, it is a
question of which lives have greater visibility.

Lives lost through violence, starvation, indebtedness and extreme stress, are
invisible, in the sense that they will diffuse through category and time. Someone
will die of suicide. A woman will be killed in an episode of domestic violence.
The police might beat a protestor to death. The deaths will occur not just now,
but months and years from now, as mounting starvation and indebtedness and
chronic illnesses take their collective toll. As Hari Vasudevan wrote on April 22:

 Starvation is peculiar. It does not kill quickly. Gandhi showed that. So have many
 others. But, ultimately, it kills surely. Perhaps, under the relaxation of the lockdown,
 a hungry family will go back to work, having been unable to move more than a
 hundred kilometers, and now terrified of a homecoming fraught with the suspicion
 of contagion . . . " [93].

The non-covid deaths from a lockdown will blend into the surrounding land-
scape of ill-health and death from a multitude of categories; their very dif-
fusiveness makes them not news, though they will reappear under careful
14

record-keeping by statisticians, public-interest activists or economists. The
website https://thejeshgn.com/projects/covid19-india/non-virus-deaths/ tracks lockdown-
related deaths not ascribed to covid-19. Deaths are tracked in national and
local newspapers in English and in several (but not all) Indian languages. The
categories into which deaths now primarily fall are suicide, migration-related
accidents, violence (domestic and otherwise), exhaustion, financial distress
and hunger. The tracking is laudable but necessarily incomplete, and this
incompleteness is bound to increase as the newspaper reports fail to make the
connection—as they invariably and understandably will—between each death
in question and the lockdown that caused it. Neither will these deaths carry
the same urgent exponential signature as the initial trajectory of covid-19 deaths
will display, even though they have spiked days after the lockdown. But over
time, they will surely mount, just as they will surely slide under the radar of a
world eager for well-defined events. These lost lives are invisible, but are just as
surely ascribable to covid-19.

We will argue that it is this conjunction of visibility and invisibility that drives
the Indian response: unexpectedly and often brutally efficient in enforcing
a lockdown, so as to gain international kudos, while verbally exaggerated
and yet silently deficient on the relief that is so desperately needed for those
whose livelihoods are at stake. We are seeing a Central State intervention
that is geared maximally to achieving visibility, rather than the less optically
dramatic but equally important act of substantive amelioration. It is international
political economy with domestic consequences to boot, as we shall see below
when we review the changed fiscal relationships that are beginning to emerge
between the Indian Center and the Indian States, the new amendments to
labor laws that are swiftly being put into place, the clauses that incentivize
corporate donations to flow towards the Center, and the wholly inadequate
definition and implementation of the relief packages. In short, the Indian
Government is succumbing to the overriding temptation of implementing all the
trappings of a stringent lockdown without bothering overmuch about delivering
compensating welfare relief. The former strategy is amenable to propaganda as
                                                                                   15




          (a) India and Developed                   (b) India and Developing

 Figure 1. Time Path of Cases Since the 100th Confirmed Case of Covid-19; India
 and Selected Countries. Source: Our World in Data, https://ourworldindata.org/.

effort directed to the prevention of covid-related deaths. In contrast, the latter
approach possesses less immediate advertisement-value, and is more difficult,
plodding and laborious to implement. It looks unlikely to ever be.

In what follows, we will selectively describe some of the many practical
suggestions that have been made by various commentators on what sort of
relief package might be dictated in a time of lockdown and beyond, actual State
performance in this regard, some consequences and correlates of State policy,
and the social attitudes of the ruling classes. We hope to be able to locate our
assessment within the framework described in this section, one that highlights
the relatively easy rewards to State intervention that are to be had from a policy
that prioritizes visibility above other goals.


4. The Progression of Covid-19 in India: A Brief Account

Figure 1, taken from the website Our World in Data, at https://ourworldindata.org/,
locates India with respect to other countries in the progression of the disease.
The figure shows how the disease has progressed, measured in days since the
16

100th confirmed case. Panel A shows this for India relative to some other
advanced economies, and Panel B does the same for India relative to some other
developing countries. (The light grey lines show all countries.) Nothing here
suggests, despite the zeal of lockdown enforcement, that India is headed for
any unique destination. With populations taken into account, and barring the
development of widespread testing or a vaccine, it suggests that the Indian
curve will soon overtake most other countries in terms of absolute numbers
— although this is tempered by the low CFR; see below. Given the enormous
population density of Indian megacities and even its smaller towns, as well as
the population clusters (e.g., in slums) within the cities, this is not surprising —
if anything, it points to the relative stringency of the lockdown measures that
have been adopted in the country.

Figure 2 does a bit more in terms of percentages. Panel A shows that while
India has a similar time trajectory on the aggregate, it has a lower case fatality
rate: at just a shade over 3%, it is far lower than the world average of around
7%. One suspects (correctly, as we will argue below) that this has to do with
the age distribution of the population. This somewhat optimistic scenario is
tempered by Panel B, which suggests that India, with its low testing rate, is surely
undercounting both the cases and most likely the deaths as well. Taken together,
while Panels A and B do not say much about the trend of the disease in India
— Figure 1 is more relevant for that — they do suggest that the multiplicative
constant that anchors the overall trajectory of progression has yet to fully reveal
itself.

Now let us go a bit deeper into the Indian experience. As of May 17, 2020,
India is recording just short of 100,000 cases and a shade over 3,000 dead, a
case fatality rate of 3.16%. Table 2 shows the pattern of cases and deaths across
several Indian states and territories that together account for the vast majority
of confirmed incidences (94617 of the 95,698 cases and 3,012 of the 3,025 deaths).
Just Maharashtra, Gujarat, Tamil Nadu and Delhi account for 2/3 of both cases
and deaths — this regional clustering is, of course, only to be expected of a
highly contagious disease and seen the world over. These numbers don’t tell
                                                                                         17




                 (a) CFR                               (b) Testing and Cases

 Figure 2. Case Fatality Rates (Panel A), and Tests and Cases Per Million (Panel B);
 India and Selected Countries. Source: Our World in Data, https://ourworldindata.org/.


us anything about how truly widespread the disease is, nor how the lockdown
is affecting its incidence, because the tests are as they should be at this stage —
reactive in nature and not designed for statistical inference. Testing is therefore
overwhelmingly concentrated on those who are seriously ill and in need of
medical assistance, and is being used — as in other countries at this stage of the
curve — for confirmatory diagnostic purposes.

That said, some features of this table are of interest. First, states such as Tamil
Nadu and Kerala are doing extremely well in that they are registering very low
case fatality rates. This is not surprising in the case of Kerala, even with their
relatively low testing rate. Kerala has a history of battling the Nipah epidemic,
and the first outbreaks of covid-19 also occurred there, as we’ve already noted.
Kerala’s secret has never been high-tech, but rather reliable medical facilities,
supreme common sense in matters such as contact tracing and quarantine, and
a highly educated population that understands the need for such measures. As
the Economist observes [23]:

 “Kerala tamed Nipah within a month, adopting an all-hands approach that included
 district-wide curfews, relentless contact-tracing and the quarantine of thousands of
 potential carriers. Kerala has used the same simple, cheap tools to fight covid-19,
 with similarly stellar results."
18


        Region                    Cases % 1-Week Deaths CFR (%) Tests
                                     [1] Growth      [2]   [2/1] per m.
        Maharashtra               33,053          7.64     1,198        3.62    2,243
        Gujarat                   11,380          3.56       659        5.79    2,114
        Tamil Nadu                11,224          6.04        79        0.70    4,316
        Delhi                      9,755          4.52       148        1.52    6,853
        Rajasthan                  5,202          4.88       131        2.52    3,002
        Madhya Pradesh             4,977          3.90       248        4.98    1,263
        Uttar Pradesh              4,464          4.84       112        2.51      765
        West Bengal                2,677          3.92       238        8.89      887
        Andhra Pradesh             2,380          1.06        50        2.10    4,577
        Punjab                     1,964          0.92        35        1.78    1,735
        Telangana                  1,551          2.78        34        2.19      518
        Bihar                      1,320         12.05         8        0.61      383
        Jammu and Kashmir          1,183          5.53        13        1.10    6,130
        Karnataka                  1,147          5.04        37        3.23    2,210
        Haryana                      910          2.59        14        1.54    2,721
        Odisha                       828         12.35         4        0.48    2,089
        Kerala                       602          2.38         4        0.66    1,282
        All-India                 95,698           5.5     3,025        3.16    1,606

     Table 2. Cases, Deaths and Tests per Million by Indian States and Territories. Notes:
     Numbers as of May 17, 2020. Source: https://www.covid19india.org/.




That article was written on May 9. Eight days later, the number of deaths still
has not changed. May it stay that way. But we know that Kerala has many
emigrants to the Middle East, and infection rates are high there. They will be
returning on the first available flights, once those flights are permitted. But the
State Government understands this and is preparing for it the best they can.
“We are training up school teachers," says the Health Minister of Kerala, K.K.
Shailaja.

Tamil Nadu is a success story along another dimension — they are testing at a
relatively high rate. They have the third highest case count in the country —
assuredly, in part, because of the testing. 80% of Tamil Nadu’s 11,000+ cases
                                                                                      19

are asymptomatic: another sure sign that the state is testing aggressively. The
numbers are dramatically higher than those for Kerala, but Tamil Nadu holds
a comparable CFR of 0.70%, on par with Kerala’s 0.66%. It has preemptively
extended its lockdown beyond the current Central guidelines. Again, tracking
and tracing is of a very higher order, and a home quarantine option is available,
with regular monitoring.

The state of Odisha, one of the poorest in the country, is another stand-out in
terms of readiness, but with inadequate facilities relative to its competence and
understanding. Like Kerala, Odisha understands disasters — it faced down the
deadly 1999 cyclone. With its limited resources, Odisha nevertheless became the
first state in India to incentivize self-declaration of the disease, and is testing well
above the national average. Odisha incentivized their quarantine scheme with
an offer of INR 15,000, and has managed to contain the deaths from covid-19
to an admirable degree. That might change, as migrants continue to flood back
home. Odisha has registered a significant recent spike in confirmed cases, as
Table 2 shows.

Despite comparably low mortality rates in Bihar, it is extremely doubtful that the
same steps are being taken there. Bihar has an abysmally low rate of testing, and
very poor health facilities. Ordinarily, one would expect that to translate into a
very high CFR, so overall Bihar’s statistics do not hang together in any consistent
way. One can only presume that the virus had not been firmly seeded there. That
is about to change. Most alarming is the recent spike in cases, which — as in the
case of Odisha — is very likely due to returning migrants from the mega-cities.
(For more remarks, see Section 6.4.) In the coming weeks and months, Bihar
will be a potential hotspot for the virus, unless quarantining facilities rise to the
occasion.

Similar worries beset (or should beset) the states of West Bengal and Uttar
Pradesh, both of which also display very low rates of testing. West Bengal in
particular stands out quite dramatically in its extremely high case fatality rate.
Again, this could be the outcome of low testing or poor deployment of health
20

facilities — at this stage, we cannot tell. But there is little doubt that the state,
with the megacity of Kolkata at its core, is a potential flashpoint for the disease.

Returning now to India as a whole and its comparison with the world at large,
one feature that stands out is the relatively low CFR of 3.16%. This is way short
of the world average, which hovers around 6.7%. Notice that India is low on the
world testing scale — see Figure 2 Panel B — which would suggest that it would
essentially be testing the more serious cases. But that would generally move the
CFR upwards. On the other hand, given that the Indian population is younger
than all economically advanced economies, that would bring the CFR down.

It is possible to tentatively reconcile these opposing tendencies if we have some
ideas of covid-19 incidence by age group. The only information we could find
on this is reported by Statista.com for a sample of 2,344 patients.7 Table 3 reports
this case distribution for India on Row 1, recalls India’s population share by age
in Row 2, and displays the impact of covid-19 on each age group in Row 3 (Row
1/ Row 2). As expected, the incidence is higher among individuals of working
age. The remaining rows record CFRs by the same age groups from different
countries, and use these, weighted by the numbers in Row 1, to “predict" the
overall Indian CFR. The results are striking: each of these predictions drastically
understates the actual Indian CFR of 3.16%. That number may look small, but
corrected for age it is actually extremely high. Just why this is the case remains
to be seen. One possibility, as already mentioned, is that testing is very low,
so that only the more desperate cases are recorded, which naturally have high
mortality associated with them. The other possibility is that these are truly high
fatality rates coming from lack of proper care conditional on illness. While we
may safely rule out the latter hypothesis in states like Kerala, the jury is still out
on the other states. In the absence of adequate health infrastructure, a stringent
lockdown can only go so far.

That noted, we can be quite confident in stating that these rates far exceed
the true or infection fatality rate (IFR) , which is deaths divided by infections,
     7 See
        https://www.statista.com/statistics/1110522/india-number-of-coronavirus-cases-by-a
ge-group/.
                                                                                            21

                                        Age Group                               Implied
                                                                              CFR India
              0-10 11-20 21-30 31-40 41-50 51-60 61-70 71-80 81+
 Case % [1]    4.2   9.7 21.9 22.9 16.3 13.1       8.7   2.6 0.6
 Pop % [2]    19.8 20.9 17.6 14.4 11.1       7.3   5.3   2.4 0.9
 Impact [1/2]  0.2   0.5   1.3   1.6   1.5   1.8   1.7   1.1 0.6
 CFR China       0   0.2   0.2   0.2   0.4   1.3   3.6   8.0 14.8                    0.95
 CFR N’lands     0   0.3   0.1   0.2   0.5   1.5   7.6 23.2    30                    1.81
 CFR Italy     0.2     0   0.1   0.4   0.9   2.6    10 24.9 30.0                     2.29
 CFR Spain     0.3   0.4   0.3   0.3   0.5   1.3   4.4 13.2 20.3                     1.28
 CFR S. Kor      0     0     0   0.1   0.2   0.7   2.5   9.7 22.2                    0.74
 CFR India                                                                           3.16


  Table 3. Counterfactual Indian CFRs. Numbers in the final column report Indian
  CFR that would be predicted by the age-based CFRs of different countries, using
  India’s age distribution of cases in Row 1. Row 3 shows how different ages are
  impacted relative to population share. Sources: Case distribution from sample of
  2,344 Indian patients reported by Statistia, https://www.statista.com/statistics/111052
  2/india-number-of-coronavirus-cases-by-age-group/, Population age distribution from
  2011 Indian Census, CFRs by age from Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mortalit
  y_due_to_COVID-19#Mortality_by_age.



including infections that are mild or asymptomatic. Studies of infection fatality
rates are on the increase as antibody testing becomes more widely available,
but many of these are problematic in one way or the other, and given the
policy implications that could hang on this data, discussion around these efforts
can become extremely contentious. One meta-study of published research [53]
provides an average point estimate of 0.75%, with a pretty wide confidence
interval (at the 95% level) ranging from 0.49% to 1.01%.These numbers are
likely to undergo substantial adjustment as serological tests continue to acquire
greater ease and precision, and as the sample size (as well as sampling methods8 )
continue to improve. As an admittedly rough rule of thumb, if India’s CFR were
to be scaled down by the same factor as the world’s CFR of 6.7% must be scaled
in order to reach the average point estimate of 0.75%, then India’s IFR likely
stands at around 0.35%, which is higher than that of the flu (widely thought
   8 With the obvious lacunae seen in sampling and statistical procedures for some of these
studies, we would recommend that JPAL organize a crash course for epidemiologists.
22

to be around 0.1%) but not inordinately higher, even with the suspicion cast
on health infrastructure. In any case, as already stated, these estimates await
serious empirical confirmation.

These optimistic adjustments regarding the IFR notwithstanding, the coron-
avirus pandemic has brought into sharp relief the importance of having a solid
country-wide health infrastructure which can respond quickly and flexibly to
a health crisis — and India’s weak preparedness for such contingencies. This
is reflected in the country’s poor record of testing, which has been seriously
hampered by insufficient access to testing kits, especially of the type that permit
rapid serological tests — even admitting that serological tests are of greater
importance in later scenarios such as lockdown exit (or even research), whereas
PCR testing is the more urgent from the point of view of treatment. The
availability of indigenous technology is restricted to a very small number of
domestic companies. The government has therefore had to import rapid testing
kits, by placing orders with multinational companies for such kits with enhanced
pack-sizes allowing for more tests per kit [40]. The experience here has been an
unhappy one. A report filed in the Economic Times of April 27th [90] indicates
that around the middle of April the government suspended its countrywide plan
of conducting tests employing imported Chinese rapid testing kits, as these were
allegedly faulty; and that all orders for such kits have been withdrawn. Chinese
exporters have responded with denials and counter-charges of incorrect timing
in the use of the kits.

Testing has been further compromised by the paucity of epidemiologists, who
have an important role to play in surveillance, testing and identification. In
an April 20th report, Anoo Bhuyan [11] points out that “more than a quarter
of India’s 736 districts have no district-level epidemiologists and 11 states have
no state-level epidemiologist either, according to a letter from India’s health
ministry. . . " The letter, written on April 7th by India’s Health Secretary and
addressed to the states of the Indian Union, directs them to hire, on “a war
footing," epidemiologists who are described as being “a crucial element in
the effective management of . . . pandemics like COVID-19." Briefly, limited
                                                                                  23

resources and their poor deployment have been a feature of state intervention
in tackling the coronavirus epidemic. A zealously enforced lockdown isn’t
everything.


5. Relief Measures

5.1. Introduction. Despite the extreme and emergent nature of the corona crisis,
it is nevertheless quite remarkable that several detailed and practical measures
for relief and rehabilitation have been provided, at short notice, by several
commentators. We cannot possibly hope to cite all, or even most, of these
contributions, let alone review them, but it is also the case that these proposed
measures have an enormous overlap. After all, at some level, what needs to be
done isn’t rocket science. An enormous section of the Indian population will be
hit very hard by the lockdown, and adequate transfers need to be provided to
tide them over this difficult period. But the devil, as always, lies in the details.

As discussed by us in an earlier joint contribution with Lore Vandewalle [66],
vulnerability to a lockdown is accentuated in India by three specific structural
features of the population. The first has to do with the ubiquity of casual labor,
accounting for well over 20% of all Indian households — such individuals are
particularly vulnerable. The second is the preponderance of informal production
— well over half of India’s GDP is produced in the informal sector — and these
are activities which cannot be easily taken online. Many of these are based on
personalized relationships with other Indian households, but those relationships
— domestic work, for instance — require physical interaction. Third, median
household savings are low, and inadequate to take an estimated 38% of all
households through even a 21-day lockdown (we are currently on our way to
two months) if all their employment dries up.

The above considerations suggest substantial welfare gains to augmenting a
lockdown with a redistributive plan that fully protects the most vulnerable.
But apart from the distributive aspects of any relief plan, there are in addition
macroeconomic angles — ranging from the propping up of demand (largely
24

through fiscal means), the management of supply-side issues (largely through
monetary policy), and also the maintenance of fiscal balance across Center and
States. Every relief plan must be evaluated according to how it fares on both the
distributive and macroeconomic dimensions. We go into more detail below.


5.2. Distributive Considerations. The fundamental questions with targeted trans-
fers are these: how do we reach vulnerable households, and what form should
transfers take? A few years ago, this would have been a hopeless question,
because targeting by economic characteristics was practically non-existent. Fast
forward to today and the situation has changed somewhat; just how much will
be discussed below. Very few individuals still file income taxes, it is true. But
we do have some lists that continue to exhibit some degree of correlation with
economic need, though the extent of that correlation continues to be debatable.

Several lists are potentially available for making targeted transfers to the
population at large.

1. JDY. The most recent of these come from the bank accounts opened under Jan
Dhan Yojana (JDY), a financial inclusion program started in late 2014. Around
380 million JDY accounts exist today, over half of which are owned by women.
The vast majority of these accounts are in public sector banks, and around 60
million accounts appear to be held in regional rural banks.

2. PDS The second is the list that is available, under the public distribution
system, for the distribution of foodgrain, sugar and kerosene at ration shops,
or the PDS list for short. The PDS list as it now exists came into being under
the National Food Security Act of 2013. It covers approximately 2/3 of the
population: around 75% in the rural sector and around half of the urban
population possesses uniform entitlement of 5 kg of foodgrain per person per
month, with a household lower bound of 35 kg for a sub-list of the poorest
households.

3. NREGA Then there is a list of individuals who have job cards under the
National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, which guarantees up to 100
                                                                                25

days per year of rural wage employment for all households with individuals
above 18 years of age and willing to work. The scheme was rolled out in 1995
and has been extended to comprehensively cover rural India. A couple of points
are to be noted: this is an exclusively rural list, and approximately 140 million
individuals are signed up for job cards.

4. BPL The BPL (“below poverty line") list is meant to be a comprehensive list
of all Indian families that are economically disadvantaged. The identification
of the poor under this list has not been an easy task, and the criteria used for
BPL membership vary from state to state, and across rural and urban areas.
Members are eligible for various benefits, such as cooking fuel. For this reason,
membership on the lists has become a political issue and there are significant
errors of inclusion. Moreover, the vulnerable in this crisis clearly transcend the
relatively demanding and narrow class of those in poverty.

Both PDS and NREGA lists are linked imperfectly to bank accounts. Some Indian
states — but not all — appear to have a comprehensive mapping between PDS
recipients and bank accounts they might possess. Likewise, an amendment to
the Employment Guarantee Act in 2011 requires that all job card holders under
NREGA must have a linked bank account, but several states have continued
to make payments in cash. JDY list-members do not have this problem by
definition: they are defined by their bank accounts. How correlated they might
be to people in need is another matter altogether.

Several observers have provided wide-ranging wishlists for the distributive
portion of a relief plan. Reetika Khera [45] advocates the implementation of
cash transfers, employing existing transfer schemes and National Electronic
Funds Transfer. She also recommends in-kind transfers, to cover enhanced
rations and an expansion of the PDS to include essential commodities such
as oil and soap, while relaxing requirements of proof of eligibility by way of
the cumbersome (and now potentially dangerous) Aadhaar-based biometric
identification procedure. This is accompanied by suggestions of home delivery
of food for children, the provision of shelter for migrant workers in urban areas,
the opening of community kitchens, and the adoption of measures for controlling
26

the prices of essentials. On the health front, Khera advocates public hygiene
education, the regulation of private health agencies, and extensive testing for
covid-19. Further prescriptions, which also take account of the medium- and
long-term, are available in an elaborate list prepared by a group of academics
from Ashoka University — this is available in a two-part article in The Wire by
Abhinash Borah et al. [12].

Parikshit Ghosh [31] advances the cause of extensive testing for covid-19 beyond
the lockdown; and to make quarantining a feasible proposition, he recommends
the grant of a “quarantine allowance," citing the case of Odisha, which has
provided for an incentive of Rs.15,000 for a two-week stay in quarantine. Apart
from this, he also advocates a social safety net in the form of a quasi-universal
basic income, to be paid out over the next six months. In this context, a novel
aspect of Ghosh’s suggestion is that he advocates cash transfers via the PDS, an
idea perhaps well worth exploring and to which we briefly return below.

We also note here a manifesto [22] with 635 signatories, to the Finance Minister’s
announcement of a relief package (to be described and discussed below), seeking
— among other measures — enhanced rations, implementation of minimum
wages for NREGA workers, advance and increased pension payments, enhanced
cash transfers via the JDY scheme, cash transfers to construction workers,
assistance to pregnant women and mothers, expansion of coverage of farmers
under the Prime Minister’s Kisan scheme, and a moratorium on all debts
incurred after January 1st, 2020.

All of this is worthwhile advice, and while some of the detailed prescriptions
made may be no more than counsels of perfection, they would not run to more
than percentage points of GDP measured in the single digits — an expense well
worth considering, as several other countries have. Indeed, some of this counsel
could be viewed as fundamental and non-negotiable, such as universal access
to the public distribution system at this extraordinary time. There is, in fact,
wide and rather obvious consensus on this matter; see, for instance, Amartya
Sen, Raghuram Rajan and Abhijit Banerjee, who write [68]:
                                                                                              27

 “The correct response is to issue temporary ration cards — perhaps for six months
 — with minimal checks to everyone who wants one and is willing to stand in line to
 collect their card and their monthly allocations. The cost of missing many of those
 who are in dire need vastly exceeds the social cost of letting in some who could
 perhaps do without it."

This is by no means a new observation. The Supreme Court made it in 2016:

 “In the States in which drought has been declared or might be declared in the future,
 all households should be provided with their monthly entitlement of food grains in
 terms of the National Food Security . . . regardless of whether they fall in the category of
 priority household or not . . . The requirement of a household having a ration card is
 directed to be substituted by an appropriate identification or proof of residence that
 is acceptable to the State Government."9 [Emphasis ours.]


5.3. Macroeconomic Considerations. There are features of the current crisis which
may be viewed as a “supply side failure." The most important of these have to
do with the failure of supply chains. We have already mentioned the disruption
of the agricultural supply chain, coming on the heels of mandi closures, which
choked off the wholesale buying points in the chain. As a result, many farmers
found themselves with harvests that they could not sell in the ongoing lockdown.
Other choke points include production: there have been shortages of agricultural
workers during harvests both for fear of the pandemic but also mainly because
of police reactions. While there are features of the retailing chain that are specific
to agriculture, it is not hard to imagine other supply processes being damaged
in the same way in the manufacturing sector. For smaller firms without access
to liquidity to tide them over, this could be a death blow.

It is important to note, however, that these are no ordinary supply bottlenecks.
The injection of liquidity per se will not get rid of them. What is needed, in
contrast, is an environment that will safely permit labor to work, or buying

   9 SeeDirections 30 (3 and 4) of the Supreme Court Judgment in Swaraj Abhiyan v. Union of
India, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 857 of 2015, available at https://www.legitquest.com/case/swaraj
-abhiyan--ii-v-union-of-india-others/9B0E4.
28

points to operate, without fear either of the virus or of unsympathetic law-
enforcers entrusted with implementing the lockdown. Both these fears can
be ameliorated to some degree by proper planning. In an early article [36],
Yamini Iyer and Mekhala Krishnamurthy have advanced a useful conceptual
apparatus for dealing with the epidemic, covering the issues of how to manage
the movement of persons, the movement of food, the movement of funds and
schemes, and the functioning of supply chains for agricultural commodities.
The last mentioned item is of crucial importance in mitigating the severe costs of
a generalized and long-drawn-out lockdown. Quite apart from its obvious role
in catering to household needs on the consumption side, it is central if agrarian
incomes are to be protected, especially with the crush of returning migrants
from the urban areas. Sudha Narayanan [58] offers pragmatic advice on the
freeing-up of mandis and all markets for agricultural produce, on managing
post-harvest output, on decentralizing the procurement of foodgrain, and on
avoiding unreasonable restrictions on the transport of commodities so as to
minimize supply chain failures in an environment where “[m]any of the logistical
disruptions have come from an ‘overzealous bureaucracy’ and police overreach
in enforcing the lockdown."

Again, these are not classical supply side problems. Expanding liquidity directly
to companies, especially micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs), is
certainly important. It will serve to prevent these companies from going under.
MSMEs produce around 30% of Indian GDP, are spatially distributed almost
equally in rural and urban areas, and contribute significantly to manufacturing,
trade and other services. Equally important, MSMEs claim a major share of
employment in India, accounting for over 110 m jobs.10 One can only hope
that direct support to MSMEs will protect that employment as well, though it
is unclear to us that it will; see, for instance, Section 6.5. At the same time, we
should not expect an aggregate injection of liquidity, especially via the banking
system, to have any substantive effect in combating the economic slowdown.

     10 This
          information has been taken from the Annual Report of the Government of India’s
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises; see https://msme.gov.in/sites/default/files/M
SME-AR-2017-18-Eng.pdf.
                                                                                   29

Such monetary easing via banks will generally be unhelpful from the supply
side. As Rajeshwari Sengupta and Harsh Vardhan [70] have pointed out, banks
have effectively become highly risk-averse because of a large fraction of non-
performing loans (leading in part to the punishment of banks by the Government
and the Reserve Bank of India), as well as the fact that a rising proportion of firms
are highly over-leveraged. Commercial banks have been increasingly engaged in
retail lending, while public sector banks have been passing the buck by lending
on to non-bank financial companies (NBFCs). A liquidity easing to banks by the
Reserve Bank of India is therefore highly unlikely to be passed along in terms of
new credit to firms. Banks are likely to hoard that liquidity. Indeed, given that
firms are facing a demand crisis, it is likely that the portfolio mix of loan demand
will shift even more strongly away from productive investment to shorter-term
sustenance, leaving banks even more unwilling to lend to firms.

In contrast, one might expect a substantial fiscal stimulus to serve to reverse,
at least in part, a demand crisis that has been ongoing before the covid-19
lockdown and now is further exacerbated by additional drops in demand layered
on by the increased uncertainty generated by the virus. The role of fiscal policy
is further heightened by the monetary impotence highlighted in the previous
paragraph. In this context, it has to be noted that the distributive transfers of
the previous section and fiscal stimuli go hand in hand. In short, the most
direct macroeconomic response to this should be fiscal rather than monetary —
interventions on the spending side, and transfers can add to that response. It
may be that the Indian government is reluctant to spend directly, but then there
is a case for making transfers to deserving, targeted, vulnerable groups, and
letting them shore up the demand side, to the extent possible, as a serendipitous
byproduct. If the government is unwilling to engage in direct deficit spending
to shore up the demand side, the least it can do is give the money away to those
who need it the most, and wait for those funds to return as aggregate demand.

There is a final macroeconomic aspect to any relief package, and that concerns
the relationship between the Center and the States. It should be noted that health
is a State subject, and yet the States have been facing a funding shortage that
30

intensifies with each passing day of the lockdown. For one thing, revenues from
the new goods and services (GST) tax have declined in March to under Rs 1 tr,
as business shutdowns took their inevitable toll on sales tax revenues, the drop
since March 2019 coming in at 8.4%. Under GST law, States are supposed to
be reimbursed by the Center for revenue shortfalls in the first five years of GST
implementation, which started in 2017, but there are arrears still to be released.
Meanwhile, the Center has been advantaged by a drop in oil prices, which have
been mopped up as Central revenue by virtue of an oil tariff hike. That raises
the specter of excessive centralization of funds which the Center must do its best
to avoid, but which it actually seems to be doing its worst to promote.

Fund transfers to the States have three important aspects. First, the States need
the funds and will spend them. That will have demand-side effects which are
welcome given the existence of a widespread demand crisis. Even money spent
on health professionals and equipment will translate into income. Second, the
incentive for the States to exit the lockdown will become better aligned to those
of the Center. As matters stand now, given the severe shortage of resources,
no State will want to exit the lockdown, fearing that it will have a spiraling
epidemic on its hands. And finally, the decision rights over funds have to match
the informational reality on the ground — States and local governments have a
far better knowledge of local conditions, and can react to them in more flexible
ways than any one-size-fits-all that the Center might adopt.




5.4. The Indian Government’s Relief Plan 1. It was only after the first lockdown of
March 25th was implemented that the Finance Minister announced a covid-19
relief package on March 27th. In light of a new package just released at the time
of this writing, we will refer to this as Plan 1. The overall package was valued at
Rs. 1.7 trillion (or around US 22.5 billion dollars). Under Plan 1, these earmarked
funds were to be deployed for the following purposes [15]:

1. Rs.500 per month, for 3 months, to an estimated 200 million JDY female
account holders;
                                                                                31

2. An additional 5kg of wheat or rice per person on the PDS list, and 1kg of
pulses per PDS household, for 3 months;

3. Enhanced “rural employment guarantee" daily wages, from Rs.182 to Rs.202,
presumably available for job card holders on the NREGA list.

4. A cash transfer of Rs.2000 to 87 million farmers under the PM Kisan scheme;

5. Free Liquefied Petroleum Gas cylinders for 86 million Ujjwala scheme
beneficiaries (who are all BPL families) for 3 months;

6. An ex gratia payment of Rs.1000 to poor senior citizens, widows and disabled
persons.

7. Medical insurance of Rs.5 million for health workers fighting covid-19.

8. Collateral-free loan of up to Rs 2 million for female self-help groups.

In addition, for the organized sector, Plan 1 envisaged government contributions
to Provident Funds for those employees earning under Rs 15,000 per month
in companies with fewer than 100 employees, and permits a non-refundable
advance of 75% of the Provident Fund, or 3 months’ wages, whichever is
lower. For construction workers, Plan 1 directs States to provide relief under
the Construction Workers’ Welfare Fund, which would be made available to
the States. The Plan also makes available unallocated funds under the District
Mineral Fund to be used by the States for supplementing medical testing and
screening.

Overall, Plan 1 is less than 1% of India’s GDP. This compares very unfavorably
(in percentage terms) with the allocations made by economically advanced
countries. According to Anderson et al [6], the “immediate fiscal impulse [of]
additional government spending (such as medical resources, keeping people
employed, subsidizing SMEs, public investment) and foregone revenues (such
as the cancellation of certain taxes and social security contributions)" is of the
order of 9.1% of GDP for the USA, 6.9% for Germany, and 4.5% for the UK. The
fiscal stimulus in per capita terms shows up India in an even worse comparative
32

light, by virtue both of its much larger population and far greater levels of
poverty and vulnerability. Just as an example, assuming that only one-half of
India’s 1360 million population will need special assistance, the funds available
from the fiscal package per needy person works out to just Rs.2,500, or around
USD 40!)

As it happens, Plan 1 is probably of the order of only 0.6% of GDP. While
observers such as Jean Drèze correctly laud the government for increasing in-
kind allocations via the PDS, Drèze [20] writes:

 “Indeed, the budget has been padded. For instance, by including Rs.16,000 crore
 of pre-committed [PM-Kisan] expenditure, and Rs.5,600 crore for [NREGA] wage
 increases that had already been notified by the rural development ministry on March
 23. The release of excess foodgrain stocks is billed at so-called economic cost, when
 in fact, their opportunity cost is much lower. (This is an old accounting anomaly for
 which the FM is not responsible.) And the funds being sought from construction
 workers’ welfare funds don’t really belong to the Union government. If we focus on
 novel relief measures funded by the Centre, the budget is likely to be closer to Rs.1
 lakh crore than Rs.1.7 lakh crore."

It might sound somewhat curmudgeonly of Drèze to castigate the government
for including NREGA wage increases that had been announced on March 23, but
a little postscript might convince the reader that this is actually quite charitable
of him. The prescribed NREGA wages in most states are actually higher than
the new announced minimum, and besides, would NREGA function under a
lockdown at all? April 2020 has seen a year-over-year decline of 86% in NREGA
employment: in that month, an estimated 3.4 million households were provided
work as opposed to 17m in April of 2019 [4]. This is a catastrophic decline which
the Government is reportedly taking recent steps to reverse (with proper social
distancing guidelines for public employment programs).

A leading feature of Plan 1 is its transfer of Rs.500 per month to female-owned
bank accounts under the JDY list. There is serious concern that the JDY list
could be the wrong one to use, because it is not even clear how clustered these
accounts are across families. It is hard to get a measure of such clustering, but
                                                                                                  33

it is certainly the case that many are unaware of having an account under JDY.
Rohini Pande, Simone Schaner, and Charity Troyer Moore [61] observe that:

  “A nationally representative survey from 2018, the Financial Inclusion Insights
  Survey, asked respondents whether they have a bank account and, if yes, whether
  it is a JDY account. Roughly 80% of female respondents stated they have a bank
  account, but only 21% said they have a JDY account. What drives the gap between
  government and survey numbers? Likely some combination of dormancy, account
  duplication in the system and the lack of knowledge among women about the type
  of account they hold."

The authors estimate that some 125–175m poor women do not have access to
JDY accounts, and so not, a fortiori, to the transfers.11 They also note that one in
four poor women live more than 5 km away from their nearest banking point.
Their implication is that Indian relief cannot rely on cash, or not on cash alone.
We reserve judgment on this implication, but certainly there is room to do more
(at least temporarily) on the non-cash front.

Indeed, there is enough foodgrain stock to do this for several months. Dipa Sinha
[76] examines the hike via PDS of 5kg grain/ 1 kg pulses, and correctly observes
that there is a clear scope for more aggressive in-kind transfers. If universal
coverage is permitted under PDS (and 20% self-select out, leaving 80%), that
coverage can comfortably persist at 10kg of grain per person for six months,
which would work out to about 65 million tons, at a time when the stocks
available with the Food Corporation of India already run to 75 million tons,
with the prospect of an additional 30-35 million tons arriving from post-harvest
procurement. But such expansion, when considered in particular States and
Territories, appears to present unique bureaucratic challenges, as Sinha notes in
her article.12
   11 They argue that by the United Nations poverty criterion of USD 2.50 per day, roughly 325m

women are under the line, giving them the lower bound of 125m even if all 200m JDY account
holders are under the line as well. The upper bound comes from their estimate that no more
than 75% of the JDY holders are below the poverty line.
    12 In the same article, Sinha writes: “In Delhi for instance, a non-ration cardholder is required

to enrol herself online first by entering their phone number and getting an OTP. They are required
to then upload their Aadhar as well as a family photo. Once that is successfully done, they will
34

Meanwhile, the Indian Government appears to have settled on more creative
ways of handling their food surplus. According to Agarwal [2] in The Wire on
April 21st, “[t]he Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas has announced that the
‘surplus rice’ available with the Food Corporation of India will be ‘allowed to
be converted to ethanol for utilisation in making alcohol-based hand-sanitizers’
. . . The ministry has so far not clarified what it means by ‘surplus quantities of
rice’, at what price it intends to buy the rice from FCI and when."

Returning now to cash transfers and the modalities of such transfer: there is
certainly room to transfer more cash, much more, if the Center’s capacity were
to be viewed as the only constraint. On the modalities, if JDY is believed to
be excessively clustered or urban, there are other lists at hand, each favored
by different observers. Jean Drèze and Reetika Khera’s list of preference is the
NREGA compilation, and they underscore Pande et al.’s reservations on the JDY
list:

 “The reason is that the job-cards [NREGA] list is a transparent, recursive household
 list with village and gram panchayat identifiers, while the list of JDY accounts is an
 opaque list of individual bank accounts. Cash-in-hand may seem like the antithesis
 of [JDY and mobile banking], but this option may become important in the near
 future if the banking system comes under further stress. There are precedents of
 effective use of the cash-in-hand method, notably in Odisha for pension payments,
 and in various states for NREGA wage payments. Several states (including Andhra
 Pradesh, Odisha and Tamil Nadu) have already resorted to cash-in-hand for relief
 payments during the lockdown."

We agree that the reservations regarding JDY are well-founded, though there
is little doubt that it represents the swiftest route available to the Central
Government — never mind that from the point of view of the recipient it may be
receive an SMS which has a link to the e-coupon. Beneficiaries are expected to have smartphones
through which they open the e-coupons when they go to collect their rations . . . Therefore, the
assumption is that every person not only has access to a smartphone but also the technical
capability to fill in online forms. . . . Moreover, after a day of launching, the website was down
for over three days because of the overload. There was also a fake website claiming to be
issuing ration cards . . . Each state seems to be coming up with some such system of identifying
or verifying those who should be included, even whilst they are claiming to have made the PDS
universal."
                                                                                       35

more problematic. The NREGA list has an estimated 140m job-card holders on
it; the PDS has 230 million cards that pertain to 800m households. The former is
entirely rural, which certainly does not eliminate it from consideration, as one
could combine it with other urban measures. But it seems odd to not regard the
PDS list, at least at a first cut, as an obvious alternative. The Ashoka University
group of economists mention the PDS, and Parikshit Ghosh [31] uses this list to
generate more explicit calculations for a quasi-UBI (quasi, given that the PDS
covers 60% of all households):

 A little back-of-the-envelope calculation shows that a Rs. 1,000 monthly grant per
 member to each PDS household (Rs. 5,000 for a family of five), continued for 6
 months, should cost about 3% of GDP, or Rs. 5.7 trillion (scale it up if you wish). For
 a crisis of the century, spending this much to secure the basic needs of our fellow
 citizens seems like a no-brainer . . . Financing this additional expenditure through
 borrowing should not pose a problem. Private investment has been weak for a long
 time and in the current climate of uncertainty, it is bound to suffer another blow. It
 is a safe bet that new government debt is not going to create a lot of crowding-out,
 and money in people’s pockets will also act as a much-needed fiscal stimulus."


It appears that the PDS accounts are linked to well-defined bank accounts
quite well in some States, and badly or perhaps not at all in others. Our
own investigations (admittedly, at short notice), have not turned up anything
definitive on the subject. While it should be easy to use such accounts for direct
deposit where available, there is a question about whether cash can be taken
efficiently and safely via the PDS when bank accounts are not available. We
leave this as an open question that deserves immediate and urgent attention.

Whether or not cash is sent through the NREGA or the PDS list, the NREGA
list can be used for what it was originally intended for. As already noted, there
has been a dramatic decline in employment via this channel, overwhelmingly
caused by the lockdown. While such zeal at the start of an unprecedented
crisis is understandable, it runs counter to the relief package of the Government,
which explicitly factors in higher NREGA wages as part of the payout. The
Government cannot have it both ways. As Reetika Khera [45] has argued,
36

NREGA could expand its work guarantees well beyond 100 days per annum,
and she has called for 20 days per month during the crisis.

As MNREGA is implemented in rural areas only, it has to be suitably comple-
mented in cities in order not to prolong the human tragedy of the first week of
the lockdown. Thousands of poor migrant workers have been frustrated by the
shut-down of transport facilities and closed state borders in their effort to return
to their village homes. Many have been forced to undertake foot journeys of
several hundreds of kilometers, with limited cash to hand, and little access to
food, water, or shelter. Trekking laborers have been rounded up and locked up
in crowded enclosures. In one shocking incident, a contingent of migrants was
showered with corrosive disinfectant. Significant reports of deaths are beginning
to come in, including the deaths of children. There is little doubt that these will
multiply as the coming difficult days go by.

In summary, the Indian Government has allocated just a little under 1% of GDP
to the plan. Taking into account the fact that some provisions of Plan 1 are
already in the Union Budget, while others (such as NREGA wages) rely on
some dubious accounting, the effective assistance is significantly smaller than
the promised 1%. This shortfall is clearly mirrored in the numbers. Consider, for
instance, the proposed allowance of Rs 500/month/family: the average monthly
per person consumption expenditure is itself about two-and-a-half times this
amount; and, indeed, even the average per person expenditure of the poorest
20% of the population exceeds the allowance [88].

As for in-kind assistance, we’ve discussed these in detail, but that discussion
omits items which are not even mentioned in Plan 1. For instance, there are
serious shortages even in the ability to equip health workers with protective
personal equipment (PPE) such as surgical gloves, masks and body suits. In
feedback sought on the availability of health infrastructure from 266 District Col-
lectors and other senior Indian Administrative Service officers, 47% disagreed or
disagreed seriously about the availability of sufficient PPE, while this figure was
of the order of 59% for Intensive Care Unit beds, and 72% for ventilators [94]. An
aspect of sensitivity to priorities in planning is starkly reflected in the fact that
                                                                                 37

despite a WHO notification on global shortages of PPE on February 27th, “the
Indian government waited till 19 March to issue a notification prohibiting the
export of domestically manufactured PPEs and the raw material for the same"
[46].

Plan 1 comes up short in addressing the severe resource scarcities faced by the
State governments, which need in turn to decentralize further to local admin-
istrations who understand the nuances of ground realities. State repositories
of funds cannot take advantage of “corporate social responsibility" spending:
such spending seems only to be allowed for contributions to Central coffers.
Specifically, a public charitable trust was created on March 27th, with the Prime
Minister as ex-officio Chairman and the Finance, Home and Defence Ministers as
ex-officio Trustees, bearing the name of the “Prime Minister’s Citizen Assistance
and Relief in Emergency Situations Fund" (PM CARES Fund). Donations to
this Fund are meant to be employed for financing expenses incurred in dealing
with the covid-19 epidemic, and are eligible for tax exemption. Corporates
will have their contributions counted as part of their mandatory Corporate
Social Responsibility (CSR) obligations, including the option of setting off any
donations above the CSR limit against future CSR liabilities. The States cannot
do any of this.

We have already noted that there are arrears due to the States in the matter of
revenues from GST, and these were now heightened by a huge slowdown in
business and hence in the generation of sales tax revenue, though some reversal
appears to have occurred with relaxation of economic activity in the third phase
of the lockdown. The Center has already impounded the beneficial effects of
an oil price drop by hiking the oil tariff. The States have nowhere to turn, and
are increasingly dependent on the Center — or on hastily placed tax hikes on
alcohol retail outlets; see, e.g., [9] — for desperately needed funds. None of this
was visibly addressed in Plan 1.

One would be forgiven for imagining that in a situation of such apparent
constraint, external sources of funding would be welcome. And indeed, the
International Monetary Fund has mooted the issue of liquidity in the form of
38

Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) to the tune of 500 billion US dollars — only for
the proposal to be vetoed (unsurprisingly) by the US and (surprisingly) by India,
for the ostensible reason, in the latter case, of guarding against the possibility
of some countries (presumably Pakistan) employing the funds for “extraneous
purposes" (supposedly terrorist activity). Commenting on India’s response,
Jayati Ghosh [30] writes: “Whatever may be the reason, this is a strategy that
is not just fraught with risks but also illogical. Globally, it is a costly denial of
a chance for the world economy to revive after this extraordinary shutdown.
Internationally, it shows that India is willing to abandon the interest of the rest
of the developing world, with little advantage to itself."

The covid crisis comes on top of an already enfeebled economy, weakened by
demand contraction and a generalized slowdown, with unprecedented levels of
unemployment coupled with zero employment growth. There are technological
and market forces behind these trends for which no individual Government can
be held entirely responsible. That said, the state of the economy in the time
immediately preceding the pandemic only heightens the extent of the necessary
fiscal effort that now confronts the government in the post-lockdown situation,
with its layered crisis of lives and livelihoods.13

Creative suggestions have been made to undergird that fiscal effort. For instance,
Ayushi Bajaj and Gaurav Datt [8] propose one way of monetizing government
debt whereby the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) buys up government securities,
credits the government’s account with the purchase value of the securities, and
then writes off the debt, so that the initial expansion of government debt and in
the RBI’s balances are subsequently reversed. Generous public spending is even
more urgently indicated if there are options available for resource mobilization
which will not necessarily stretch the fiscal deficit to extravagant limits. One
such option has been pointed out by Gurbachan Singh [75], who observes that
India’s foreign exchange reserves are of the order of Rs. 35 tr — larger than might
be dictated by considerations of abundant prudence. Plan 1 represented only 5%
of these reserves, and Singh suggests that lowering their level by another 10%
     13 See   also, in this general context, Agarwal and Srivas [5], Sainath [67], and The Wire [84].
                                                                                           39

should not be seriously problematic, especially with the option of implementing
a regime of Pigovian taxes in the event of sudden and large capital flows. This
would immediately add a fiscal stimulus of another 2% of GDP.

Invitations for discretionary donations based on philanthropic impulse are
another source of funding. The Prime Minister’s National Relief Fund (PMNRF),
which was established in 1948, accepts contributions which are deployed for
(among other purposes) providing immediate relief to families affected by
natural calamities of various kinds. We’ve already mentioned the creation
of PM CARES, a fund parallel to the PMNRF. That act was questioned by
opposition political parties, and its constitutional legality was the subject of
a Public Interest Litigation case, which was however dismissed by a bench of
the Supreme Court.14 Subject to the Centre-State asymmetries that we have
already highlighted, we would welcome voluntary contributions. But these,
by definition, are discretionary donations, as opposed to taxes—which are
mandatory, have the force of law behind them, are an expression of public
entitlement to private income and wealth, and have to be accounted for with
transparency. Taxation is therefore a source of funding which, one might
have thought, immediately suggests itself. Indeed, this is the subject of a
very interesting recommendation in the European context by Camille Landais,
Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman [48], who write:

 “European governments have reacted swiftly to the COVID crisis and are now
 discussing ways to mutualize the cost of the epidemic. This column proposes
 the creation of a progressive, time-limited, European-wide progressive wealth tax
 assessed on the net worth of the top 1% richest individuals. If fighting COVID-19
 requires issuing 10 points of EU GDP in Eurobonds (or a rescue fund worth 10 points
 of EU GDP), a progressive wealth tax would be enough to repay all this extra debt
 after ten years."

Following this line of reasoning, one of us [87] used the Hurun India Rich List
data on the net worth of 953 wealthiest entities with a net worth in excess
of Rs. 10 billion each, around USD 135 million at current exchange rates. The

  14 The   accounts of the PM CARES Fund will be examined by private auditors, and not by the
office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
40

exercise involved computing the effect of a tax on the wealth of just these entities.
Together, they account for less than 0.0004% of all households in India, but a 4%
tax on their wealth would yield a revenue which is 1% of GDP, a remarkable
fact. This prescription would, of course, require legislation for the enactment of
a wealth tax, which was formally abolished in the Union Budget of 2016–17.

Of related interest are the suggestions made by a group of Indian Revenue
Service (IRS) officers in a report entitled “Fiscal Options & Response to Covid-19
Epidemic" (or FORCE), which was released to the media on the Twitter handle
and website of the IRS Association. Among other recommendations made in the
FORCE report are that the marginal income tax rate on incomes exceeding Rs.
10m per year should be raised from 30% to 40%, that a one-time “Covid Relief
Cess" of 4% should be levied on taxable incomes exceeding Rs.1m per year; and
that a wealth tax should be re-introduced on the “super rich," defined as those
with a net worth of Rs 50m or more [41].

The government’s response to this report and its recommendations has been—to
put it neutrally—extraordinary. According to a report filed in Scroll.in,

 The Central Board of Direct Taxes [on April 27th] issued chargesheets against three
 senior Indian Revenue Service officials, involved in preparing and publicising a
 report on increasing income tax . . . The three officials, at the rank of the principal
 commissioner, have been suspended [and] have been given 15 days to file a written
 reply in their defence and are supposed to convey whether they want to be heard in
 person . . . " [81]

No comment is necessary, or (in our case) possible.


5.5. The Indian Government’s Relief Plan 2. On May 12, Prime Minister Modi
announced that a new relief plan would be unveiled by the Finance Minister,
Nirmala Sitharaman, over the following days.

Plan 2 envisages an expenditure of around Rs. 20 trillion (or around USD 270
billion), more than 10 times the amount in Plan 1, and amounting to around
10% of Indian GDP. The exact break-up of this amount, or the precise nature
                                                                                   41

of the accounting involved, is not completely clear at the time of writing. The
components of Plan 2 were specified by the Finance Minister in five tranches
over five days following the Prime Minister’s March 12 announcement. These
can be summarized as follows, in line with the break-up provided by The Mint;
see Dasgupta and Kumar [18]:

Tranche 1, Rs. 5.95 tr; Tranche 2, Rs. 3.10 tr; Tranche 3, Rs. 1.50 tr; Tranches 4
and 5, Rs. 0.48 tr, coming to a total of Rs. 11.03 tr.

Where does the remainder of the Rs. 20 tr package come from? It turns out that
included in Plan 2 package are the Plan 1 provision of Rs. 1.7 tr, revenue losses
from certain tax concessions made after March 22nd amounting to Rs. 0.078 tr,
and a sum of Rs. 0.15 tr for the health sector which had been earlier announced
by the Prime Minister. But most significantly, the package also includes huge
prior infusions of liquidity by the Reserve Bank of India, totaling Rs. 8.02 tr.
These additional elements aggregate to Rs. 9.95 tr which, when added to the
11.03 tr from the earlier-mentioned 5-tranche announcement, yields Rs. 20.98 tr,
the ostensible size of Plan 2. From what we can gather from various sources, the
following are some salient components of the package:

1. Collateral-free loans to Micro, Small and Medium-Scale Enterprises (MSMEs)
up to Rs 3 tr and an equity infusion of Rs. 0.5 tr, with an additional Rs. 0.20 tr in
loans to stressed MSMEs;

2. Rs. 0.9 tr for power distribution companies, Rs. 0.3 tr of “special liquidity"
for non-banking financial institutions (NBFCs) and Micro-Finance Institutions
(MFIs) and a Rs 0.45 tr. partial credit guarantee scheme for NBFCs, housing
finance companies (HFCs), and MFIs with low credit rating.

3. Liquidity relief through reduction in Tax Deducted at Source (TDS) and Tax
Collected at Source, valued at Rs. 0.5 tr, and “expedited" income tax refunds of
Rs 0.18 tr.

4. Concessional credit of Rs 2 tr for 25m farmers, fishermen and animal
husbandry farmers under PM-Kisan.
42

5. Additional emergency working capital of Rs. 0.3 tr for farmers through the
National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development.

6. Extension of the Credit Linked Subsidy Scheme for the housing sector and
middle income group, amounting to Rs. 0.7 tr;

7. A special credit facility for street vendors, amounting to Rs. 0.05 tr;

8. Employees’ Provident Fund support for businesses and workers, amounting
to Rs. 0.025 tr;

9. Promotion of Affordable Rental Housing Complexes for migrant workers and
the urban poor, in a scheme whose physical contours and fiscal provision are as
yet not quite clear;

10. Foodgrains for non-ration card holders (5 kg of wheat/rice per person and
1 kg chick-pea per family) for 2 months, intended to cover 80 million migrants,
amounting to Rs. 0.035 tr; and allowance for the use of ration cards anywhere
in the country, with financial implications which are not yet clear;

11. An additional Rs 0.4 tr to be allocated to NREGA employment, over and
above the earlier budget estimate of Rs 0.61 tr for fiscal 2021.

The money for migrants will be provided to State governments, and District
Collectors and Municipal Commissioners will have access to this money. Other
features of Plan 2 include an extension of the due date for tax returns, to
November 30, relief from regulatory penalties for real estate companies for
up to six months, an emphasis on “buying domestic" — the banning of global
tenders for government procurement contracts up to Rs. 0.002 tr — and an
expansion of the definition of MSME by raising the thresholds for inclusion in
these categories.15 If we add all the amounts above, we obtain a total of Rs. 9.55
tr, which accounts for nearly 87% of the 5-tranche announcement of Rs. 11.03
     15 For instance, the new threshold for micro-enterprise is investment up to Rs 1 cr and turnover

under Rs 5 cr. The definition earlier was on investment criteria of up to Rs 10 lakh for services
and Rs 25 lakh for manufacturing. For more detail, see https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/s
mall-biz/sme-sector/finance-minister-announces-revised-msme-definitions-no-different-betwe
en-manufacturing-and-service-enterprises/articleshow/75717694.cms.
                                                                                           43

tr. This suggests that while the list above is conceivably not exhaustive (or is
incompletely informed by particulars of the financial implications of all of its
components), it cannot be far from being so.

Given that trillions are not part of our everyday mental accounting, the following
comparisons might help. First, the entire relief Plan 1 package, even with its
faulty accounting, is half of what the Government is planning to give to MSMEs
as loans. Second, we can quickly calculate what would be needed to provide
half of India’s households with a minimum of Rs. 5000 each, which is a common
estimate of minimum monthly needs. Using the figure of approximately 280 m
households (247m is the number from the 2011 Census), this means that Rs. 0.7 tr
would be needed per month.16 The resulting three-month total of around Rs 2.1
tr is, again, worth comparing with some of the items above. Third, in the matter
of relief for migrant laborers, the PM Cares Fund allocates Rs. 0.01 tr to them,
which is one-half the amount to be spent on ventilators, and is less than 0.06%
of the new package of Rs. 20 tr. On the other hand, the new allocation of Rs 0.4
tr to NREGA could go part of the way towards helping returning migrants.

Finally, the fiscal component of this package is small and somewhat unclear. We
wish to be very clear that we understand the need for both monetary and fiscal
stimuli, as we have both supply- and demand-side problems on our hands. But
supply-side alleviation serves at best as a temporary palliative while the demand
constraint persists. One could counter with the view that a fiscal stimulus on
its own has little value either, as long as the supply bottle necks continue. But
it needs to be understood that the fundamental supply bottleneck comes today
from the induced shortage of labor created by the covid lockdown, and the
attendant chain reactions that have sprung from this shortage. This is a supply-
side problem that — to the extent permissible by the pandemic — is either under
our control, or not remediable through monetary easing. In any case, and at


  16 This roughly aligns with P. Chidambaram’s estimate of Rs. 0.65 tr; see https://www.finan
cialexpress.com/india-news/chidambaram-urges-congress-cms-to-demand-transfer-of-cash
-to-poor-families-during-meeting-with-pm-modi/1925437/. Though we do not know how he
arrived at this number, his final estimate is sensible.
44

the very least, we would hope for some balance across the fiscal and monetary
realms.

At a stretch, we could count under “fiscal stimulus" all of the Plan 1 allocation
of Rs. 1.7 tr, reduced, let us say, to Rs.1.3 tr to account for elements of double-
counting alluded to earlier, the provisions for tax relief (Rs. 0.78 tr), the PM’s
announcement for the health sector (Rs. 0.15 tr), the provident fund payments of
Rs. 0.025 tr, the Rs. 0.035 tr provision for foodgrain to migrant workers without
ration cards, and the entire new expenditure of Rs. 0.4 tr on NREGA, to arrive a
bit south of Rs. 2 tr, which is around 1% of India’s GDP. (In fact, Barclay’s estimate
of the actual fiscal impact of the package, at Rs. 1.5 tr, is even more pessimistic,
and only 0.75% of GDP; see [78] and [74]. The rest of the items appear to be loans
and liquidity injections from the Reserve Bank and from nationalized banks, or
reductions in provident fund contributions and taxes deducted or collected at
source. This strategy should be viewed in the context of a country already flush
with liquidity, with banks very reluctant to on-lend (see the discussion in Section
5.3 on the macroeconomic aspects of the crisis).


6. Other Outcomes

6.1. Introduction. In what follows, we look briefly at some of the accompani-
ments to, and outcomes of, the lockdown. An important feature of the lockdown
relates to the procedural aspects of its implementation—or more accurately, in
the present context, its enforcement. We then consider three direct fallouts of
the lockdown: supply chain disruptions in agriculture, the shut-down’s impact
on migrant labor, and its consequence for other morbidities. Three further
accompaniments to the lockdown have been the phenomena of communalization
of the pandemic, caste discrimination, and domestic violence. These issues are
also briefly reviewed.


6.2. Enforcement of the Lockdown. The Blavatnik School of Government of the
University of Oxford has created an “Oxford COVID-19 Government Response
                                                                                      45

Tracker (OxCGRT)," which collates government policy responses to the pan-
demic, scores the stringency of such measures, and creates a “stringency Index"
from these. The OxCGRT website is careful to point out that “this index simply
records the number and strictness of government policies, and should not
be interpreted as ‘scoring’ the appropriateness or effectiveness of a country’s
response. A higher position in the Stringency Index does not necessarily mean
that a country’s response is ‘better’ than others lower on the index." According
to OxCGRT data, over the period April 1 - May 1, India is among the highest
ranking countries in terms of its calculated stringency level.

India’s high “stringency score" seems to reflect, in some measure, police action
against “lockdown offenders." Several anecdotal cases (with visual back-up) are
available of police beating up “transgressing" citizens with lathis, getting them to
frog-march, forcing them to perform push-ups and sit-ups, and harassing street
vendors. Distressing video-recordings of such acts are available on the Scroll.

The situation appears to have turned bad enough for The Editors Guild of India
to lodge a protest against police assaults on working journalists, and for the
Kerala High Court to take suo motu cognizance of alleged police excesses and
seek a response from the Centre to its contention that


 “Amidst the din of the pandemic that engulfs us all, our laws cannot remain
 silent. . . They must continue to operate so as to protect the rights of our citizens.
 It is well established in our jurisprudence that the fundamental right to life and
 personal liberty, under Article 21 of our Constitution, cannot be suspended even
 during an emergency. As the sentinel on the qui vive, this court must be alert to the
 cries of the citizenry, alleging violation of their Constitutional rights" [80].



The lockdown period has also seen the arrests of human rights activists and
student leaders, with appeals to the country’s law courts proving to be of little
avail; see The Wire [85] and Yamunan and Daniyal [96]. That the lockdown may
have been implemented not wisely but too well is suggested by the content of
the next three sub-sections.
46

6.3. Supply Chain Disruptions in Agriculture and Urban Food Markets. One must
expect that an inevitable concomitant of a thoroughgoing lockout must be serious
breaks in backward and forward linkages of supply. As mentioned before,
Sudha Narayanan [58] provided an early diagnosis of supply chain failures
in agriculture, and suggested how these might be dealt with. The extent of the
disruption is described in a very instructive appraisal by Vikas Rawal and Ankur
Verma [64]. The authors note that it was only on the third day of the lockdown,
on March 27th, that the government clarified that agricultural production and
market activities were outside the purview of the lockdown. By this time, it
would appear that substantial damage had already been done to the supply
chains in agriculture, as the following account, based on the work of Rawal and
Verma, testifies.

An analysis of post-winter-harvest (rabi) market arrivals in 1,331 designated
mandis (market trading points) over the period March 15 - April 14 for the years
2017, 2018, 2019 and 2020 reveals that there were serious shortfalls in these
arrivals in 2020 for seven key food commodities, comprising foodgrains (wheat,
chickpea, and mustard) and vegetables (potato, tomato, onion and cauliflower).
The quantity of wheat sold over the first lockdown period of 21 days (March
25-April 14) in 2020 was found to be only 6% of the quantity sold over the same
period in 2019; the corresponding figures for chickpea and mustard are 6% and
4% respectively. The performance of perishable commodities was somewhat
better: even so, the declines in arrivals for onions, potatoes, tomatoes and
cauliflower between 2019 and 2020 were of the order of 70%, 59%, 26% and
11% respectively.

Despite the (delayed) exemption of agricultural operations from the purview
of the lockdown, supply disruptions could not be prevented because of the
impact of the lockdown elsewhere, as Rawal and Verma note. Specifically,
because of restrictions on mobility, labor from neighbouring villages and from
migrants who typically returned to their villages in the post-harvest season
was unavailable in sufficient quantity for the crucial activities of loading and
unloading. Additionally, restraints on vehicular mobility severely compromised
                                                                                  47

the safe transportation of food commodities. In the event, aggregate demand
shortfalls were matched also by aggregate supply shortfalls.

The case of urban food markets has been analyzed in an instructive contribution
by Sudha Narayanan and Shree Saha [59]. A face-to-face survey of 50 food
retailers at 21 locations in 14 cities across India suggests that a set of common
problems faced by them during the lockdown included irregular supply, diffi-
culty in access to transport, increased transport costs, labor shortages for loading
and unloading activities, large increases in traders’ prices, declining demand,
and harassment of street vendors by the police. The resulting supply shortages
have been reflected in rising wholesale and retail prices of food. Over a 28-day
period of the initial lockdown and its extension (March 24-April 21), Narayanan
and Saha have analysed daily price data for 22 food commodities—rice, wheat,
wheat flour, edible oils, pulses, milk, potato, onion, tomato, sugar, jaggery,
iodized salt and loose tea leaves—across 114 Centers in India. The data collected
at the Centers by the respective State Civil Supplies Departments are published
by the government’s Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Affairs.

Using the data described above, the authors construct a Food Price Index, both
Wholesale and Retail, for the 22 commodities mentioned. Without entering into
detail, we simply note here that over the ‘pre-lockdown’ period of February
22-March 23, both the Wholesale and Retail Price Indices constructed by the
authors display a declining trend, and then a perceptibly increasing trend over
the ‘post-lockdown’ period of March 24-April 21. This is despite the decline in
aggregate demand already apparent in the pre-pandemic downward spiral of
the economy and the further post-pandemic stress on demand. The demand side
of the market should have predicted a decline in food prices. The short-term
spike in price suggests that supply disruptions have more than compensated
for demand declines, leading to presumably substantial rationing in quantities
transacted in the market.


6.4. The Predicament of Migrant Laborers. India has a large mass of internal mi-
grant laborers, estimated at at least 120 million persons and considerably larger
48

than the populations of the largest European countries.17 Most of these migrants
are employed as low-paid casual workers in the informal sector. Considering
annual migration flows, Clément Imbert [33] estimates — employing Census
and National Sample Survey data — that there may be up to 22 million persons
who have migrated over the last year in the country, around half of which are
inter-state migrants. These numbers only represent flows of migrants, and there
could be additional numbers from the stock of existing migrants who chose
to return home when the lockdown is lifted. Certainly, one would expect the
seasonal inter-state migrants to return in large numbers. Estimating the overall
flow is problematic, but it can easily run to several million.

While permanent migrants generally come from all over India, seasonal migrants
have more concentrated origins (see Imbert [33], Figure 2), coming from poorer
states such as Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, and Odisha.
Their destinations are the mega-cities, where large-scale work (principally in
construction) is available. We have already remarked on the large recent spike
of cases in the covid epidemic in some of these states; see Table 2 and the
discussion in Section 4.

The incentive for migrants to return is obvious. When the lockdown was
announced with just four hours’ notice on March 24th, migrant laborers knew
they were facing the immediate prospect of being laid off from work, of not being
paid their wage dues, and of facing a life without jobs, cash, food and shelter.
The Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy (CMIE) reports that unemployment
was at 23.5% during April 2020, well up from 6-9% in the 12-month period
before, with every indication that unemployment would continue to climb into
May (Vyas [95]). Figure 3 shows how the employment drop in April divided
itself into various labor categories — small traders and laborers have been hit the
hardest, with a drop of 91m in employment in a single month. (As a reference,
total employment was already down to 396 m at the end of March [95])


     17 “Labor
            and Migration in India," Aajevika Bureau, 2014, http://www.aajeevika.org/labor-and-
migration.php.
                                                                                    49




 Figure 3. Employment Changes for Different Occupational Groups in the Month of
 April 2020. Source: Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy, https://www.cmie.com/k
 ommon/bin/sr.php?kall=warticle&dt=2020-05-05%2008:22:21&msec=776.


It is important to note that migrant laborers from other states cannot avail
themselves of PDS rations even if they possess ration cards made out in their
names, if the cards relate to their state of origin and not their destination state.
(Agarwal [3]). Most of these people would therefore not fall within the ambit of
the relief provisions envisaged in the Covid-19 relief package announced by the
government on March 27th. However, the second package announced by the
government expands the PDS to cover these situations. At the time of writing
we are not in a position to fully evaluate the implementation of this very recent
measure.

With all inter-state bus and rail transport stalled by the lockdown, migrants
in their desperation took to walking back to their homes, often hundreds
of kilometers away from their present migrant destinations. A number of
journalistic reports have described the suffering of these trekking migrants. Here
is a small sample of the accounts available in these articles. An April 12th report
by Jay Kishan Sharma [73] indicates that over 1,000 stranded migrant laborers
from Odisha spilled out on to the streets in Surat (Gujarat) on March 30th, and
50

over 90 of them were arrested by the police for torching vegetable carts and
vehicles in protest over the non-availability of transport to take them to their
homes. When the second phase of the lockdown was announced on April 14th,
some 3,000 migrant workers poured out on to the streets of Mumbai, seeking
transport at the Bandra bus and railway stations, where they were caned in a
charge by the police: there are estimated to be some 6 lakh migrants interned
in make-shift shelters in several districts of Maharashtra; see Sukanya Shantha
[72].

An earlier report filed by Shantha [71] on April 7 notes that 120 migrant laborers
from Rajasthan who had walked for 6 days from Benguluru, were detained and
beaten up by the police in Valsad District of Gujarat on March 31st, packed into
container trucks, and sent off to Palghar District in Maharashtra: the Gujarat
police are supposed to have initiated an enquiry into the event. On March 28th,
thousands of migrant laborers who had trekked their way to Delhi en route
to Uttar Pradesh thronged the Anand Vihar bus station in East Delhi in the
expectation of being ferried over the Delhi-U.P. border, but the buses available
were no match for the size of the exodus, and police resorted to blocking and
breaking up the crowds [34].

Other reports (see, e.g., [79] and [83]) indicate that at least 22 persons belonging
to migrant laborer families may, by that time, have died on their long marches
home, for reasons of hunger, exhaustion or road accidents. The condition
of stranded workers in different parts of the country is reflected painfully
in the statistics that have been compiled by the Stranded Workers Action
Network (SWAN) team [89], on the basis of their conversations with subsets of
16,863 stranded workers who have reached out to the team from Maharashtra,
Karnataka, Delhi, Haryana, Punjab, and Tamil Nadu. The period covered is the
duration of the lockdown till April 26th:

(a) Remuneration. The average daily wage of the workers was Rs. 380, and
the median wage was Rs. 365. Only 6% received their full wages during the
lockdown, while 78% were not paid at all.
                                                                                   51

(b) Cash on hand. More than 97% of the workers received no cash aid from the
government; 64% had Rs.100 or less; 74% Rs. 200 or less; and 78% Rs. 300 or
less;

(c) Hunger. 82% of the workers received no rations from the government, and
68% received no cooked food; 50% had food rations for less than a day, and 72%
for less than 2 days.

It was only on May 3rd that the government announced the operation of special
Shramik trains for persons stranded during the lockdown; [7]. According
to government guidelines, the trains would be operated according to the
requirements of state administrations. An issue that has created considerable
consternation among commentators is the levying of train fare upon passengers,
leading to one opposition party offering to meet the travel expenses of migrant
workers; see Naqshbandi and Dutta [57].

Indeed, the plight of India’s migrant laborers has been the subject of a Public
Interest Litigation filed by two activists, Harsh Mander and Anjali Bharadwaj,
seeking immediate payment of wages to the laborers. Apparently, the peti-
tioners’ concerns regarding the rights of those they were representing were not
persuasive. After the final hearing on the case, the Supreme Court closed it by
effectively leaving it to the discretion of the executive to act as it saw fit in the
matter: “We call upon the respondent — Union of India — to look into such
material and take such steps as it finds fit to resolve the issues raised in the
petition;" see Mander [51]. Notwithstanding this, the predicament of migrant
workers after the lockdown has been widely regarded as a serious human rights
issue, on which there has been a fair amount of reporting and commentary
in the international press as well; see, for instance, Slater and Masih [77], or
Ellis-Petersen and Chaurasia [21].

6.5. Labor Laws. Even as migrant laborers started returning to their homes in
the special Shramik trains alluded to earlier, the state of Karnataka suddenly
suspended the operation of these trains, apparently in response to the demands
of the building-and-real-estate-lobby that migrant workers ought to be retained
52

within the state to facilitate revival of construction activity. (The suspension was
revoked after a public outcry against the move; see Kulkarni [47]. Similarly,
employers’ associations such as the Confederation of Indian Industries, the
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry and the Associated
Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) have begun
clamoring for various dilutions of the law relating to labor (Press Trust of India
[35]). State governments have not been slow to respond to these demands:
already, Rajasthan, Punjab, Himachal Pradesh and Gujarat have decided to
increase the length of the working day from 8 hours to 12 hours, and of the
working week from 48 hours to 72 hours; in Madhya Pradesh, provisions relating
to working conditions and to appointment of a labor welfare officer have been
relaxed; and in Uttar Pradesh, all but a few basic labor laws will stand suspended.
These measures are expected to be in place for finite periods of time, from 2-
3 months to 2-3 years; see Jainani and Ray [38]. These moves represent an
upending of an entire global history of the struggle for workers’ rights, and are a
stark example of our thesis of a political economy in which the interests of those
that are neither noticeable nor significant in the scheme of things are traded for
the interests of those who are visible and consequential.


6.6. Other Morbidities. One further serious consequential impact of a covid-
related lockdown is its impact on other morbidities, a matter of considerable
concern to those public health experts who have had an eye on the global South.
So, for instance, Vikram Patel [63] points out that 1,000 people die of respiratory
tract infections every day, a problem that could be rendered worse by contagion
arising from people being confined to homes which are often tiny and insanitary
habitations. A lockdown also imposes restrictions on mobility, makes transport
costly and curtails access to curative facilities, even as it contracts the availability
of health staff and physicians in hospitals. Thus chronic ailments like diabetes,
cancer and heart disease are liable to be edged out of the ambit of routine care.
And mortality from suicide and trauma from domestic abuse must be expected
to increase. A further major casualty is the routine activity of immunization.
Tuberculosis is, or should be, a source of great worry, on which Madhukar Pai
                                                                               53

writes [60]: “The global Covid-19 response will likely result in diversion of
healthcare workforce and resources away from routine TB services, or reduction
in the number of health workers because of illness and self-isolation."


6.7. Coronavirus, Religion, Caste and Gender. There are at least three events
preceding the epidemic which have had a role to play in communalizing it
along religious lines. The first is the remarkable and peaceful sit-in protest
conducted mainly by Muslim women in the East Delhi neighbourhood of
Shaheen Bagh against the government’s initiatives on the controversial Citi-
zenship (Amendment) Act, the National Register of Citizens and the National
Population Register. The second is a highly communally charged election
campaign launched by the BJP in the month leading up to the Delhi Assembly
election of February 8th (which the BJP lost). The third is the violent communal
violence unleashed toward the end of February in Delhi, which claimed 53 lives
of which more than two-thirds were Muslim. These events set the stage for
communalizing the coronavirus epidemic that unfolded around the same time.

Two episodes of salience must be mentioned in this connection. The first has
to do with a religious gathering of the Tablighi Jamaat sect in the Nizamuddin
area of Delhi: many of the participants in the gathering were identified as
covid-infected, and they were traced and quarantined. Through fake news and
pliant media cooperation, it has since been put out that the Tablighi incident is
part of a deliberate Islamic conspiracy to infect the Indian population with the
coronavirus. For two detailed accounts (among others), see Jain [37] and Daniyal
[17]. A second episode has to do with the mob lynching on April 16th of three
people (of whom two were Hindu monks) in Maharashtra’s Palghar district.
Despite the arrest of people who were declared by the State Government to
belong to the same community as the victims, a campaign of innuendo has been
launched implicating members of the minority community and specific leaders
of opposition political parties in the crime; see Patel [62].

In major national catastrophes, Dalits are often among the most badly affected
groups. The covid-19 pandemic has proved to be no exception. A survey
54

conducted in Tamil Nadu by the research collective Vaanavil has found that
Scheduled Caste persons working as construction workers, loaders and sanitary
workers have not been paid wages on MNREGA work programs, and have
not been beneficiaries of State and Central Government cash relief payments
to which they are entitled.; see Tiwari [92]. Matters do not appear to be much
different in one of India’s premier universities. A report by Bose [13] states:
“While the rest of the capital practices social distancing and stays indoors,
sanitation workers who clean the 18 hostels and messes of the Jawaharlal Nehru
University claim they have not been paid three months’ wages. Despite being
made to come to work amid the national lockdown, the workers have neither
been provided with any protective gear such as masks or gloves nor do they
have the luxury to opt for work from home or leave without pay."

Women are made to carry a disproportionate burden of the negative effects of
an epidemic-induced lockdown. Ashwini Deshpande [19] observes that women
are more vulnerable to job-losses than men; that those women who are required
to ‘work from home’ during the lockdown, when domestic helps are also bound
by it, will likely carry the double-burden of enhanced domestic work; and that
women are also exposed to the risk of domestic and intimate party violence
during a period of enforced joint cohabitation. Nalini Gulati [32] reports that
according to the National Commission for Women there has been a sudden spurt
of complaints — in the form of 123 emails — of domestic abuse in the lockdown
period between March 23rd and April 10th, and that similar worrying trends
have also been registered by women’s commissions and state governments such
as those of Kerala and Punjab.



7. Conclusions

This brings to an end our interim report on India’s lockdown experience. It
is relevant now to return to Sections 2 and 3 of this essay (“The Philosophy
of Lockdown" and “Lives versus Lives: The Visible and the Invisible"). We
use these to revisit the conceptual core of a proposal for a relatively relaxed
                                                                                     55

lockdown that was earlier advanced by Ray, Subramanian and Vandewalle; see
[65] and [66]. In these articles, we pointed to certain features of the Indian
economy — its occupational structure, and the prevalence of poverty, inequality
and informality — which could cause a prolonged and indefinite lockdown (sans
safety nets) to wreak the harshest consequences on the well-being of the poor
laboring classes. Our understanding of the covid-19 epidemic was that it is a
relatively “low fatality-high contagion" disease whose most adverse impact is on
the old-age (60+) population, which accounts for a relatively small proportion in
developing societies like India, unlike in economically advanced countries such
as those in Europe and North America.

Ray, Subramanian and Vandewalle consider a relatively “relaxed" version of
a lockdown which (a) allows for individuals of working age, but no older
than 45, to work; (b) provides for special public (State-sponsored) care for the
aged population while also leaving such care to be provided by the forces of
private incentives and motivations at the individual household level; (c) ensures,
crucially and indispensably, the organization of the most extensive antibody
testing as such testing becomes widely available, and as antibody stocks in
the population build up; (d) slowly brings older people into the workforce as
the disease becomes less pervasive, and (e) guarantees compensating welfare
measures from the State to enable the particularly vulnerable populations (the
poor, and casual and informal-sector workers) to tide over the immediate and
secular damage done by a lockdown to their lives and livelihoods. Furthermore,
measures such as mask-wearing, physical distancing, and the avoidance of
crowded gatherings (to the extent possible) would continue in full force.

David Katz, a physician, in an early communication [44], writes:



 “I am deeply concerned that the social, economic and public health consequences of
 this near total meltdown of normal life — schools and businesses closed, gatherings
 banned — will be long lasting and calamitous, possibly graver than the direct toll of
 the virus itself . . . The unemployment, impoverishment and despair likely to result
 will be public health scourges of the first order."
56

In seeking to quantify the benefits and costs of country-wide lockdowns in
advanced and developing economies, Zachary Barnett-Howell and Ahmed
Mushfiq Mobarak [10] are sceptical about the virtues of comprehensive lock-
downs in poorer countries:


 “Given the deeper concerns about the risks that economic shutdowns pose on the
 most vulnerable members of low-income societies. . . , it remains unclear whether
 the value of mitigation and suppression policies in poor countries outweighs the
 uncertain economic costs."18


In similar vein, Joelle M. Abi-Rached and Ishac Diwan [1] write:


 “In a recent opinion piece, the economists Debraj Ray and Sreenivasan Subramanian
 have broken the taboo by noting that India cannot afford to let people lose their
 livelihood and simply die of famine . . . The main risk of imitating the rich and
 imposing harsh but unworkable lockdowns is that the effort would crowd out scarce
 public capacity that can be better put to use elsewhere where it can make a difference."


Jayaprakash Muliyil, also a physician and one of India’s most distinguished
epidemiologists, has this to say:


 “Suppression is not going to work in India in my opinion . . . In India, suppression
 would mean hurting each other, exploitation, giving power to wrong kinds of people.
 That is not my response to a public health emergency . . . This is going to be a long
 haul. You have to be sensible about it . . . [I]f you apply drastic measures, people will
 rebel if they don’t have food and milk for their children — and healthcare for other
 ailments" [54].




     18 See   also, in this connection, Loazya [50].
                                                                                                   57

It is easy enough to provide several more references in this vein.19 The question
is, then, why we observe the forceful emphasis on a draconian lockdown. We
claim that it is precisely because covid-19 poses a visible threat that the elites of
India all know about, and are vulnerable to. In catering to these fears, the Indian
Government also obtains international recognition as being on the frontlines
against the pandemic. Moreover, for the elites, a lockdown is often not much
more than a loss of cleaners and maids. But there is a price to be paid, which
are the horrors and privations that the poor and truly vulnerable of India must
endure as their livelihoods fail, often succumbing to these with their invisible
lives. That invisibility is only in part due to poverty. In greater part, it is because
non-covid deaths are diffuse; they are classified under a multitude of headings,
and so lack the capacity to attract focal attention.

A tight lockdown accompanied by humane welfare compensation for the
citizenry adversely impacted by its provisions can avoid some of the greatest
human costs, and for that reason it may dominate a relaxed lockdown. In this
sense, we do not come to the same conclusion as the libertarians, mask-spurners,
and business interests in the United States who are asking for an immediate end
to the lockdown because economic activity and individual freedoms come above
all else. The argument for developing countries is different. It is that the welfare
compensation in question may not be forthcoming to an adequate degree.

It therefore strikes us being a bit otiose to suggest, as some commentators have
done, that the emphasis ought to be on “lives and lives," as opposed to “lives

   19 Here are just three more examples.   Alex Broadbent and Benjamin Smart [14] write: “We are
putting in place measures that will lead to malnutrition and starvation for millions of people,
and for these horrors, children and especially infants are the most at risk. And very many of
those infants are born, and will die, in Africa." Vikram Patel, a doctor and public health specialist,
expresses a similar point of view [63]: “When one balances the vast uncertainties about Covid-19
when the lockdown was imposed . . . with the absolute certainty that such a lockdown would
massively disrupt the lives and well-being of most of our population, it is hard to conclude
that such a preemptive strike was justified." And Julian Jamison [39] observes: “Policymakers
everywhere may be tempted to focus on the immediate fatalities from covid-19 while eliding
the equally real but more remote mortality from malnutrition, psychological distress, extreme
poverty and sociopolitical unrest that lockdowns and economic disruption can cause. Yet the
dangers of the latter are far sharper in the developing world . . . "
58

versus lives," or that one needs to attend to both the problems of checking
the pandemic and the distress caused by a lockdown. Who would disagree?
Certainly not we. Indeed, as this review has shown, there is attention to such
suggestions (on a scale and with a wealth of knowledge that is truly admirable),
but it can all come to nothing if there is both inability and unwillingness on the
part of the policy establishment to implement such safety measures. Given the
short-run inelasticities of supply (especially in the matter of health infrastructure)
and genuine feasibility constraints, it would be sensible to view the problem from
a “lives versus lives perspective" even in the context of a capable and completely
well-intentioned State. But when the latter presumption is misplaced, as our
review suggests it is, the perspective we speak of a fortiori gains even more
credibility. In well-accepted economic terminology, a relaxed lockdown is an
instance of a “second-best policy," which in no way exonerates laxity in State
action. It is not a perfect substitute for competent State intervention.20

In summary, this essay’s assessment of post-lockdown developments in India
suggests that a “lives versus lives" perspective on the covid-19 pandemic, which
is relevant for any lockdown-mediated policy response in a developing country
like India, is magnified significantly by the lack of adequate State intervention
in the cause of welfare-support. Indeed, that perspective only becomes sharper
in the context of a State focused on visibility21 and “optics,"22 on being seen
to be acting in the interests of the articulate and influential sections of society,


     20 For
          a useful account of what the state can do with, and must spend on, the public health
system in order to make a relatively relaxed lockdown possible, see Muralidharan [55].
   21 The notion of “visibility" applies also in other contexts. For example, Amartya Sen has noted

in many of his writings on famine that starvation deaths in a time of famine attract a great deal
more attention than do regular, “orderly" deaths due to undernutrition. Similarly, sporadic state
action on regulating child labour in “hazardous occupations" such as fireworks attracts more
immediate attention than would a long-term, systematic engagement with the phenomenon of
“school-less-ness" and child work in family activities.
   22 On May 3rd, Indian Navy and Indian Air Force (IAF) helicopters showered rose petals

on hospitals treating covid patients, and IAF planes conducted flypasts ostensibly to convey
gratitude to the health staff battling the epidemic, even as migrant laborers have to buy their
train tickets to eventually get back home, and health workers have to struggle without adequate
personal protective gear.
                                              REFERENCES                                                   59

and when this orientation is aided by the timorousness or complicity of the
institutions of democracy.

What we have put together is no more than a collation of the hard and
conscientious work done by several commentators—not least by journalists,
reporters and opinion-writers—on the course of the coronavirus epidemic over
the last few weeks. That it has been possible at all to write this interim report
is due precisely to such sterling effort invested by so many people, to whom a
great debt of gratitude is owed, and will continue to be owed as they continue
to track the events which will unfold in the weeks and months to follow. It
is obvious that our record has no merit of originality, but it is hoped that the
effort of assembling widely scattered material on a number of issues into one
cognate account will be of some little use in enabling all concerned actors to
pause, reflect, and take stock.


References

 [1] Joelle M. Abi-Rached and Ishac Diwan. “In Poor Countries, Focus on
     Protecting the Elderly from Covid-19”. The Medium (Apr. 10, 2020). url:
      https : / / medium . com / in - poor - countries - focus - on - protecting - the - elderly / in - poor -
      countries-focus-on-protecting-the-elderly-from-covid-19-99cd2bc93a7a.
 [2] Kabir Agarwal. “As Millions Fear Starvation, Govt to Convert ‘Surplus’
     Rice Into Ethanol for Sanitiser”. The Wire (Apr. 21, 2020). url: https://thewire.
     in/government/pds-rice-ethanol-sanitiser.
 [3] Kabir Agarwal. “Coronavirus Lockdown: As Hunger Grows, the Fear of
     Starvation Is Real”. The Wire (Apr. 16, 2020). url: https://thewire.in/rights/covid-
     19-100-million-hunger-pds-universal.
 [4] Kabir Agarwal. “COVID-19 Lockdown: In April, MGNREGA Work Crashed
     to Lowest in 7 Years”. The Wire (May 1, 2020). url: https://thewire.in/labor/covid-
     19-lockdown-mgnrega/.
60                                         REFERENCES

 [5] Kabir Agarwal and Anuj Srivas. “What Doesn’t Add up in Nirmala
     Sitharaman’s Relief Package for India’s Poor”. The Wire (Mar. 27, 2020).
     url: https://thewire.in/economy/nirmala-sitharamanrelief-package-india.
 [6] Julia Anderson, Enrico Bergamini, Sybrand Brekelmans, Aliénor Cameron,
     Zsolt Darvas, Marta Domínguez Jíménez, and Catarina Midões. “The Fiscal
     Response to the Economic Fallout from the Coronavirus”. Bruegel Datasets
     (Apr. 25, 2020). url: https://www.bruegel.org/publications/datasets/covid- national-
     dataset/.
 [7] ANI. “Guidelines for Migrants’ Shramik Trains Revealed”. The Economic
     Times (May 3, 2020). url: https : / / economictimes . indiatimes . com / industry /
      transportation / railways / guidelines - for - migrants - shramik - trains - revealed / shramik -
      special-trains-for-migrant-workers/slideshow/75516773.cms.
 [8] Ayushi Bajaj and Gaurav Datt. “Financing of Fiscal Response to Covid-19:
     A Red Herring?” The Wire (Apr. 12, 2020). url: https://www.ideasforindia.in/
     topics/macroeconomics/financing-of-fiscal-response-to-covid-19-a-red-herring.html.
 [9] Smita Balram and Sagar Malviya. “Coronavirus Fee: Cash-strapped States
     Rush to Raise Taxes on Alcohol”. Economic Times (May 6, 2020). url: https:
      //economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/cons- products/liquor/cash- strapped- states-
      rush-to-raise-taxes-on-alcohol/articleshow/75564004.cms?from=mdr.
[10] Zachary Barnett-Howell and A. Mushfiq Mobarak. Should Low-Income
     Countries Impose the Same Social Distancing Guidelines as Europe and North
     America to Halt the Spread of COVID-19? Yale School of Management, 2020.
[11] Anoo Bhuyan. “As India’s Covid-19 Cases Rise, 11 States and 216 Districts
     Still Have No Epidemiologists”. IndiaSpend (Apr. 20, 2020). url: https://www.
      indiaspend.com/ india- tries- to- hire- 227- epidemiologists- in- the- middle- of- covid- 19-
      pandemic.
[12] Abhinash Borah, Sabyasachi Das, Aparajita Dasgupta, Ashwini Desh-
     pande, Kanika Mahajan, Bharat Ramaswami, Anuradha Saha, and Anisha
     Sharma. “Covid-19: Are We Ready for the Long Haul, Parts I and II”. Ideas
     for India (Apr. 2, 2020). url: https://www.ideasforindia.in/topics/macroeconomics/
     covid-19-are-we-ready-for-the-long-haul-i.html.
                                              REFERENCES                                                   61

[13] Rakhi Bose. “Our Life Has No Value? JNU Sanitation Workers Clean
     Hostels With No Pay or Protection”. News18Buzz (Apr. 24, 2020). url:
       https:// www.news18.com/ news/ buzz/ our- life- has- no- value- jnu- sanitation- workers-
       clean-hostels-with-no-pay-or-protection-2585681.html.
[14] Alex Broadbent and Benjamin Smart. “Why a One-Size-Fits-All Approach
     to COVID-19 could have Lethal Consequences”. The Conversation (Mar. 23,
     2020). url: https://theconversation.com/why-a-one-size-fits-all-approach-to-covid-19-
     could-have-lethal-consequences-134252.
[15] Economic Times Bureau. “FM Nirmala Sitharaman Announces Rs 1.7 Lakh
     Crore Relief Package for Poor”. The Economic Times (Mar. 27, 2020). url:
       https:// economictimes.indiatimes.com/ news/ economy/ policy/ fm- nirmala- sitharaman-
       announces-rs-1-7-lakh-crore-relief-package-for-poor/articleshow/74825054.cms?from=
       mdr.
[16] Caroline Chen. “What Antibody Studies Can Tell You — and More
     Importantly, What They Can’t”. The Spectator (Apr. 28, 2020). url: https :
       //www.propublica.org/article/what-antibody-studies-can-tell-you-and-more-importantly-
       what-they-cant.
[17] Shoaib Daniyal. “Explained: Sampling Bias drove Sensationalist Reporting
     around Tablighi Coronavirus Cases”. Scroll.in (Apr. 7, 2020). url: https :
       / / scroll . in / article / 958392 / explained - sampling - bias - drove - sensationalist - reporting -
       around-tablighi-coronavirus-cases.
[18] Surajit Dasgupta and Ravi Prakash Kumar. “Nirmala Sitharaman Gives
     Break-up of the Rs. 20 lakh crore Economic Package”. The Mint (May 17,
     2020). url: https://www.livemint.com/news/india/nirmala- sitharaman- gives- a- break-
     up-of-economic-package-of-over-rs-20-lakh-crore-11589700751079.htm.
[19] Ashwini Deshpande. “Protecting Women is Missing from Pandemic Man-
     agement Measures in India”. QuartzIndia (Mar. 28, 2020). url: https://qz.com/
     india/1826683/indias-approach-to-fighting-coronavirus-lacks-a-gender-lens/.
[20] Jean Drèze. “View: The Finance Minister’s Covid-19 Relief Package is
     Helpful, But There are Gaping Holes in It”. The Economic Times (Mar. 28,
     2020). url: https : / / economictimes. indiatimes. com / news / economy / policy / view - the -
62                                           REFERENCES

       finance- ministers- covid- 19- relief- package- is- helpful- but- there- are- gaping- holes- in-
       it/articleshow/74853103.cms.
[21] Hannah Ellis-Petersen and Manoj Chaurasia. “India Racked by Greatest
     Exodus Since Partition Due to Coronavirus”. The Guardian (Mar. 30, 2020).
     url: https : / / www. theguardian . com / world / 2020 / mar / 30 / india - wracked - by - greatest -
     exodus-since-partition-due-to-coronavirus.
[22] Caravan. “Concerned Çitizens’ Response to the COVID 19 Relief Package
     Announced by the Finance Minister”. Caravan Magazine (Mar. 27, 2020).
     url: https://caravanmagazine.in/noticeboard/citizens-response-to-covid-relief-package-
     nirmala-sitharaman.
[23] Economist. “Vietnam and the Indian State of Kerala Curbed Covid-19 on
     the Cheap”. The Economist (May 9, 2020). url: https://www.economist.com/asia/
     2020/05/09/vietnam-and-the-indian-state-of-kerala-curbed-covid-19-on-the-cheap.
[24] Maryam Farboodi, Gregor Jarosch, and Robert Shimer. Internal and External
     Effects of Social Distancing in a Pandemic. Working Paper 27059. National
     Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
[25] Eli P. Fenichel. “Economic Considerations for Social Distancing and Be-
     havioral Based Policies During an Epidemic”. Journal of Health Economics
     32 (2013), pp. 440–451.
[26] Eli P. Fenichel, Carlos Castillo-Chavez, M. G. Ceddia, Gerardo Chowell,
     Paula A. Gonzalez Parra, Graham J. Hickling, Garth Holloway, Richard
     Horan, Benjamin Morin, Charles Perrings, Michael Springborn, Leticia
     Velázquez, and Cristina Villalobos. “Adaptive Human Behavior in Epi-
     demiological Models”. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108
     (2011), pp. 6306–6311.
[27] Andrea Galeotti, Sebastian Hohmann, and Paolo Surico. A Rule of Thumb
     to Detect Excess Deaths? Lessons from Italy. mimeo. London Business School,
     2020.
[28] Pietro Garibaldi, Espen R. Moen, and Christopher A. Pissarides. “Modeling
     Contacts and Transitions in the SIR Epidemics Model”. Covid Economics
     Vetted and Real-Time Papers 32 (2020), pp. 1–20.
                                              REFERENCES                                                63

[29] Pierre-Yves Geoffard and Tomas Philipson. “Rational Epidemics and Their
     Public Control”. International Economic Review 37 (1996), pp. 603–624.
[30] Jayati Ghosh. “Why India Should Support an SDR Issue by the Interna-
     tional Monetary Fund”. The Wire (Apr. 17, 2020). url: https : / / thewire . in /
     economy/india-sdr-issue-international-monetary-fund.
[31] Parikshit Ghosh. “We Need a Marshall Plan to Fight Covid-19”. Ideas for
     India (Apr. 8, 2020). url: https://www.ideasforindia.in/topics/macroeconomics/we-
     need-a-marshall-plan-to-fight-covid-19.html.
[32] Nalini Gulati. “Covid-19: Lockdown and Domestic Abuse”. Ideas for India
     (Apr. 19, 2020). url: https:// www.ideasforindia.in/ topics/ social- identity/ covid- 19-
     lockdown-and-domestic-abuse.html.
[33] Clément Imbert. “Covid-19: Expected Migrant Movement as Lockdown
     Eases”. Ideas for India (May 1, 2020). url: https:// www.ideasforindia.in/ topics/
     macroeconomics/covid-19-expected-migrant-movement-as-lockdown-eases.html.
[34] Press Trust of india. “Coronavirus: Exodus of Migrant Workers Out of
     Delhi Unabated but Police Block Their Entry into Anand Vihar ISBT”. The
     Hindu (Mar. 29, 2020). url: https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/coronavirus-
       exodus- of- migrant- workers- out- of- delhi- unabated- but- police- block- their- entry- into-
       anand-vihar-isbt/article31198725.ece.
[35] Press Trust of India. “Lockdown-hit Industry Demands Suspension of
     Labour Laws for 2-3 Years”. The Economic Times (May 8, 2020). url: https:
       //economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/policy/lockdown-hit-industry-demands-
       suspension-of-labour-laws-for-2-3-yrs/articleshow/75633578.cms?from=mdr.
[36] Yamini Iyer and Mekhala Krishnamurthy. “Covid-19: An Emergency
     Economic Manifesto”. Hindustan Times (Mar. 25, 2020). url: https : / / www.
       hindustantimes . com / analysis / covid - 19 - an - emergency - economic - manifesto / story -
       8GFWu7HWJJqPHIpYCsHL5M.html.
[37] Ritika Jain. “Article 14: Covid-19: How Fake News and Modi Government
     Messaging Fuelled India’s Latest Spiral of Islamophobia”. Scroll.in (Apr. 21,
     2020). url: https : / / scroll . in / article / 959806 / covid - 19 - how - fake - news - and - modi -
     government-messaging-fuelled-indias-latest-spiral-of-islamophobia.
64                                        REFERENCES

[38] Deepa Jainani and Surya Sarathi Ray. “States Suspend/Relax Labour Laws
     to Help Industry Emerge From Crisis”. Financial Express (May 8, 2020). url:
      https://www.financialexpress.com/industry/states- suspend- relax- labour- laws- to- help-
      industry-emerge-from-crisis/1951744/.
[39] Julian Jamison. “Lockdowns will Starve People in Low-Income Countries”.
     The Washington Post (Apr. 20, 2020). url: https://www.washingtonpost.com/outlook/
     2020/04/20/lockdown-developing-world-coronavirus-poverty/.
[40] P. B. Jayakumar and E. Kumar Sharma. “Enough Coronavirus Testing Kits
     Available; 33 Lakh En Route, Says ICMR”. Business Today (Apr. 15, 2020).
     url: https://www.businesstoday.in/latest/trends/coronavirus-enough-rt-pcr-testing-kits-
     available-33-lakh-on-way-says-icmr/story/401096.html.
[41] Rajeev Jayaswal. “IRS Officers Pitch 40% Tax Rate Plus Covid Relief
     Cess, Under Probe”. The Hindustan Times (Apr. 27, 2020). url: https://www.
      hindustantimes.com/india- news/govt- rejects- irs- officers- report- suggesting- covid- 19-
      cess-40-tax-on-super-rich-calls-it-irresponsible-act/story-MrFyPkmNEUkwEIqk6S37DJ.
      html.
[42] Prem Shankar Jha. “Modi’s ‘Stimulus Package’ is a Gigantic Confidence
     Trick Played on the People of India”. The Wire (May 18, 2020). url: https:
      //thewire.in/political- economy/modis- stimulus- package- is- a- gigantic- confidence- trick-
      played-on-the-people-of-india.
[43] Callum J. Jones, Thomas Philippon, and Venky Venkateswaran. Optimal
     Mitigation Policies in a Pandemic: Social Distancing and Working from Home.
     Working Paper 26984. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
[44] David L. Katz. “Is Our Fight Against Coronavirus Worse Than The
     Disease?” The New York Times (Mar. 20, 2020). url: https://www.nytimes.com/
     2020/03/20/opinion/coronavirus-pandemic-social-distancing.html.
[45] Reetika Khera. “Covid-19: What can be Done Immediately to Help Vulner-
     able Population” (Mar. 25, 2020).
[46] Vidya Krishnan. “India did not Stockpile COVID Protective Equipment
     for Health Workers Despite Clear WHO Guidelines”. The Caravan (Mar. 22,
     2020). url: https://caravanmagazine.in/health/india-did-not-stockpile-covid-protective-
     equipment-health-workers-despite-clear-who-guidelines.
                                        REFERENCES                                          65

[47] Pavan Kulkarni. “COVID-19: K’taka Govt Agrees to Resume Trains for
     Migrant Workers After Trade Unions Accuse State of Enforcing Forced
     Labour”. Newsclick (May 8, 2020). url: https : / / www. newsclick . in / Karnataka -
     resumes-train-for-migrant-workers-after-TU-pressure.
[48] Camille Landais, Emmanuel Saez, and Gabriel Zucman. A Progressive
     European Wealth Tax to Fund the European COVID Response. Vox CEPR Policy
     Portal, Apr. 3, 2020.
[49] John Lee. “How Deadly is the Coronavirus? It’s Still Far from Clear”. The
     Spectato8 (Mar. 27, 2020). url: https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/The-evidence-on-
     Covid-19-is-not-as-clear-as-we-think.
[50] Norman Loazya. Smart Containment and Mitigation Measures to Confront
     the COVID-19 Pandemic: Tailoring the Pandemic Response to the Realities of
     Developing Countries. World Bank Blogs, Apr. 7, 2020.
[51] Harsh Mander. “For India’s Migrant Workers, the Prospect of Life with
     Dignity Has Become More Remote”. Scroll.in (May 5, 2020). url: https :
      //scroll.in/article/961030/harsh-mander-for-indias-migrant-workers-the-prospect-of-life-
      with-dignity-has-become-more-remote.
[52] Vivek Menezes. “India’s Leaders Have Panicked. Now the Millions Who
     Power the Country are Suffering”. The Guardian (Apr. 8, 2020). url: https://
     www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/apr/08/india-leaders-coronavirus-lockdown.
[53] Gideon Meyerowitz-Katz and Lea Merone. Systematic Review and Meta-
     Analysis of Published Research Data on COVID-19 Infection-Fatality Rates.
     preprint. medRxiv, 2020.
[54] Jayaprakash Muliyil. “Interview: ‘Suppression Won’t Work in India. Slow
     Down the Coronavirus. This Will Be a Long Haul’”. Scroll.in (Mar. 23, 2020).
     url: https://scroll.in/article/956932/interview- suppression- wont- work- in- india- slow-
     down-the-coronavirus-this-will-be-a-long-haul.
[55] Karthik Muralidharan. “Sound Public Health Policy Need of Hour”. The
     Hindustan Times (May 12, 2020). url: https://www.hindustantimes.com/opinion/
     sound-public-health-policy-need-of-hour/story-srLUKQXQXCQjEDpePYcTzN.html.
[56] Supriya Nair. “For a Billion Indians, Lockdown Has Not Prevented
     Tragedy”. The Guardian (Mar. 29, 2020). url: https : / / www. theguardian . com /
66                                         REFERENCES

      world / commentisfree / 2020 / mar / 29 / india - lockdown - tragedy - healthcare - coronavirus -
      starvation-mumbai.
[57] Aurangzeb Naqshbandi and Anisha Dutta. “Covid-19 update: Row over
     Migrants’ Rail Fare as Congress Offers to Foot the Bill”. The Hindustan Times
     (May 5, 2020). url: https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/row-over-migrants-
     rail-fare-as-cong-offers-to-foot-the-bill/story-XrPFuQeVL9Mu3irfpbAQgM.html.
[58] Sudha Narayanan. “Food and Agriculture During a Pandemic: Managing
     the Consequences”. Ideas for India (Mar. 27, 2020). url: https : / / www .
      ideasforindia.in/topics/agriculture/food- and- agriculture- during- a- pandemic- managing-
      the-consequences.html.
[59] Sudha Narayanan and Shree Saha. Urban Food Markets and the Lockdown in
     India. Indira Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai, Working
     Papers 2020-017, 2020.
[60] Madhukar Pai. “COVID-19 Coronavirus And Tuberculosis: We Need A
     Damage Control Plan”. Forbes (Mar. 17, 2020). url: https://www.forbes.com/
      sites/madhukarpai/2020/03/17/covid-19-and-tuberculosis-we-need-a-damage-control-
      plan/#10ffc439295c.
[61] Rohini Pande, Simone Schaner, and Charity Troyer Moore. “Food Before
     Cash: Because PMJDY Cash Transfers will Exclude Many of India’s
     Poorest”. The Economic Times (May 11, 2020). url: https://indianexpress.com/
      article/opinion/columns/coronavirus- india- lockdown- food- relief- poor- migrant- workers-
      mass-exodus-essential-commodities-supply-6403528/.
[62] Jignesh Patel. “Palghar Lynching Incident Falsely Communalised on Social
     Media”. Alt News (Apr. 20, 2020). url: https://www.altnews.in/palghar-lynching-
     incident-falsely-communalised-on-social-media/2020.
[63] Vikram Patel. “India’s Tryst with Covid-19”. The India Forum (Apr. 17,
     2020). url: https://www.theindiaforum.in/article/indi-s-tryst-covid-19.
[64] Vikas Rawal and Ankur Verma. Agricultural Supply Chains during the
     COVID-19 Lockdown: A Study of Market Arrivals of Seven Key Food Com-
     modities in India. SSER Monograph 20/1, 2020.
[65] Debraj Ray and S. Subramamian. Covid-19: Is There a Reasonable Alternative
     to a Comprehensive Lockdown? Ideas for India, Mar. 28, 2020.
                                             REFERENCES                                                 67

[66] Debraj Ray, S. Subramamian, and Lore Vanderwalle. India’s Lockdown.
     Policy Insight 102. Centre for Economic Policy Research, Apr. 2020.
[67] P. Sainath. “In India, Neither Tokenism nor Panic Can Help Counter this
     Unique Crisis”. The Wire (Mar. 26, 2020). url: https://thewire.in/government/india-
     coronavirus-migrants-agriculture/.
[68] Amartya Sen, Raghuram Rajan, and Abhijit V. Banerjee. “Huge Numbers-
     05-be Pushed into Dire Poverty or Starvation . . . We Need to Secure Them”.
     The Indian Express (Apr. 17, 2020). url: https://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/
      coronavirus- india- lockdown- economy- amartya- sen- raghuram- rajan- abhijit- banerjee-
      6364521/.
[69] Somdeep Sen. “Modi’s Government has Botched its Response to India’s
     Pandemic”. Jacobin (Apr. 15, 2020). url: https://www.jacobinmag.com/2020/04/
     india-narendra-modi-pandemic-coronavirus-bjp?.
[70] Rajeswari Sengupta and Harsh Vardhan. “Policymaking at a Time of High
     Risk-Aversion”. Ideas for India (Apr. 6, 2020). url: https://www.ideasforindia.in/
     topics/money-finance/policymaking-at-a-time-of-high-risk-aversion.html.
[71] Sukanya Shantha. “Gujarat Police to Probe Allegation That Migrant
     Workers Were Forced Into Container Trucks”. The Wire (Apr. 7, 2020). url:
     https://thewire.in/government/gujarat-police-inquiry-migrant-workers-container-trucks.
[72] Sukanya Shantha. “‘Let Us Go Home’: No Sign of Relief in PM’s Speech,
     Migrant Workers Take to Mumbai Streets”. The Wire (Apr. 14, 2020). url:
     https://thewire.in/labour/mumbai-bandra-migrant-covid-19.
[73] Jay Kishan Sharma. “Migrant Workers’ Stir Turns Violent”. The Hindustan
     Times (Apr. 12, 2020). url: https://www.hindustantimes.com/india- news/migrant-
     workers-stir-turns-violent/story-WIwF3Ye1YxVtlaT8U8jKiN.html.
[74] Samrat Sharma. “Modi’s Rs 21 lakh cr Special Economic Package Actually
     Costs the Govt Only This Much”. Financial Express (May 18, 2020). url:
      https : / / www. financialexpress. com / economy / narendra - modis - rs - 21 - lakh - cr - special -
      economic-package-actually-costs- the- govt- only-this- much- nirmala-sitharaman- relief-
      package/1962288/.
68                                            REFERENCES

[75] Gurbachan Singh. “Covid-19: Reserves to the Rescue”. Ideas for India
     (Apr. 11, 2020). url: https : / / www. ideasforindia . in / topics / macroeconomics / covid -
     19-reserves-to-the-rescue.htm.
[76] Dipa Sinha. “Food for All During Lockdown: State Governments Must
     Universalise PDS”. The Wire (Apr. 20, 2020). url: https://thewire.in/rights/covid-
     19-lockdown-food-supply-pds.
[77] Joanna Slater and Niha Masih. “In India, the World’s Biggest Lockdown
     has Forced Migrants to Walk Hundreds of Miles Home”. The Washington
     Post (Mar. 28, 2020). url: https : / / www. washingtonpost . com / world / asia _ pacific /
      india- coronavirus- lockdown- migrant- workers/2020/03/27/a62df166- 6f7d- 11ea- a156-
      0048b62cdb51_story.html.
[78] Business Today Staff. “‘Actual Fiscal Impact’ Mere Rs 1.5 lakh cr in Rs 21
     lakh cr Economic Stimulus: Barclays”. Business Today (May 18, 2020). url:
      https://www.businesstoday.in/current/economy-politics/govt-stimulus-measures-cause-
      actual-fiscal-impact-rs-15-lakh-cr-barclays/story/404099.html.
[79] Scroll Staff. “Covid-19: At Least 22 Migrants Die While Trying to Get Home
     During Lockdown”. Scroll.in (Mar. 22, 2020). url: https://scroll.in/latest/957570/
      covid- 19- lockdown- man- collapses- dies- halfway- while- walking- home- 300- km- away-
      from-delhi.
[80] Scroll Staff. “Covid-19 Lockdown: Kerala HC Seeks Centre’s Reply on
     Police Excesses, Says ‘Laws Can’t Stay Silent’”. Scroll.in (Mar. 30, 2020).
     url: https://scroll.in/latest/957728/covid-19-lockdown-kerala-hc-seeks-centres-reply-
     on-police-excesses-says-laws-cant-stay-silent.
[81] Scroll Staff. “Three IRS Officials Suspended for Causing Panic with Report
     on Increasing Taxes”. The Hindustan Times (Apr. 27, 2020). url: https://scroll.
      in / latest / 960407 / three - irs - officials - suspended - for - causing - panic - with - report - on -
      increasing-taxes.
[82] Scroll Staff. “What? No New Task? Modi’s Lockdown Extension Speech
     Sparks Scathing Humour on Twitter”. Scroll,in (Mar. 4, 2020). url: https :
      //scroll.in/article/959129/what-no-new-task-modis-lockdown-extension-speech-sparks-
      scathing-humour-on-twitter.
                                         REFERENCES                                           69

[83] Wire Staff. “22 Migrant Workers, Kin Have Died Trying to Return Home
     Since the Lockdown Started”. The Wire (Apr. 30, 2020). url: https://thewire.in/
     rights/coronavirus-national-lockdown-migrant-workers-dead.
[84] Wire Staff. “Express Gyan: Why the Centre’s Lockdown Relief Plan for the
     Poor is not Enough”. The Wire (Mar. 26, 2020). url: https://thewire.in/economy/
     coronavirus-lockdown-india-relief-package-poor.
[85] Wire Staff. “International Network of Scholars Condemns Arrests of
     Teltumbde, Navlakha”. The Wire (Apr. 21, 2020). url: https://thewire.in/rights/
     anand-teltumbde-gautam-navlakha-arrest-scholars-at-risk-network-statement.
[86] Wire Staff. “Modi’s Silence on Essential Supplies During 21 Day National
     Lockdown Sets Off Panic”. The Wire (Mar. 4, 2020). url: http://science.thewire.
     in/health/coronavirus-narendra-modi-national-lockdown/.
[87] S. Subramanian. “Doing the Maths: Why India Should Introduce a Covid
     Wealth Tax on the Ultra Rich”. Scroll (Apr. 16, 2020). url: https:// scroll.in/
      article/959314/doing-the-maths-why-india-should-introduce-a-covid-wealth-tax-on-the-
      ultra-rich.
[88] S. Subramanian. “Letting the Data Speak: Consumer Spending, Rural
     Distress, Urban Slow-Down, and Overall Stagnation”. Arena Papers of The
     Hindu Centre for Politics and Public Policy (2019). url: https://www.thehinducentre.
     com/the-arena/current-issues/article30265409.ece.
[89] SWAN Team. “32 Days and Counting: COVID-19 Lockdown, Migrant
     Workers, and the Inadequacy of Welfare Measures in India”. Stranded
     Workers Action Network (May 1, 2020). url: https:// covid19socialsecurity.files.
     wordpress.com/2020/05/32-days-and-counting_swan.pdf.
[90] Teena Thacker. “Centre Decides to Withdraw Faulty Covid-19 Antibody
     Test Kits, Cancels Import Orders From China”. The Economic Times (Apr. 20,
     2020). url: https : / / economictimes . indiatimes . com / industry / healthcare / biotech /
      pharmaceuticals/centre-decides-to-withdraw-faulty-covid-19-antibody-test-kits-cancels-
      import-orders-from-china/articleshow/75406955.cms?from=mdr.
[91] Karan Thapar. “Interview: India Could Be Next Coronavirus Hotspot,
     Worst Case up to 60% Could Be Infected”. The Wire (Mar. 19, 2020). url:
70                                        REFERENCES

      https:// science.thewire.in/ health/ interview- india- could- be- next- coronavirus- hotspot-
      worst-case-up-to-60-could-be-infected/.
[92] Sadhika Tiwari. “Amid COVID-19, Scheduled Caste Workers Face Dis-
     crimination”. IndiaSpend (May 3, 2020). url: https://www.indiaspend.com/amid-
     covid-19-scheduled-caste-workers-face-discrimination/2020.
[93] Hari Vasudevan. “Food is a Necessity. So is Making It Available”. NewsClick
     (Apr. 22, 2020). url: https://www.newsclick.in/Food-Necessity-Making-Available.
[94] Anubhuti Vishnoi. “IAS Officers Point to Inadequate Health Infrastruc-
     ture”. The Economic Times (Apr. 3, 2020). url: https://economictimes.indiatimes.
      com/ news/ politics- and- nation/ ias- officers- point- to- inadequate- health- infrastructure/
      articleshow/74959132.cms.
[95] Mahesh Vyas. The Jobs Bloodbath of April 2020. The Centre for Monitoring
     Indian Economy, May 2020.
[96] Sruthisagar Yamunan and Shoaib Daniyal. “As Delhi Police Crack Down
     on Student Leaders, Courts Cite Lockdown to Justify Lack of Scrutiny”.
     Scroll.in (Apr. 29, 2020). url: https://scroll.in/article/960591/as-delhi-police-crack-
     down-on-student-leaders-court-cites-lockdown-to-justify-lack-of-scrutiny.
