                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INFLATION, EXTERNAL DEBT AND FINANCIAL SECTOR REFORM:
            A QUANTITATIVE APPROACH TO CONSISTENT FISCAL POLICY
                       WITH AN APPLICATION TO TURKEY




                                Ritu Anand

                           Sweder van Wijnbergen




                          Working Paper No. 2731




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 October 1988




We are indebted to Willem Buiter for many helpful discussions. We thank
Haluk Tukel, Teoman Akgur, and Hasan Ersel from the Central Bank of Turkey
for extensive assistance with data collection. We also thank them and Rusdu
Saraceoglu for helpful comments. Roberto Rocha estimated the asset demand
functions used in this paper. An implementation of the model presented here
is available in LOTUS from the authors. The views expressed in this paper
are our own and do not necessarily reflect those of the World Bank, the
Turkish authorities, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                      NBER Working Paper 273l
                                      October 1988

           INFLATION, EXTERNAL DEBT AND FINANCIAL SECTOR REFORM:
            A QUANTITATIVE APPROACH TO CONSISTENT FISCAL POLICY
                       WITH AN APPLICATION TO TURKEY

                                 ABSTRACT


    This paper presents and applies an integrated framework to assess the

consistency between fiscal deficits and other macroeconomic targets, such as

output growth and the rate of inflation. The model centers around the

government budget constraint and can be used to either derive the financeable

deficit given inflation targets, or to derive an equilibrium inflation rate

for which no fiscal adjustment would be necessary. The financeable deficit is

defined as the deficit that does not require more financing than is compatible

with sustainable external and internal borrowing, and existing targets for

inflation and output growth. The model can assess the impact on the relation

between fiscal adjustment and sustainable inflation rates of financial sector

reforms affecting base money demand, of changes in interest rates paid on

foreign and domestic public sector debt, of output growth targets and of

exchange rate policy. The analysis furthermore incorporates an approach, due

to Cohen ( 1986),   to the derivation of a sustainable external debt policy.

Finally, the model can also be used to see what happens if the required fiscal

adjustment is postponed. We explore two alternatives: one where fiscal

adjustment takes place eventually, and one where the inflation tax is used

eventually to close any financing gap. The model is applied to an analysis of

inflation, external debt and financial sector reform in Turkey.




 Ritu Anand                              Sweder van Wijnbergen
 Finance Commission,                     World Bank
 Government of India                     1818 H Street, N.W.
                                         Washington, DC 20333
                                                                    3




1      Introduction



        This paper presents and applies an integrated framework to assess the

consistency between fiscal deficits and other macroeconomic targets, in

particular output growth and the rate of inflation.        The model centers around

the government budget constraint and can be used to either derive the

"financeable" deficit given inflation targets, or to derive an equilibrium

inflation rate for which no fiscal adjustment would be necessary. The
financeable deficit is defined as the deficit that does not require more

financing than is compatible with sustainable external and internal borrowing,

and existing targets for inflation and output growth. The model can assess the

impact of financial sector reforms affecting base money demand,         of changes in

interest rates paid on foreign and domestic public sector debt, of output

growth targets and of exchange rate policy on the relation between fiscal

adjustment and sustainable inflation rates. The               analysis furthermore

    incorporates an approach, due to Daniel Cohen ( 1985, 1986), to the derivation

    of a sustainable external debt policy. Finally, the model can also be used to

    see what happens if the required fiscal adjustment is postponed.       We explore

    two alternatives: one where fiscal adjustment takes place eventually,     and one

    where the inflation tax is used eventually to close any financing gap once

    debt issue is discontinued. The model is applied to an analysis of inflation,

    external debt and financial sector reform in Turkey.

         The framework is based on the public finance approach to inflation. In

    this approach ( see Phelps (    1973), Dornbusch ( 1977), and Buiter (1983,
    1985), among others), inflation is interpreted as the residual tax. Residual

    because it restores balance between the expenditure plans of the public

    sector, its debt management and revenues from traditional sources    of taxation.
4




Inflation acts as a tax because it forces the private sector to reduce

expenditure just to maintain the real value of money balances it desires to

hold for a given rate-of-return structure. It drives a wedge between income

and expenditure not offset by any real accumulation of assets, just like any

other tax does. Also, since its counterpart is Central sank advances to the

public sector, it allows the public sector to cover a matching excess of

expenditure over more traditional sources of revenue.

        This approach does not deny the fact that, in the short n, demand

pressure or cost-push factors such as nominal exchange rate changes may be

more important determinants of inflation. However, such factors contribute

little to the understanding of sustained inflation. Excess demand pressure, as

    Friedman points out in his celebrated presidential address ( Friedman          (



    1968)),   should lead to accelerating rather than sustained inflation. Cost-push

    factors such as wage or exchange rate changes can explain price level shifts

    but not really sustained inflation. Of course continued nominal devaluation

    could explain a matching excess of domestic over foreign inflation, but such

    an explanation begs the question of what is behind the apparent need to resort

    to such a continued policy of nominal devaluation? A similar objection can be

    raised against strict monetarist explanations of inflation. The claim that

    sustained inflation is not possible without a matching growth in nominal

    balances is almost tautologically true since otherwise the real money stock

    would go off towards zero or infinity. It however begs the question of what

    drives such a process of sustained monetization.

         To explain sustained inflation rates, an analysis of the fiscal

    implications of sustained inflation is necessary, and this    is what the fiscal

    approach to inflation does. This approach has received   renewed attention after

    an influential paper by Sargent and Wallace ( 1982), who
                                                                  used this view on
                                                                 5




inflation to explain paradoxical links between inflation and money growth

sometimes observed in practice. The concept of sustainability plays an

important role in their analysis. Sustainability of inflation targets requires

consistency between those inflation targets and their i'clied consequences for

revenues from the inflation tax on the one hand, and on the other hand the

public sector's surplus of expenditure over other sources of revenues. This

analysis has been extended to the open economy so as to allow discussion of

exchange rate policy in Drazen and Helpman ( 1987) and van Wijnbergen (   1986).

     It is arguable that the exchange rate policy followed in many moderate

and high inflation countries has increased the relevance   of the public finance

approach to inflation. Moderate and high inflation has forced many countries

to offset inflation differentials with trading partners by nominal devaluation

 to avoid disruption of real trade flows. However, such a policy eliminates the

 role of the exchange rate as a "nominal" anchor since any blip in the price

 level will be offset automatically by a matching exchange rate adjustment.    If

 in addition monetary policy is accommodating through the Central Bank's
 inability to resist monetization of fiscal deficits, no monetary anchors are

 left. In su& circumstances the public finance approach to inflation might

 even become relevant for the explanation of short run inflation,    not just for

 medium trends.

      But even if a fixed exchange rate regime is adhered to, the approach

 suggested here is relevant. A fixed exchange rate regime (or, more generally,

 a predetermined exchange rate regime) implies a medium term inflation rate:

 foreign inflation plus the rate of nominal devaluation embedded in the

 exchange rate regime ( zero if it is a truly fixed regime). Consistency

 between the inflation rate implied by the exchange rate policy followed and

 fiscal policy is important. Empirical evidence shows conclusively that the
6




absence of such consistency is an important determinant of lack of credibility

and the eventual collapse of a fixed exchange rate regime ( Cumb-y and van

Wijnbergen (   1987)). Hence the approach sugggested in this paper could be used
to assess sustainability of a fixed exchange rate regime.

       In what follows we first present the analytical framework that underlies

the model. We then provide the empirical analysis necessary before the model

can be applied. This analysis and the associated data requirements are greatly

simplified by insisting on consistency rather than on optimality. We then

proceed to apply the framework to an analysis of external debt, financial

sector reform, inflation and fiscal policy in Turkey.



2      Analytical Framework



2.1 Fiscal Deficits, Money Creation and Debt.



       This Section explores the link between fiscal deficits, money creation

and debt. First, the analysis focuses on the precise measurement of the public

sector's net claim on real resources (    the   "real" or "operational" deficit),

and on the ways it can be financed. Then the implications for feasible

financing of given macroeconomic targets for inflation and output growth, of

changes in financial sector regulatory policies and of interest rates abroad

and at home are explored.

       To derive the relation between fiscal deficits, money creation and debt,

start from the following relation:




(la)       D+i +i*B*E_B+B*E+DCg
                                                                     7




                           —   B   + (B* -   nfa)E   + DCg + nfa E



The left hand side of (1) lists the expenses (net of taxes) of the public

sector: its non-interest deficit D plus nominal interest payments on domestic

and foreign debt. j (j*) is the nominal interest rate on domestic (foreign)

debt B (B*). E is the nominal exchange rate (TL per dollar). These expenses

need to be covered by the issue of domestic or foreign debt (B and B*), plus

Central Bank advances to the public sector, DC . The non-interest deficit D
                                                       g
and the interest payments should include the non-interest deficit and interest

obligations of all government entities: the central government, state

enterprises, municipalities, local governments, and extra-budgetary funds. The

proper treatment of the Central Bank is discussed below; its obligations too

should be included.

     The second line of equation (1) regroups the sources of financing

somewhat, to bring out the link between money financing and public sector

deficits. Increases in base money, M, equal the increase in net domestic

credit to the government, DC, and increases in net foreign assets of the

Central Bank, nfa E, minus the increase in the Central Bank's net worth.

Therefore base money can be seen as a source of revenue to the government.

This analysis also suggests the proper definition of money for an analysis of

deficit finance. Clearly, revenue derived from inflationary erosion of the

private sector's deposits that is offset by inflationary erosion of loans

outstanding to the private sector does not increase NET revenue. Hence the

need to use base money or "inside money" only ( See Anand and van Wijnbergen (

1987) on how to deal with such real world complications as Central Bank's
8




credit to the private sector and so on). Reserve or base money equals currency

in circulation and ( net) reserves held by commercial banks at the Central

Bank. These components form the net liabilities of the Central Bank towards

the private sector. However, counting all of the Central Bank's liabilities

(base money) as a public sector liability means that of the Central Bank's

assets, the claims on non-government agents need to be subtracted from the

public sector's debt. In particular, the public sector's foreign                       debt needs to

be measured NET of the Central Bank's foreign assets (i.e. public sector

foreign debt equals B*nfa*).

           If in addition the Central Bank's profit and loss account is included

into the definition of the public sector, the link between deficits and money

financing becomes watertight. In a simplified set-up, the Central Bank's

profits consist of interest earnings on reserves,                  i*nfa*, with as counterpart


an increase in net worth: i*nfa*E — NW. Subtracting that simple expression

from the budget identity yields:




    (Ib)        D +   iB   + i*(B*.nfa*)   E —   B   + (3*   -   nfa)E +   DCg
                                                                                 +   nfa   E -   NW




                                             —       B+(B -nfa)E+M

           The importance of the latter correction cannot be stressed enough.

    Examples are rife where countries run a balanced budget, sometimes under the

    force of a constitutional amendment, but in fact continue deficit spending by

    effectively shifting Treasury expenditure to the Central Bank. In Turkey, a

    substantial part of the interest payments on the Central Government's foreign

    debt is handled by the Central Bank, without being recorded in the Central
                                                                                                      9




                                                      Further modifications to (1) are necessary
Government's budget.

to tighten the link between the public sector's net claim on resources to

increases in the real value of domestic and foreign debt, to inflation and to

money creation. The most important one involves incorporating:

capital losses due to inflation and exchange rate changes                                       into the accounting

framework

       Making this correction to equ. (1) results in the following link between

deficits and inflation (see Anand and van Wijnbergen (1987)                                                for a more

detailed analysis of the steps involved):



                              *         *         *               .         *.-nfa* )e)
( 2)          d +   rb +     (r   +e)(b -nfa )e — b +                  ((b                + M/P



                                                                             *•   *         •
                                                                                                +
                                                                —b +   ((b    -nfa )e) +    m       Pm1




Lower case letters denote real variables, so d — D/P, the real value of the

non-interest deficit; p (p*) is the domestic (foreign) price level.                                          p (p*) is

 the corresponding domestic (foreign) inflation rates.                                      b (      b*)   is the real

                                            debt in terms of domestic (                     foreign)       goods, and m
 value of domestic (          foreign)
                               *
 is   the real money stock. nfa is the real value of the banking system's net
                                                  *
 foreign assets in terms of foreign goods. r ( r ) is
                                                          the real rate of

 interest: r —
                  '
                     i*
                  F, r — -    P          i*       *                  *
                                  e is the real exchange rate, e — EP /P. e
                                              -             .




 is the rate of depreciation of the real exchange rate. M is the nominal, and m

 the real money stock: m — M/P. A "
                                                                . " indicates     changes in the variable below




 'We use the following identity in the derivation of (2):


        ((b
            *•      *
              -nfa )e) —
                                   •*-nfa.* )e + e(b*
                                  (b
                                                      .•'
                                                                       *
                                                                  -nfa )e
10




it. Finally, n denotes the real growth rate of the economy.

     Equ (2) states that the fiscal deficit, inclusive of the Central Bank's

profit and loss account, but counting REAL interest payments only, equals

changes in the real value of domestic and foreign debt, plus revenue from the

inflation tax ( Pm) and from seignorage ( run). The sum of the latter two equal

revenue from monetization, M/P. Outside steady state there could be other

sources of revenue from monetization than these two: once-off changes in the

real money stock because of changes in inflation or interest rates, or similar

once-off changes due to financial innovations shifting money demand.

     Equation (2) as it stands is nothing but accounting, but it is at the

basis of most of the analysis to come. Macroeconomic variables such as growth

and inflation have implications for the amount of money the private sector is

willing to absorb for given interest rates. Similarly, changes in financial

structure and regulation will also have an impact on the amount of revenue

from monetization that can be expected. Finally, creditworthiness and

sustainability imply constraints on the issue of interest bearing debt. All

such restrictions can be incorporated in equ. (2). In the next two Sections,

we consider first monetization and then debt issue. The next Section then puts

it all together to derive the constraints on fiscal policy that consistency

with financial structure and macroeconomic targets implies.



2.2 Revenue from Monetization and the Structure of the Financial Sector.



     The previous section argued that the appropriate money concept to use is

net Central Bank liabilities to the private sector, or reserve money. It is

thus important to understand how demand for base money responds to changes in
                                                               11




financial sector regulation, to interest rates and inflation and so on. This
                                            liabilities are towards different
creates a practical problem in that those

agents in the economy. It is therefore unlikely that an aggregate money demand

function would adequately capture the sensitivity of reserve money demand with

respect to changes in the inflation rate, financial structure and interest

rates. We use a more structural approach in this paper.        Underlying this

approach is a model describing private portfolio choice as a function of
inflation, output growth and interest rates. This gives the amount of

currency, demand deposits and time deposits the private sector is willing to

hold given output, inflation and interest rates.       This is coupled with a

simple financial sector model incorporating reserve requirements and other

bank regulatory policies to derive the demand for reserves by commercial

banks. The demand for reserves is then added to the demand for currency

 already derived to get an estimate of the total demand for base money given

 inflation, interest rates and so on.     All this is then used to calculate

 revenue from monetization for different inflation rates, output growth rates,

 interest and inflation rates and different regulatory policies.

      This indirect, structural approach has a number of advantages.      It allows

 explicit calculation of the effects of changes in financial sector regulation

 on the financeable deficit through the impact of such regulation on the

 aggregate demand for base money. For the same reason, this approach is more
                                                                              Below we
 likely to be stable across changes in financial sector regulation.

 give an example for a simple fractional reserve banking system      (   ie   a system

 where banks are required to hold a fraction of their deposits as reserves).

 More complicated regulatory systems are incorporated as an option in the LOTUS

 model that is available on diskette as a companion to this paper.

      To analyse the determinants of the demand for the primary components of
12




reserve money entering into such a financial sector model, consider first a

simple portfolio approach to private sector asset demand:



(3a)        (C/(PY)) —



(3b)        (DD/(PY)) —



            (TD/(PY)) —
(3c)                       fTD(P.iDD,iTD)


Demand for currency C, demand deposits DD, and time deposits TD, all as a

share of nominal GNP (PY in the formula), depend on inflation P, and the

interest rates paid on demand and time deposits, DD and                   More

sophisticated financial structures would introduce additional factors. For

example, with foreign exchange deposits available one would expect exchange

rate depreciation and foreign interest rates to influence demand for domestic

assets. However the time period since the introduction of foreign exchange

deposits has been too short to allow econometric analysis of the influence of

such factors.

        Under a fractional reserve system, with reserve requirement ratios RRDD

and 11TD against demand and time deposits respectively, demand for base money

M Is:



            M/(PY) —             +             +
(4)                    Cu/(PY)       DDDD'Y)       PTDTD/(PY)


                   —                    +

                       +
                                                              13




(4) can be used to derive the impact of changes in inflation, interest rates

and financial sector regulation on base money demand and their likely impact

on the revenue the public sector can expect from monetization. Combining this

information with equ. (2) then allows assessment of the fiscal consequences of

inflation and of financial sector reforms affecting for example reserve

requirements R%D and RR,0 or the interest rates paid on deposits.



2.3 Creditworthiness and the limits on foreign debt issue



     The cost and availability of foreign financing are clearly important

determinants of what constitutes a consistent fiscal policy. Required
                                                               *    *   *
financing   depends on the cost of the existing foreign debt, r (b -nfa )e; in

addition, for any total revenue requirement, the amount to be covered from

domestic sources depends on the amount of foreign financing (b*.nfa)e that is

desired, or, if less, available.

     Assessing a country's room for external borrowing involves two

considerations: solvency and creditworthiness. Solvency concerns ability to

pay and is intricately linked to the non-interest current account, real

 interest and output growth rates, and, of course, the initial level of debt.

Solvency is assumed to be in jeopardy if the discounted value of an estimate

of minimum current and future consumption levels exceeds current wealth net of

foreign debt. In practice, one would calculate the discounted value of current

and future feasible trade surpluses and compare that value with the current

debt; these two approaches are in fact equivalent. Cohen (1985) assesses the

solvency of the major debtor countries and concludes that in almost none of

them solvency is at all at risk.
14




     Creditworthiness may however be a constraint even if solvency is not.

Creditworthiness depends on the lenders' perception of a country's ability AND

willingness   to pay. Therefore creditworthiness often imposes tighter

constraints than solvency alone. Assessing the precise limits imposed by

creditworthiness constraints is difficult for several reasons. First of all,

it is extremely difficult to assess the costs of default. Cohen (1986)

suggests a simple approach to this problem, by observing that, if a country

has not defaulted yet, the current debt service burden must fall short of

whatever the cost of default is. An obvious definition of a "prudent" debt

strategy then is any borrowing path that will not, at any time, raise the   debt

service burden above its current value. This may sound almost tautologically

true, but it has important implications. For example the trade surpluses that

many Latin American countries had to run   after   1982 in fact do not qualify

under this approach. Clearly, being forced to run trade surpluses of around 8%

of CNP raises the burden associated with the current level of external debt

and so might trigger default.

     A second problem is the definition of the debt burden. Repayment not only

requires a sufficiently high value of wealth to be able to pay, but also the

generation of a surplus of traded goods production over traded goods
consumption (net exports). This is likely to be much more burdensome in a

country with most of its resources in the non-traded sectors of the economy

than in an outward oriented economy. But if it is more burdensome, a country

might be more tempted not to repay, even if solvency requirements are met.

Hence the     importance of debt-export ratios         in   the assessment of

 creditworthiness. But while debt-export ratios are important, they are a

biased estimate of the ratio of a country's debt to its output of tradeable

 goods. Some domestically produced traded goods are likely to be sold at home.
                                                                             15




                                                       would be an underestimate, since GNP
On the other hand, the debt-output ratio

incorporates non-traded goods. We therefore use a weighted average of the

debt-output ratio and the debt-export ratio:



             *          *              *
(5)         R — 'yX + (1-1)Y


                                                       home   output) expressed in terms of
with X ( y*) the value of exports (
                  *                    *   —
foreign    goods: X — X/e          (   Y       Y/e).
       For the choice of the weights we follow an approach suggested by Cohen
                                                              such a way that no incentive to
(1986). Cohen suggests weights constructed in

drive a wedge between actual and social costs of foreign exchange remains, at
                                                                     The measure of resources
least for the purpose of assessing creditworthiness.

R* should thus be set up such that any improvement in the debt output ratio as

a consequence of a real appreciation will be just offset by the negative

 impact on the debt-export ratio. The issue then is how to choose -y. Choosing
                 *
 y such    that R does not depend on the real exchange rate requires that the

 following holds:


                  *           *         dY
                                               *
             dR              dX
 (6)         —        — -y        + (1-y)_
             de              de            de


 This leads to the following expression for -y:



                                  Y
                                   *
                                  e
 (7)          7— _________
                              x* - EY*)
                       xee

       (          is    the elasticity of X (          y*)   with respect to the real exchange
16




rate e (    the empirical implementation of the model presented here allows for
different choices of -y).

       A feasible external debt strategy that maintains creditworthiness at

least at current levels then consists of a time path for foreign borrowing

that viii not include a rise in                      For later convenience we define the
                     *
growth rate of R , nR:


                             (l-7)n,
(8)           nR ________ + ________
                    + (1-)) (y + (l-y))

           *                               *
Note that R has been constructed such that R is insensitive to real

depreciation. n,               is   the growth rate of exports ( CNP), both expressed

in terms of foreign goods. n, can in turn be linked to output growth in the
                                              *
countries     Turkey is exporting to, n


                      x* *
(9)


         x*                                  *
Here
        €,.
               is   the elasticity of X ,         Turkey's   exports in constant "dollars",

with respect to output in the countries Turkey is exporting to.

       Combining all this leads to the following expression for feasible
                                                                         *
external    debt accumulation as a percentage of GNP, e(b -nfa )/y




(10)
              e(b    nfa*) —   e(b*   -
                                          nfa*)



Equations (8-10) allow empirical application once the various elasticities

have been estimated. Econometric estimates of these elasticities and of the
                                                                          17




parameters of the asset demand functions are presented in Section 3.



2.4 Putting it all together: on the design of consistent fiscal policies



       We define a consistent fiscal policy as a policy that can be sustained

over the medium term withc.. compromising any other macroeconomic target and

without reliance on unsustainable debt finance. Unsustainable debt finance

implies debt issue at a rate in excess of the growth rate of the resources

available for eventual debt service. This is in fact a more stringent

requirement than solvency if the real interest rate exceeds the real growth

rate of the economy.

       If we take R* as the resource base concept for foreign debt, and domestic

output y as the resource base for domestic debt, we obtain the following

restrictions on debt issue:




(11)       b —    nb,   b* -   nfa —   n(b*
                                              -   nfa*)


n (       is   the growth rate of y (         R*).   Inserting these restrictions on debt

issue into equ. (2), and expressing variables as percentages of GNP then

yields the following ezpression for the deficit reduction required for

consistency, RDR:



(12)        RDR   —     + r + r*(*      -   na*)e)    -   (n +   ($**)   +     + P}

A "—" above a variable indicates the variable is expressed as a share of GNP.

RDR equals the actual deficit inclusive of real interest payments on foreign
18




                                                           _*        _*
and domestic debt, minus the financeable deficit, (nb + nR(b -nfa ) + fin +
Pm). A deficit reduction equal to RDR will bring fiscal deficits in line with

other macroeconomic targets in the sense defined before.

        Alternatively, (12) can be used to calculate "sustainable" inflation

rates. In that case one simply equates RDR to the actual deficit, and solves

for the inflation rate that restores equality 2• Such an exercise faces a

problem of multiple solutions if the functional form of the asset demand

functions implies a dependence of the interest elasticity on inflation or

nominal interest rates. An example where this occurs is the semi-logarithmic

equation. This problem need not concern us here since it clearly does not

arise if (12) is used, as is done in this paper, to derive a sustainable

deficit for given inflation targets rather than the other way around.

        Note that if     is used as the benchmark against which to measure foreign
                                              A
debt accumulation, real depreciation (e>O) does NOT affect fiscal balance:
higher debt servicing costs are just offset by additional foreign borrowing

under such a rule. ut this will not be the case if either exports or output

are chosen as benchmark. If the debt-output ratio is used as a benchmark, (12)

becomes:



 (13)        RDR —   (a + r + (r* + e)(* - n?a*)e)

                         —   _*   *       —
                     - (nb+n(b-n?a)+flm+PIfl)

 Clearly, under a debt-output rule, a real depreciation (e>O) increases the

 RDR, ie reduces the room for fiscal expansion.




 2See Melnick and Sokoler (1984) for an exercise       along such lines.
                                                                                   19




            Under a debt-export rule, (12) becomes:


                                    *       ' _*          _*
                                                         rifa )e}
(14)        RDR — (d + rb +        (r   +   e)(b     -


                  -       -+                     +n +          P}

                                    r*_*         _*
                      —        —
                                                 nfa
                                                                    —     x*n*_*   _*
                                                                              (b -nfa )
                 — (d + rb +          (b     -
                                                         )e)    (nb +

                      + (n   + P)m) +       (1   -
                                                     x* e(b
                                                        _*)
                                                                    -   nfa   )e




Under this rule, real depreciation will                             relax the fiscal adjustment

requirement if the export elasticity with respect to the real exchange rate

exceeds one.



 3      Emvirical Preliminaries



             Some empirical work is needed before the model set up in Section 2

 can actually be implemented. First, the asset demand functions that form the

 input into the financial sector model need to be estimated. Section 3.1

 presents the results for Turkey. Second, the export elasticities with respect

 to price and income in recipient countries are needed for the derivation of

 the resource measure used in the external debt part. These are presented in

 Section 3.2



 3.1 The Structure of Money Demand in Turkey



         Reserve money consists of currency in circulation and reserves held

 against demand deposits and time deposits. To derive demand for base money we

     therefore estimate asset demand functions describing the private sector's
20




portfolio choice over currency, demand deposits and time deposits as a

function of inflation, income and interest rates. Consider demand for currency

first.




(15)        log(C/CPI) — 3.58 + O.S7log(y)               °69TD,t - LO7iDD,t
                            (3.10) (2.42)                (3.67)   (3.01)



                            -    1.51       + 0.28
                                                      log(C1/CPI1)
                                (3.79)       (1.77)




R2—0.83 DW—2.08 Sample Period:1977.I-1986.IV



The results are reasonable, with all the coefficients of the right sign and

almost all highly significantly different from zero. Seasonal dummies were

also included but their coefficients are not reported here. Adjustment is

quick, with a mean lag of less than 5 months (1/(1-0.28) quarter).

       A similar equation for demand deposits yields the following results:



(16)        log(DD/CPI) — 8.90       -    0.55 log(y) - 0.96 TD,t + 0.60

                           (6.71) (2.86)                 (7.97)       (1.30)



                            -.
                                 2.16       + 0.24
                                                      1og(DD1/CPI1)
                                 (7.83)      (2.67)




R2—o.98 DW—1.85 Sample Period:1977.I-1986.IV



Again a reasonable equation, with a relatively high adjustment speed ar
                                                                    21




strong sensitivity to interest rates and expected inflation.

       Applied to time deposits, the portfolio approach yields:



(17)        log(TD/CPI) — 1.30 + 0.28 log(y) + 1.18 TDt + 0.38 DD,t
                              (1.94) (1.02)          (4.61)    (1.21)



                       -   1.41      + 0.68 log(TD1/CPI1)

                           (2.41)     (7.48)



R2—0.99 DW—l.90 Sample Period:1977.I-1986.IV



       The equation shows strong sensitivity with respect to the own interest

rate tTD     and to expected inflation. The coefficient of the interest paid on

demand deposits is insignificant, low and of the wrong sign. Reestimating the

equation excluding this variable yields:



(18)        1og(TD/CPI) — 1.34 + 0.12 log(y) + 0:98 TD,t - 1.02
                              (1.98) (0.51)          (5.04)       (2.09)



                               + 0.76
                                           1og(TD1/CPI1)
                                  (11.7)



R2—O.99 DW—1.90 Sample Period:1977.I-1986.IV



3.2 Export Demand Elasticities



       Estimating demand elasticities of demand for Turkish exports runs into
22




the practical problem that the composition of Turkish exports has changed a

great deal over the past few years. While total exports rose at an annual rate

of 29.4 percent in real terms, exports to the Gulf countries went up by 58.6%

over the same period. As a result, the share of exports going to the Gulf

countries went up from 13.2 percent in 1980 to 36.4 percent in 1985. We

therefore decided to estimate separate demand equations for exports to the

Middle East and for exports to other countries.

                                 is                      This      involves   more   than
        The   next problem            specification.

technicalities. At issue is whether Turkey competes with local producers in

the markets it is exporting to or with other countries exporting to the same

market. In the first case, the relevant relative price variable is a measure

of Turkish export prices relative to a weighted average of say WPI indices in

the export markets covered by the equation (           after    bringing the indices in a

common currency, of course). In the second case, comparison with import price

indices for imports into Turkey's export markets is more appropriate. In Anand

and van Wijnbergen (1988) we show that the second assumption is strongly

supported empirically. We therefore only report those results here.

        Consider first the results for exports to the Gulf countries,



 (19)         log(X) — -3.43 + 4.45 log(CMPRO) + 0.57           log(RMOIL)

                        (1.62) (2.40)                  (1.75)



                                       ol
                       + 0.59
                              log(XX1)
                        (4.01)




 a2   — 0.95 DW — 1.53 Sample Period: 1969-1984
                                                                         23




X°1 is the real value of Turkish exports to the Gulf countries expressed in

terms of foreign goods. RMOIL is the total import bill of those countries in

real terms. CMPRO is the relative price of Turkish exports in terms of the

aggregate import price index for those countries. The results show a very high

price elasticity of demand for Turkish exports and only a unit (long run)

elasticity with respect to all imports into the Gulf countries.

       The results for exports to other countries, oc               mostly the major OECD

countries) are qualitatively similar, although quite different quantitatively:



                                            Px                 -
(20)        log(XOC) — 1.34 +    2.02 log(M) + 0.62       log(MX)


                       (0.70) (2.28)             (1.68)




R2—0.76 Sample Period: 1968-1984



   is the dollar-based aggregate price index for imports into Turkey's export

markets. MX    is   the corresponding real value of imports into those export

markets. If real income in Turkey's export markets is used instead of total

imports, the income elasticity goes up substantially:


                                             x
(21)
                —oc
                          0.20 + 1.85
                                             M + 1.17
                                          log(_)
                                                               *
            log(X )   —
                                                          log(Y)
                                            P
                          (0.08) (1.90)          (1.67)


R2—0.76 Sample Period: 1968-1984
24




       A final elasticity needed for the Cohen approach to external debt is the

supply elasticity of domestic real output with respect to the real exchange

rate (   defined as the relative price of output in Turkey's trading partners
with respect to the price of Turkish goods). A simple regression yields:



(22)        log(Y) — 2.20     -   0.86 log(e) + 0.05    TIME

                     (3.93) (3.24)             (5.99)



This completes the empirical preliminaries. We now turn to the application of

the framework and empirical results.



4      An Enmirical Alication: Deficits. Financial Sector Reform and

       Inflation in Turkey.



       In Section 4.1 we use the framework presented above to assess the

consistency of fiscal deficits with other macroeconomic targets for Turkey.

Section 4.2 discusses the consequences of postponing fiscal adjustment and

studies the interrelation between domestic debt issue, monetization and

current and future inflation We then use the model to assess the fiscal

 impact of financial reforms in Section 4.3. Finally Section 4.4 looks at the

 impact of the size and cost of foreign debt on the budget, and the fiscal

implication of debt-substitution policies where external debt is in effect

 "swapped" for internal debt.



4.1 Inflation and the Consistency of Fiscal Policy



       The results are summarized in Tables 1 and 2. Underlying these tables are
                                                               25




various targets and assumptions. First, a 6 percent real growth rate of GNP.

Second, the reserve requirements and nominal interest rates on demand and time

deposits prevailing at the end of 1987 are used. As to liquidity requirements,

only the part over which no interest is paid is included in the definition of

base money.

     Table 1 assesses potential revenues from seignorage and the inflation tax

for various inflation rates. The table first lists demand for currency, demand

deposits and time deposits for various inflation rates; these asset demands

are derived using     the empirical results of Section 3.1 and the model

presented in Section 2. These are then used to calculate demand for base money

as a function of reserve requirements and the liquidity ratio. In the next

column, inflation tax revenue is presented, while the final column lists total

revenie from monetization. Total demand for base money, the table shows, is

sensitive to inflation. It falls from 7.8% of GNP at 15% inflation to 5.9% at

60% itf1ation.   It is clear from the next column that higher inflation leads

to higher revenue from inflation tax, be it at a declining rate. However, the

marginal increase in inflation tax revenue becomes less and less as inflation

rises; at 200% inflation (not shown in the table) inflation tax reaches its

maximum value.   Total revenue from monetization also rises, although at a

slightly lower rate, because the second component, seignorage, actually

declines as inflation rises, This is a negligible effect, however.
26




TABLE 1: INFLATION TAX AND SEIGNORAGE AT VARIOUS INFLATION RATES

                                 (percent of GNP)

Inflation       Demand for:                   Inflation           Monetization

                Cash       Deposits           Tax Revenues

                           Demand     Time



     15         3.0        7.5         17.5        1.0                 1.4
     20         2.9        7.3         16.7        1.2                 1.6
     30         2.8        6.9         15.3        1.6                 2.0
     40         2.7        6.5         14.1        2.0                 2.3
     50         2.6        6.1         13.0        2.2                 2.6
     60         2.5        5.8         12.1        2.5                 2.8


     This   analysis covers one source of financing, monetization. In addition

there is domestic debt issue and foreign borrowing. The results of applying

the Cohen ( 1985,      1987) approach to foreign borrowing to Turkey using the

empirical results of Section 2 are presented in Table 2. The table gives the

maximum increase in foreign debt that will just avoid an increase in the

debt-resource ratio for different growth rates at home and abroad. Under the

assumption of a 6% real output growth and 3.5%           real    output growth in trading

partners, the government can borrow 2.5% of GNP           a     year without jeopardizing
creditworthiness.

     Furthermore we assume that all the additional foreign exchange is
available to the government. This is probably reasonable, as not much private

sector foreign borrowing is expected other than inflows into the commercial

banking system through foreign exchange deposits owned by non-residents.
These are in any case better seen as remittances in disguise and should
                                                                 27




possibly be counted as above the line inflows rather than capital account

transactions.



TABLE 2: SUSTAINABLE CURRENT ACCOUNT DEFICITS (percent of GNP)

Output Growth       Output Growth Rates of Turkey's Trading Partners:

in Turkey :         0    1    2    3    3.5 4


     3              1.12 1.21 1.29 1.38 1.42 1.46

    4               1.49 1.58 1.66 1.75 1.79 1.83

     5              1.87 1.95 2.04 2.12 2.17 2.21

     6              2.24 2.33 2.41 2.5 2.54 2.58

     7              2.61 2.70 2.78 2.87 2.91 2.95



     For domestic debt we assume that debt issue is restricted to whatever is

compatible with maintaining the debt-output ratio constant.      The reason for

not allowing a faster rate of domestic debt issue is the high real rate it

carries. At 12% a year it is well above the growth rate of the economy. At

this rate, debt-service costs would escalate as a percentage of GNP if more

extensive use is made of debt-issue to finance the deficit.

     Table 3 shows, first of all, the financeable deficit as a function of the

inflation rate. It arrives at that measure by adding up the three sources of

financing: monetization, domestic debt issue and foreign borrowing. A target

inflation rate of 50%, close to the year-end-to-year-end inflation rate in

1987, allows a deficit of 6% of GNP. A target of 20% would allow a deficit of

4.8% only.
28




TABLE 3         FINANCEABLE DEFICIT FOR VARIOUS INFLATION TARGETS

                                   (percent of GNP)

Inflation        Financeable       Actual      Required

 Rate            Deficit           Deficit     Deficit

                                   in 1986     Reduction (RDR)



        15            4.4            5.7            1.3

        20            4.6            5.7            1.5

        30            5.0            5.7            0.7

        40            5.3            5.7            0.4

        50            5.6            5.7            0.1

        60            5.8            5.7           -0.1



        The next column shows the actual real deficit in 1986. If the actual

deficit is subtracted from the financeable deficit, one arrives at the

Required Deficit Reduction (RDR).             This is the reduction necessary for
consistency with the        corresponding    inflation rate.     RDR   equals   1.1% for an

inflation target of 20%, but is essentially zero for a 50% inflation target.

In that sense, 50% can be considered as the equilibrium inflation rate, given
                                                                                         -
the 1986 fiscal stance and financial structure.



4.2     Domestic Debt, Money Creation and the Trade-off between Current and

        Future Inflation.



        The previous Section discussed the fiscal adjustment necessary to achieve

a given inflation target. The same tables could be used to derive, instead,
                                                                 29




the inflation rate compatible with no fiscal adjustment, given the current

fiscal deficit.   The current Section takes a different approach. What if

adjustment takes place, but not instantaneously? In particular, what happens

if the government pursues the monetary policy necessary to sustain a given

inflation rate, fails to make the required deficit reduction and covers the

resulting gap through debt issue? This in effect constitutes a debt
substitution policy, similar to the one that is discussed in the original

Sargent-Wallace (1982) paper. Consider a policy of strict adherence to

monetary policy consistent with inflation targets of say the 1987 rate of 20%.

But instead of making the required deficit reduction, the government issues
interest bearing debt to cover the remaining financing gap.

     Monetization implies debt issue at zero nominal rate, so such a policy of

substituting interest bearing debt to replace revenue from monetization will

deteriorate the government's fiscal position. Figure 1 demonstrates the

consequences, The base line in the diagram (labeled "Adjustment now") shows

the inflation/deficit-reduction trade-off just discussed in Section 4.1. The

figure gives the amount of fiscal adjustment necessary (listed on the vertical

axis; the benchmark is 1986, in which year the real deficit was 5.7 percent of

GNP) for given inflation rates (listed on the horizontal axis). The line cuts

the axis at 50%, indicating that for that inflation target, the fiscal policy

stance in 1986 required no further adjustment.           In that sense, 50% was

therefore the equilibrium inflation rate in that year.

     The second line in the graph shows how the trade-off shifts in an

unfavorable direction if adjustment is postponed.             The line, labeled

"Adj.after six years", shows the additional fiscal adjustment necessary, or,

alternatively, the   increase   in equilibrium inflation if no adjustment is

taken. This line cuts the inflation axis at a rate in excess of 80 percent, an
30




increase of 30 percentage points.




Figure 1:             INFLATON AND REQUI.F!SCAL ADJ.
                                             (ffecti of 0eloyv3 A1tjtrent
     0.016
     o ote
     0.014
      0.0 12
z       0.01
0
U
      0.006
0
      0.006
U     0.004
0     0.002
0
           0
     —0.002

     —0.004

     —0.006

     —0.008
                0.1                    0.3               0.5                0.7          0.9

                                                 COUIUSRIUM INFLlTl0N
               0      Adjustment Now                           + Ad. after 6 YearS




4.3 Fiscal Implications of Financial Sector Policies



        Financial sector reforms are usually undertaken with microeconomic

efficiency as a predominating motivating factor.                              Advice to lower reserve

requirements is a good example. The objective is to lower the wedge between

lending and borrowing rates of the commercial banking system. Ac the same

time,          such measures have a direct impact on aggregate demand for reserve

money and hence on the basis over which the inflation tax is levied. This in
                                                               31




turn implies that they have implications for the fiscal deficit that is

consistent with inflation targets, or, alternatively, the inflation rate that

will prevail eventually if no fiscal adjustment takes place. A fiscal deficit

that was consistent with other macroeconomic targets before the reform may not

be consistent anymore once the reform has been implemented. The model

presented in this paper allows one to assess the need for fiscal policy

adjustment along with such reforms.

     Typical experiments one can perform with the model would involve changes

in reserve requirements, decisions to pay interest rates on reserves, or

changes in bank interest rates. We will only consider changes in time deposit

rates here. The impact of deposit rate changes on demand for reserve money

depends intricately on the structure of private asset demand. For example

higher time deposit rates will lead to substitution out of cash into time

deposits, thus reducing demand for base money by the amount shifted times one

minus the reserve requirement ratio against time deposits; they will however

also trigger shifts out of non-monetary assets, with a positive impact on

reserve money demand since time deposits carry reserve requirements while

non-monetary assets do not. The net effect will depend on the relative

substitution effects, and on the level at which reserve requirements against

time deposits are set (cf van Wijnbergen (1982)). The empirical evidence

suggests that the second effect dominates, at least for the current level of

reserve requirements on time deposits (van Wijnbergen ( 1984) reports similar

results for South Korea).

    Table 4 shows that currency and demand deposits will increase after a cut

in time deposit rates from 56 to 35 percent, but much less than time deposits

fall. Apparently, a cut in time deposit rates triggers a larger shift into

non-monetary assets than into currency in circulation or demand deposits. Thus
32




base money demand declines. As a result, inflation tax revenues will decline

at any given inflation rate once monetary equilibrium is restored. As a

consequence, the required deficit reduction, "RDR", necessary to achieve a

target inflation rate of 35% increases from -0.9 percent of GNP to 1.1%.



TABLE 4             TIME DEPOSIT RATES AND BASE MONEY DEMAND

          Time Deposit Rate:         0.56           0.35




          Demand for:

               Cash                   3.1           3.7

               Demand deposits        7.3           9.6

               Time deposits         19.5           8.4

          Total Base Money            7.1           6.4



Notes:    Asset demands are expressed as a percentage of GNP;              they

          are evaluated at 35% inflation and a demand deposit rate
          of 10%.



     Alternatively, look at the inflation rate that will make any deficit

reduction unnecessary. Before the cut in deposit rates, this equilibrium

inflation rate (equilibrium, that is, for given inflation rate) equaled 50

percent, as we saw in Table 4. After the cut in interest rates this

equilibrium inflation rate increases to almost 85 percent. The large increase

in equilibrium inflation for such a small increase in RDR reflects the fact

that at inflation rates close to triple digits, money demand becomes highly

elastic. As a consequence, the additional revenue from higher inflation

declines rapidly as inflation itself rises. This necessitates bigger and
                                                               33




bigger increases in inflation to cover a given increase in revenue

requirements as base level inflation increases. Changes in demand deposit

rates would have an even bigger impact, since demand deposits are close money

substitutes.

     It is important to see such results in perspective. First, the parameter

values in the financial sector model are estimates only. Hence these results

should be considered as indicative of orders of magnitude only, rather than as

very precise point estimates. Second, they do not tell us whether financial

sector reform is desirable or not, but rather to what extent fiscal policy

adjustment is necessary to make a reform sustainable given macroeconomic

targets. Third and finally, we do not address the short term macroeconomic

effects of changes in demand for base money given the supply of base money.

With perfect capital mobility and a fixed exchange rate, capital inflows from

abroad will immediately resolve any discrepancy between money demand and money

supply. If capital mobility is less than perfect, however, such an increase of

base money demand over base money supply may have a recessionary impact until

price levels or reserve changes resolve any remaining imbalance between money

demand and supply.



4.4 External Debt, Foreign Interest Rates and Sustainable Inflation



     In this section we report on two experiments. First, we show the impact

of foreign real interest rates, for a fixed level of foreign debt, on

sustainable inflation and the consistency of fiscal deficits with any given

inflation targets. We then analyse the consequences of "debt substitutioti"

repaying foreign debt not by running a matching domestic fiscal surplus, ( or

reduced deficit), but by the issue of additional domestic public sector debt.
34




The latter policy has been pursued extensively in many Latin                 American   debtors

(Cohen ( 1987)).

          Consider first the impact of real interest rates on public sector foreign

debt. Figure 2 summarizes the results. The first experiment is a hypothetical

return to the admittedly unsustainable late l970s with zero real interest

rates on foreign debt. The results are summarized by line RFO                   in   Figure 2.

This line indicates that at a zero foreign real interest rate, no adjustment

is necessary for any (positive) inflation rate. If such a reduction in real

rates would take place, the financeable deficit would exceed the actual 1986

deficit for any positive inflation target.




     Figure 2:         NFLIAflON       AND RECUI.FISCAL ADJ.
                                              of Cost of or O.b(
            0.07

            0.06

            0.05

            0.04
     0
            0.03
     C
     z      0.02




     :'

           —0.02

           —0.03

           —0.04
                   0               t                  2                 3                   4

                                          OI.PL18RItJM INLATQN
                            0                             RFO      0   RF8
                                                                   35




      The figure also shows the consequences of an increase in real interest

 rates to 8 percent (the line labeled RF8 in figure 2). Clearly, such an

 increase in real interest rates, if sustained, would push Turkey in

 Latin-America level inflation rates if no additional fiscal measures were

 taken. The intersection point shifts to 150 percent, indicating that the

equilibrium inflation rate more than doubles in that case. The figure also

shows another feature of the relation between fiscal policy and inflation. At

inflation rates substantially above 200%, the RDR line starts     sloping upward:

at rates that high, increased inflation requires more rather than less fiscal

adjustment. This is due to the fact that the maximum revenue from inflation

tax in Turkey is reached at somewhat above 200 percent inflation a year. At

higher inflation rates, the demand for base money declines so fast when

inflation rises, that total inflation tax revenue actually falls, the
                                                                           higher
inflation rate notwithstanding. As a consequence, the RDR becomes a rising

rather than a declining function of inflation if the inflation rate exceeds

200 percent a year. We assume that the government follows      money growth rules
that will keep the economy at the lower rather than the higher rate
equilibrium.

     Consider next the debt substitution experiment. Under this experiment,

the goverri.ment retires foreign debt equal to 10 percent of GNP and raises the

revenue by issuing an equivalent amount of interest bearing debt domestically.

This clearly deteriorates its fiscal position, since the real interest cost of

domestic debt is 6 percentage points higher ( 12 instead of 6) than the cost

of foreign debt. Such a policy would increase the equilibrium inflation rate

to over 150% .     Clearly,   at current interest rate differentials, a policy of

retiring foreign public debt through issue of domestic debt will in         fact
deteriorate    the fiscal position of the government.
36




5    Conclusions



     We have designed a simple framework for the assessment of the consistency

between fiscal policy and the requirements imposed by financial sector reform,

external debt and medium run inflation targets. The framework draws on the

public finance approach to inflation pioneered by Phelps (1973) and is

designed with practical application in mind. The approach has relatively

modest data requirements because of its focus on consistency rather than on

intertemporal optimality. The design of an intertemporally optimal fiscal

policy requires information about parameters such as the intertemporal

elasticity of substitution, about which we do not even have ball park

estimates. Data requirements for application of the framework set up here do

not exceed routinely available financial sector and national accounts data.

Extra effort is required, however, in obtaining detailed information about the

regulatory framework for the financial sector and about the size of the actual

deficit of the public sector. The latter is defined in a comprehensive manner,

in particular inclusive of the Central Bank's profit and loss account.

     We demonstrate the usefulness of the model by using it in an empirical

analysis of the implications of financial sector reform, inflation targets and

external debt strategies for fiscal policy in Turkey. The application

demonstrates, we hope, the usefulness of this approach for the analysis of the

interactions between external debt and foreign interest rates, domestic debt

servicing costs, fiscal policy and the sustainability of medium run inflation

targets. In addition, we applied the model to an analysis of the fiscal

implications of financial sector reform measures, showing the importance of

such measures for fiscal policy and the sustainability of medium run inflation

targets.
                                                                      37




    Many extensions are possible. Introducing explicit dynamics in the
financial sector model would allow its use in year-to-year financial

programming. An even more ambitious extension would explicitly explore the

dynamics of inflation given the external debt and fiscal policy considerations

embedded in this approach, as is done in Sargent and Wallace (1982). This

would however require a much more substantial modeling effort, and would again

lead to much more demanding data requirements, thus jeopardizing empirical

applicability.

     The model was designed to provide an easily applicable quantitative

framework, of potential use in different countries without requiring too much

of an effort for country-to-country transfer. We hope that the analysis of

Turkey presented here, apart from being of interest in its own right, also

demonstrates that the current version is a useful step in that direction.



References:



Anand,    R. and S. van Wijnbergen (         1987),"Inflation    and the Financing of

     Goverrunent Expenditure: an Introductory Analysis with an Application to

     Turkey", forthcoming, the World Bank Economic Review.

Anand, R. and S. van Wijnbergen (                1988),"Export   Incentives, Exchange

     Rate Policy and Export Growth in Turkey", mimeo, World Bank.

Buiter,     W.(1983)"Measurement of the Public Sector Deficit and its
     Implications for Policy Evaluation and Design", IMF Staff Papers,

     pp 306-349.

Buiter, W. (      1985), "A   Guide to Public Sector Debt", Economic Policy, nr.l.

Cohen, D.     (   1985), "How to evaluate the Solvency of an Indebted Nation",
     Economic     Policy.
38




Cohen, D. ( 1987), "External and Domestic Debt Constraints of LDCs: a Theory

     with Numerical Applications to Brazil and Mexico", World Bank Economic

     Review.

Cumby, R. and S van Wijnbergen ( l987),"Fiscal Deficits, the Crawling Peg and

     Speculative Attacks on the Central Bank: an Empirical Analysis of

     Argentina", NBER working paper no. 2376, forthcoming, Journal of
     International Economics.

Dorrtbusch, R. (1977), t'Deficits, Capital Accumulation and Inflation", Journal

     of Money. Credit and Banking.

Drazen, A. and E. Helpman ( l987),"Stabilization Policy with EXchange Rate

     Management", Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Melnick, R. and M. Sokoler (1984), "The Government's Revenue from Money

     Creation and the Inflationary Consequences of a Decline in the Rate of

     Growth of GNP", Journal of Monetary Economics, pp 225-236.

Phelps, E. ( 1973), "Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance", Swedish

     Journal of Economics.

Sargent, T. and N. Wallace ( 1982), "Some Unpleasant Monetary Arithmetic",

     Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Quarterly Review"

van Wijnbergen, S.( l982),"Interest Rate Management in LDCs", Journal of

     Monetary Economics.

van Wijnbergen, S.    ( l984),"Macroeconomjc Effects of Changes in Bank Interest

     Rates: an Empirical Analysis of South Korea", Journal of Development

     Economics.

van Wijnbergeri, S.    ( 1987), "Fiscal Deficits, Exchange Rate Crises and

     Inflation", NBER Working Paper no 2130.
