NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERSTANDING SPATIAL VARIATION IN COVID-19 ACROSS THE UNITED STATES
Klaus Desmet
Romain Wacziarg
Working Paper 27329
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27329

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020, Revised July 2020

This is an updated version of the paper with the same title released as NBER Working Paper
#27329, released on June 8, 2020. No RAs were harmed in the writing of this paper. We thank
Ricardo Perez-Truglia for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Klaus Desmet and Romain Wacziarg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Understanding Spatial Variation in COVID-19 across the United States
Klaus Desmet and Romain Wacziarg
NBER Working Paper No. 27329
June 2020, Revised July 2020
JEL No. I18,R1
ABSTRACT
We analyze the correlates of COVID-19 cases and deaths across US counties. We consider a
wide range of correlates - population density, public transportation, age structure, nursing home
residents, connectedness to source countries, etc. - finding that these variables are important
predictors of variation in disease severity. Many of the effects are persistent - even increasing through time. We also show that there are fewer deaths and cases in counties where Donald
Trump received a high share of the vote in 2016, partly explaining the emerging political divide
over lockdown and reopening policies, but that this correlation is reversed when controlling for
shares of minority groups. The patterns we identify are meant to improve our understanding of
the drivers of the spread of COVID-19, with an eye toward helping policymakers design
responses that are sensitive to the specificities of different locations.

Klaus Desmet
Department of Economics and Cox School of Business
Southern Methodist University
3300 Dyer, Suite 301
Dallas, TX 75205
and CEPR
and also NBER
kdesmet@smu.edu
Romain Wacziarg
Anderson School of Management at UCLA
C-510 Entrepreneurs Hall
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
wacziarg@anderson.ucla.edu

1

Introduction

By April 8, 2020, 80% of US counties were covered by stay-at-home orders issued in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic. Yet 50% of US counties had experienced five or fewer documented cases of the
disease, and 72% of counties had experienced no deaths attributable to COVID-19. What is the source
of heterogeneity in cases and deaths across US counties? Should policies be sensitive to such spatial
variation? There are, we think, two legitimate views on these questions.
Under the first view, spatial variation in disease severity only reflects diﬀerences in timing. As the
disease spreads, ultimately every location in the US will have similar infection rates, similar death
rates, and similar rates of hospitalization. This view would justify uniform lockdown policies. Such
policies would slow down disease spread to allow the health care infrastructure to cope with the disease
burden.
Under the second view, spatial variation in cases and deaths reflects underlying fundamental differences across locations - population density, modes of transportation, housing arrangements, the age
distribution, health conditions, weather, etc. At any point in time, locations will continue to diﬀer
according to these characteristics. They will diﬀer no matter the number of days since onset, and the
diﬀerences will persist, perhaps even increase over time. This provides a foundation for policies that
are sensitive to local specificities, where less aﬀected places can have less stringent lockdowns or earlier
reopenings because their health care systems are less likely to become overwhelmed.
In this paper, we pinpoint the determinants of heterogeneity in COVID-19 cases and deaths,
and provide evidence strongly consistent with the second view. We document substantial spatial
heterogeneity across US counties, and identify novel and interesting correlates of variation in the
number of cases and the number of deaths across US counties. We also analyze the persistence of
these eﬀects over time, finding that many of them have stable or even increasing eﬀects as the disease
spreads.1
We examine a broad set of correlates of disease severity. We pay particular attention to population
density, using a variety of approaches to carefully measure dimensions of population density that have
been hypothesized to aﬀect the spread and severity of COVID-19. For instance, we look at the role
of public transportation, living arrangements, housing density, and the distribution of the population
at a high level of spatial resolution. We also consider the age distribution, racial composition, underlying health conditions, inequality and poverty, political orientation, among many other variables. A
strength of our approach, unlike others that study putative determinants of COVID severity one at a
time, is that we consider many potential correlates all at once.
Our analysis examines the role of these factors at various points in time, starting on March 15,
1

An emerging literature examines the determinants of local variation in COVID-19 severity, also uncovering substantial
spatial heterogeneity. Knittel and Ozaltun (2020) exploit cross-county variation in the US, like us, but only look at deaths
and do not correct for diﬀerential timing in disease onset. Leamer (2020) studies cross-county variation within California,
finding a significant eﬀect of population density. McLaren (2020) looks more specifically at the relationship between
COVID severity and racial composition, arguing that racial diﬀerences are partly related to diﬀerential prevalence of
public transit at the county level in the US. Other papers study spatial variation for other countries, such as Belgium
(Verwimp, 2020), France (Ginsburgh, Magerman and Natali, 2020) and England and Wales (Sá, 2020).

1

2020 and ending on June 29, 2020. We examine variation in COVID-19 cases and deaths on a daily
basis using two approaches. The first approach looks at the cross-section of US counties at a given
date, providing snapshots of the correlates of disease severity at particular moments in time. The
second approach looks at the cross-section putting all counties at the same stage in terms of days since
cases and deaths reached a certain threshold per capita. This allows us to correct for diﬀerences in the
timing of disease onset, to better assess if spatial variation reflects variation in the timing of disease
onset or fundamental diﬀerences between locations.
Our paper documents five major sets of facts. First, there is substantial variation in cases and
deaths across counties. Second, this variation is associated with diﬀerences in a range of variables that
capture population density, modes of transportation, urbanicity, the age structure of the population,
the proportion of the population living in nursing homes, and distance to major airports with direct
flights to countries where COVID-19 was prevalent early on. Third, the eﬀects of these correlates
persist through time, especially for variables that capture density, the presence of elderly individuals
and nursing home population. Fourth, a deeper analysis uncovers additional correlates of disease
severity: counties with many members of minority groups (especially African-Americans and Hispanics)
are disproportionately impacted, as are counties with many poor people and a higher proportion of
people with a bachelor’s degree or more. Counties that imposed stay-at-home orders early on tend to
have fewer deaths.
Fifth and finally, we document interesting facts when it comes to the political orientation of counties
diﬀerentially aﬀected by the disease. We find that the severity of the disease is politically patterned:
in a simple specification controlling only for log population, counties with a high proportion of Trump
voters in the 2016 general election have lower cases and deaths. These results may help explain the
growing political divide over policies to ease stay-at-home orders. At the same time, the Trump eﬀect
on severity weakens and is even reversed when including additional controls for the shares of minority
groups. Taking into account these factors, Trump’s vote share in 2016 positively predicts cases and
deaths. This could reflect diﬀerences in attitudes, policies and behaviors across counties on either side
of the political divide.

2

The Correlates of COVID-19 Severity

In this section, we relate our empirical specification to standard epidemiological models, provide a
brief overview of the data, and report our findings on the correlates of COVID-19 cases and deaths
across U.S. counties.

2.1

Specification

Specification consistent with the SIRD model. Standard epidemiological models, such as the
SIRD model, posit laws of motion of the number of susceptible people, infectious people, recovered
people and deceased people for a given population and a given infectious disease. These laws of
motion are governed by a few key parameters: the rate of infection, the rate of recovery and the rate
of mortality. Together, they determine, for a given population, the evolution of the number of cases
and deaths over time.
2

To fix ideas, denote by  the cumulative number of cases and by  the cumulative number of
deaths from COVID-19 in county  at time . The rate of infection,   , and the rate of death,   ,
are likely to be, to an extent, county-specific. For example, we would expect counties with higher
population density, where individuals are more likely to run into each other, to have a higher rate of
infection   . Similarly, we would expect counties with a larger share of elderly to experience higher
death rates   . Diﬀerences in these parameter values across counties imply diﬀerences in the paths
of  and  across counties. For example, a county with a higher   will have higher cumulative
cases and deaths at any point time, compared to a similar county with a lower   . This is related
to the well-known result that a higher expected number of infections from an infected individual
(i.e., a higher basic reproduction number 0 ) generates in the limit more cumulative cases and more
cumulative deaths. Some of these insights are illustrated with simulations in the recent work by
Fernández-Villaverde and Jones (2020).
The objective of this paper is to explore the importance of county-specific factors that aﬀect   and
  . These parameters aﬀect the dynamic paths of  and  , and therefore their levels at every point
in time. We are interested in accounting for diﬀerences in levels of cumulative cases and deaths at a
given point in time in the cross-section of counties. Hence we run, for each time period , county-level
regressions of the logarithm of cases or deaths on a set of potential determinants of   and   :
log( ) = 0 +


X

  + 

(1)


X

   +  

(2)

=1

and
log( ) =  0 +

=1

where  are county-level regressors that potentially aﬀect   and   (and hence  and  ) and 
and   are county-level disturbance terms. These  regressors, indexed by , include variables such as
a county’s density, age structure and health conditions.
Note that these period-by-period regressions are able to capture any functional form for the path of
the number of cumulative cases and deaths over time. As such, they are consistent with the functional
forms generated by standard epidemiological models. Indeed, to allow for maximum flexibility in
the changing relation between the county-level determinants and the disease severity, we choose a
parsimonious period-by-period cross-sectional regression framework over a more structural empirical
model that explicitly estimates the SIRD model.
The standard SIRD model assumes that individuals have equal probabilities of interacting with
each other. In that sense, it does not really capture spatial features that make some individuals (or
groups) more or less likely to interact with others. Bisin and Moro (2020) introduce a spatial SIR
model with behavioral responses that explicitly incorporates these spatial concerns. When people are
no longer matched randomly with the entire population, but are more likely to interact with people
in their vicinity, local herd immunity becomes a possibility. In this model, spatial heterogeneity in
disease severity can be magnified due to diﬀerences in modes of interaction and the spatial scale of
interaction. As such, this model suggests that diﬀerences in population density are not suﬃcient to
3

predict variation in disease severity, and that a proper analysis should take into account both modes
of interaction as well as local eﬀective density. This is precisely what we do below, by measuring a
range of variables that capture the intensity of local interactions.
Timing and the definition of cross-sectional samples. We take two approaches to define the
sample used in the cross-county analysis. The first approach is to carry out the analysis date by date.
In this case, a time period  refers to a calendar date , and we simply run regressions (1) and (2) day
by day, from March 15, 2020 to June 29, 2020. A potential issue with this approach is that part of the
cross-county variation in disease severity may be related to timing factors. To address this concern,
we control for certain factors that could aﬀect the timing of the arrival of COVID-19 to a particular
county. For instance, we control for the distance to an airport with direct international flights to
high-severity countries.
The second approach more directly addresses diﬀerential timing of onset by considering each county
at the same time elapsed since onset. Here we refer to onset as the day when a county reached a certain
threshold, either in terms of cases per capita or deaths per capita. To formally define days elapsed
 that takes a value of 1 if
since onset, start by denoting, for each county , an indicator variable 
county  has reached at least 1 case per 100 000 population on day . For each county  and day ,
the number of days since it reached that threshold is then:



=


X





=1

2
For the choice of each cross-county sample, we then set 
 to a fixed number . That is, the first
sample consists of all counties one day after reaching the threshold, the second sample consists of all
counties two days after reaching the threshold, and so on. Since each regression compares counties
that all have passed the same threshold of per capita cases a fixed number of days before, this limits
the eﬀect of diﬀerential timing of onset across locations.

Similarly, we define the time elapsed since reaching the threshold of 05 deaths per 100 000 populaP

tion. For each county  and day , the number of days since it reached that threshold is 
=1  ,
 =
 is an indicator variable taking a value of 1 if county  has reached at least 05 deaths per
where 
100 000 population on day . Here as well, each regression compares counties that have passed the
deaths per capita threshold a fixed number of days before.
Treatment of zeros. Counties with zero cases and zero deaths are particularly prevalent early in
the sample period. Taking logs of cases and deaths amounts to ignoring the extensive margin. To
address this shortcoming, we consider the log of one plus cases or deaths (resulting in a balanced
sample of 3 137 counties). For June 29, 2020, for instance, there were 3 045 counties with strictly
positive cases, and 1 934 counties with strictly positive deaths. Including the extensive margin gives
2




For instance, when fixing  = 5, the sample consists of each county on the specific calendar date  when it reached
= 5.

4

us the following specifications:
log(1 +  ) = 0 +


X

  + 

(3)


X

  + 

(4)

=1

log(1 +  ) = 0 +

=1

State fixed eﬀects. Other policy choices and certain omitted variables may aﬀect cumulative cases
and deaths. To partly address this concern, in some specifications we include state fixed eﬀects. In
addition to picking up diﬀerences across states that go beyond the other variables we are already
controlling for, we are also interested in the magnitude of these eﬀects per se. However, we do not
include state fixed eﬀects in all specifications, as they absorb a lot of variation that we would prefer
to explicitly capture.
Summary of specifications. To summarize, we have eight specifications. There are two outcomes:
cases and deaths. There are two ways to construct the sample: by calendar date, using the log of
one plus cases or deaths as dependent variables; or placing each county at the same time since onset
for both deaths and cases (the latter excludes counties with zero deaths and cases by construction,
and additionally excludes counties where the threshold defining onset has not been crossed).3 Finally,
there is another specification choice: whether we include state fixed-eﬀects or not.

2.2

Data

We use daily data on COVID-19 reported cases and deaths collected at the county level by the New
York Times. Appendix Table A1 (Panel A) contains summary statistics for various metrics of cases and
deaths constructed from these data, revealing substantial variation across counties. To our knowledge
these are the best data available at the county level, yet it is important to acknowledge several possible
data challenges. These are particularly acute for cases, and early in the period, since reported cases
depend on testing, and testing was initially far from uniformly and widely prevalent. Data issues are
not absent from deaths data either, as reporting standards vary across jurisdictions and adjudicating
whether a death was caused by COVID-19 involves an element of judgment. An alternative would be
to use data based on excess mortality, but these are not available at the county level on a daily basis.4
Regarding measurement error, we note the following: First, if errors are random, they will raise the
standard error of the regression without creating bias. However, if both testing and the reporting of
deaths are systematically correlated with the included explanatory variables, we will need to interpret
the corresponding estimates carefully as reflecting eﬀects on both underlying severity and on reporting
3

In the Appendix, we also consider a sample based on calendar dates, using the log of cases or deaths, i.e. only the
intensive margin.
4

The National Vital Statistics System of the National Center for Health Statistics reports weekly excess deaths at the
state level: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/vsrr/covid19/excess_deaths.htm. For other examples of excess deaths
estimates, see New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene COVID-19 Response Team (2020) and Banerjee
et al. (2020).

5

of cases and deaths. Second, to the extent that testing capacity varies at the state level, including
state fixed eﬀects may in part correct for systematic measurement error due to uneven testing intensity.
Third, early in the spread of the disease, testing may also be more strongly targeted toward individuals
showing symptoms, resulting is artificially high case fatality rates (  =deaths/cases). To address
this possibility we reran our baseline regressions removing from the sample observations with   
01 - the upper tail of the distribution of  , most likely to be severely aﬀected by selection in testing
(Section 2.3 discusses the results). Fourth, testing and reporting regimes improve through time, so the
passage of time should make measurement error in cases and deaths less relevant, as locations ramp
up testing and fine tune the reporting of deaths.
We also gathered a wide range of county-level indicators to be used as independent variables. Variable definitions and sources are provided in the Data Appendix, summary statistics are in Appendix
Table A1 (Panel B) and most of the variables are displayed in map form in Appendix Figure A1.

2.3

The Correlates of Spatial Variation in COVID-19 Severity

Tables 1 and 2 report estimates of all eight specifications outlined above. Table 1 considers a crosssection of counties as of June 29, 2020 (the last date in our sample). Table 2 reports estimates
synchronizing the sample in terms of days since onset. For cases, we use 70 days since onset as the
baseline and for deaths we choose 60 days since onset. These choices are motivated by a trade-oﬀ: by
choosing a small number of days since onset, we would obtain a large cross-section of counties, less
likely to be selected, but we would consider counties very close to onset, where the eﬀect of fundamental
determinants may not yet have emerged. Instead, by choosing a larger number of days since onset
we would limit the number of counties in the sample in ways that are potentially selected, since only
early onset counties are likely to appear. Our choice reflects this trade-oﬀ, and leads to a relatively
large sample for both cases and deaths (respectively 2 755 and 1 446 counties).
We consider a set of eleven baseline correlates. The first is log population, which acts as a scaling
variable. Its inclusion implies that the other estimates can be interpreted as the determinants of cases
and deaths in per capita terms.
Density measures. A first group of regressors relates to population density, since living in closer
proximity is likely to imply a higher infection rate . Given the potential importance of density, we use
several variables. One is simply population density as measured by the county’s population divided
by its land area. This may not adequately capture eﬀective density, since some counties may have
extensive land areas, in spite of most people living in fairly dense areas. We therefore complement
simple density with variables that indicate whether a county is classified by the National Center for
Health Statistics as a large metro area or as a medium or small metro area. In addition, we also
include the share of the population that commutes by public transit, a factor that has been argued to
be an important spreader of the virus (Harris, 2020).
Results are consistent across all specifications in showing the importance of density as a determinant
of severity: all four density measures are jointly statistically highly significant and positively associated
with the number of cases in all specifications. Looking at variables individually, we find that counties

6

with a higher proportions of individuals using public transit have significantly higher severity, with
large standardized magnitudes particularly for deaths (12 − 16%). Magnitudes are sometimes reduced
when including state fixed eﬀects, but remain broadly consistent. Deaths are higher in large metro
counties than in medium or small metro counties, which in turn tend to be higher than in the excluded
category of non-urban counties. The eﬀect of log population density itself tends to be positive, but
is not consistently significant across specifications. This finding highlights the importance of properly
measuring eﬀective density using a variety of metrics, a task we further pursue in Section 4.1, where
we include additional measures of eﬀective density, based on housing arrangements and on the density
experienced by an average individual in the square kilometer grid cell where they live.
Age and nursing homes. A second group of regressors relates to the age structure of the population. Given the much higher mortality rate among the elderly, we control for the share of the
population aged 75 and above. It is important to note that the age gradients of cases and deaths may
be quite diﬀerent from each other (Hay et al., 2020, report data on the age gradient of infections rather
than deaths). As is often observed, the elderly living in nursing home may be particularly susceptible
(Barnett and Grabowski, 2020). We therefore also include a county-level measure of nursery home
residents divided by population.
We find interesting results. Cases are negatively associated with the percentage of people aged
75 and older. This may reflect diﬀerences in lifestyles between counties with diﬀerent age structures.
For instance, places with a large share of retired individuals may feature fewer places (bars, stadiums)
where the disease spreads rapidly. On the other hand, we find no consistent pattern regarding the
correlation between age structure and deaths. It is well established that deaths from COVID-19
disproportionately occur among older individuals, but this does not necessarily imply that counties
with a greater proportion of elderly persons experience a higher number of deaths, after controlling
for other determinants. Indeed, as discussed, counties with a greater share of people aged 75 and
above have a lower number of cases. When it comes to the share of the population in nursing homes,
we find positive and economically large partial correlations especially for deaths, and especially when
isolating the intensive margins of the disease. For instance in columns (3) of Tables 2 and A2, the
standardized betas on the share of nursing home residents are respectively 154% and 136%. This
finding is consistent with the idea that once a county is aﬀected by the pandemic, its nursing homes
can quickly become powder kegs, and account for large shares of county-wide deaths.
Other correlates. A third group of regressors include other factors that have been hypothesized to
aﬀect the onset and severity of the pandemic. Early reports suggested that temperature may play a
role in the spread of the disease, so we include a county-level measure of the average temperature in
February, March and April (using data from China, Qi et al., 2020, suggested that higher temperatures
slowed the disease, but Xie and Zhu, 2020, find a flatter temperature gradient). We find evidence
that locations with higher temperatures in those months experienced more cases and deaths, with
sometimes large standardized magnitudes. The implications for the evolution of the disease in the
summer months are unclear, since both the absolute level of temperature and its spatial distribution
will change.

7

The onset of the pandemic in specific locations in the US may have been related to connectivity
with high-severity countries (Wells et al., 2020). We construct a measure of the distance to any airport
with direct flights to one of the top-5 countries with coronavirus cases on March 15, 2020 (China, South
Korea, Iran, Italy and Spain). This variable bears a consistently negative relationship with cases and
deaths.
Among the remaining correlates, we first include median household income, a standard metric
to capture diﬀerences in economic well-being across counties. We do not find a robust eﬀect of
median income across specifications. Second, a measure of social capital from Rupasingha, Goetz and
Freshwater (2006), bears a positive relationship with cases and deaths in Table 1, but this result does
not hold up when looking at the intensive margin only (Table 2).5
State fixed-eﬀects. Tables 1 and 2 report results with or without state fixed eﬀects. Appendix
Figures A2 and A3 graphically display estimates on the state fixed eﬀects, ordered by size, for the
specifications of columns (2) and (4) of Table 1. These plots reveal that, after controlling for the eleven
baseline set of correlates of disease severity, some states have lower or higher cases or deaths. We find
that counties in Hawaii and California, for instance, have lower severity than expected, while counties
in Louisiana, Connecticut or New Jersey have higher severity than expected. These diﬀerences could
reveal idiosyncrasies that are hard to capture using additional regressors varying at the county level
(for instance the fact that Hawaii is an island, or that New Jersey is close and tightly integrated with
New York, a major center of the disease in the US). They could also capture some omitted factors
excluded from our parsimonious specification. At any rate the inclusion of state fixed-eﬀects does not
seem to greatly aﬀect the patterns uncovered regarding the measured determinants of disease severity.
Isolating the intensive margin. In Table A2, we consider the determinants of log cases and log
deaths as of June 29, 2020, i.e. counties with zero cases or deaths drop from the sample. The results
confirm the findings discussed above, indeed Table A2 resembles Table 1. Results diﬀer a little more
for deaths than for cases, because by June 29 most counties in the US reported positive cases, whereas
over 1 000 counties still did not report a single death. Diﬀerences between Tables 1 and A2 are
expected to fade as time goes by as the samples will overlap more and more.
Incidence of high CFR counties. Some counties in our sample exhibit very high case fatality rates
(CFR), especially early in the period. This is perhaps because testing was limited, and selected to apply
mostly to individuals showing severe COVID-19 symptoms. As testing became more widespread, this
source of bias was likely reduced. To examine the robustness of the results to the inclusion of counties
where testing was biased in this manner, we rerun our baseline regressions removing observations with
   10%. This also implies removing counties with zero cases. Comparing Tables A2 and 2 to
Tables A3 and A4 (the sample restriction applies to the latter), we find only very minor diﬀerences in
the estimates. These results mitigate the concern that bias in testing only symptomatic individuals
5

For a further investigation of the ambiguous role of social capital as a determinant of social distancing, see Ding et
al. (2020), who find a negative eﬀect of community activities but a positive eﬀect of voter turnout. Durante, Guiso and
Gulino (2020), across Italian provinces, find that mobility declined more in areas with higher civic capital.

8

drives our results. Moreover, as time goes by and testing becomes less and less selected, the concern
should also be alleviated.

3

Persistence in the Determinants of COVID-19 Heterogeneity

The foregoing discussion concerned the cross-section of disease severity at a specific date (June 29) or
at a constant time since onset. These eﬀects oﬀer a snapshot of spatial variation, but do not describe
how the partial correlations that we calculated evolve over time. As the disease progresses, do these
sources of heterogeneity in severity persist?
To examine this question, we estimate our model daily and plot estimated coeﬃcients and their
confidence bounds through time. It is important to emphasize that this also represents a time-slice
of the eﬀects. Indeed, we do not know how they will further change past the last date in our dataset
(currently June 29) but we will update the results as more data becomes available.
Evolution between March and June 2020. Figure 1 displays coeﬃcient estimates from the
specifications of equations (3) and (4), with 95% confidence intervals. The sample of counties is the
same over time (3 137 counties) and the dates run from March 15 to June 29, 2020. In most cases, we
see an initial period where coeﬃcient magnitudes move away from zero. This is natural since there is
not much variation to explain early on, and there is randomness in locations that got the virus early.
One important exception is the variable capturing distance to international airports with connections
to the top-5 COVID incidence countries as of March 15, 2020. This variable predicts the cross-section
of cases from the get-go, as we would expect.
Many of the 11 regressors display increasing absolute eﬀects over time. When focusing on the eﬀect
of density on cases, it grew over time until about day 80, and has been slightly weakening since. The
other three measures of density display weakening eﬀects. Public transit usage and urban categories
display persistent positive eﬀects of deaths. Looking at all four measures of density jointly, we see
that there is so far no indication that density is disappearing as a predictor of the cumulative number
of cases and deaths.
Turning to the elderly population, our results echo what we found previously: the share of the
population aged 75 and above is negatively and persistently correlated with cases, but the earlier
positive correlation with deaths has faded since early May. As for the share of the population living
in nursing homes, its impact is positive and rising over time, both for cases and for deaths.
Other correlates deserve a brief mention. The distance to the closest international airport with
direct flight connections to high-incidence countries is negatively correlated with both cases and deaths,
and those correlations are stable over time, showing the persistent eﬀect of initial conditions. Median
household income initially bore a slight positive correlation with cases, which disappeared gradually
since early May, but it is uncorrelated with deaths. A last correlate worth discussing is log population.
We observe that the elasticity of cases to population rises over time and reaches one by late June,
suggesting no scale eﬀects. For deaths, the elasticity does not reach one by the end of the period,
suggesting that there still exists a negative scale eﬀect on per capita deaths.

9

Overall, many of the location-specific characteristics that aﬀect the rate of infection and the rate
of death, such as population density and age composition, display persistent and sometimes increasing
(absolute) correlations with cumulative cases and deaths. As such, the evidence so far suggests that
the severity of COVID-19 is unlikely to equalize across space. Whether these findings hold up as the
pandemic further unfolds remains an open question.
Evolution since onset. One possible issue with Figure 1 is that the coeﬃcients may partly pick up
the diﬀerential timing of onset across diﬀerent types of counties. For example, if low-density counties
are hit later by COVID-19 than high-density counties, then their cumulative cases or deaths will tend
to be lower on any given date. Of course, if timing were the main diﬀerence between low and high
density counties, then the coeﬃcient on density should be declining over time, as disease severity in low
density counties catches up with high density counties. Since many of the regressors display increasing
absolute eﬀects over time, it is unlikely that diﬀerential timing is an important driver of our results.
However, to limit any impact of diﬀerential timing, we fix the sample in terms of days since onset.
Figure A4 displays how coeﬃcient estimates evolve as a function of days since onset. To grasp how
to read these graphs, a concrete example may help. The public transit graph in Figure A4A plots the
coeﬃcients on public transportation from 90 diﬀerent regressions, one for each of the diﬀerent time
lags since a county reached the threshold of 1 case per 100 000. Increasing the number of days since
onset decreases the sample size because fewer counties meet the criterion for passing the threshold
early on. We illustrate this changing sample size among the graphs displayed in Figure A4. As can be
seen, there are over 3 000 counties in the sample of counties one day after passing the case threshold,
but there are about 2 200 in the sample of counties 90 days after onset.
As before, we find strong evidence of persistence regarding many determinants of cases and deaths.
For example, the importance of density for cases grows as the pandemic runs its course in a given
location, and public transit shows a persistent eﬀect on both cases and deaths. As for nursing home
residents, its correlation with cases and deaths is also persistent and increasing in the days since
onset. The only determinants of both cases and deaths that seem persistently insignificant are median
income (a variable that did not bear a robust relationship with cases and deaths in Section 2) and
social capital. As we would expect, in the early days since onset coeﬃcients on the diﬀerent regressors
tend to be close to zero.6 In sum, whether defining the sample by calendar dates or by days since
onset, we find substantial persistence in the determinants of spatial variation in disease severity.

4

Further Investigation of Specific Correlates

4.1

Eﬀective Density

Our baseline results indicate an important role for density in determining the severity of COVID-19.
This should come as no surprise: as with any other infectious disease, contact between susceptible and
6

In the limit, on the first day of reaching the threshold, we are comparing counties that are identical in terms of
the variable we are trying to explain. In the absence of any cross-sectional variation, we would not expect any of the
regressors to explain anything.

10

infected individuals is a key determinant of the spread of the disease. However, the actual degree of
contact between people is not straightforward to measure. The four indicators already included in the
baseline specification may not fully capture relevant dimensions of density.
In Table A5, we continue to control for the baseline set of 11 determinants, but add three additional
measures aimed at better capturing the likely intensity of contact between people. Two of these relate
to housing and living arrangements: the share of individuals living in multi-unit housing structures and
the number of people per household. A third measures the average density a random individual of a
county experiences in the square kilometer around him. We refer to this variable as a county’s "eﬀective
local density". Columns (1) and (4) of Table A5 report coeﬃcient estimates for specifications where
we add the controls for living arrangements. We see that multi-unit housing and the size of households
are positively associated with both cases and deaths.7 Columns (2) and (5) add eﬀective local density:
its correlation with cases is statistically insignificant, whereas its correlation with deaths is negative
and significant. For reasons of further comparison, columns (3) and (6) drop housing arrangements
and public transportation, and only maintain simple density and eﬀective local density. As can be
seen, eﬀective local density now displays a positive and statistically very significant relation with both
cases and deaths. Overall, this suggests that a county’s eﬀective local density matters, but that its
eﬀect may operates through dense housing and public transit.

4.2

Other Factors

Race. Table A6 explores the possible role of race. It reports four diﬀerent specifications: columns
(1) and (3) report regressions for cases and deaths, based on a cross-section of counties as of June
29, whereas columns (2) and (4) also report regressions for cases and deaths, but now based on a
cross-section of counties 70 days after onset (for cases) and 40 days after onset (for deaths). To the
baseline regressors, we add measures of the racial composition of a county by controlling for the shares
of African Americans, Hispanics, American Indians and Asians, with the excluded category being the
share of Whites and others. The results display a strong and consistent positive correlation between
the share of African Americans and the share of Hispanics with both the number of cases and the
number of deaths. The share of American Indians exhibits a positive correlation with deaths, but
not with cases, whereas the share of Asians shows a weaker correlation with COVID-19 incidence. In
terms of magnitudes, the share of African Americans stands out with large standardized  coeﬃcients
between 25% and 33%. Overall these results confirm concerns that the COVID-19 pandemic has a
disparate eﬀect on various racial groups.
Education. Table A7 analyzes whether the level of education may be a source of heterogeneity in
disease severity across counties. We take the same four specifications as in the previous table with
the same baseline regressors, and add two controls for the level of education: the share of a county’s
population that has a high school degree or more and the share of a county’s population that has a
bachelor’s degree or more (the excluded variable is the share of people with less than a high school
7

Public transit continues to be highly significant for log(1+deaths), but its coeﬃcient in the regression for log(1+cases)
is sensitive to the inclusion of the percentage of housing units in multi-unit structures. Indeed, the percentage of people
who use public transportation to commute is highly correlated with dense housing arrangements ( = 06).

11

degree). We find a non-monotonic relationship between average educational attainment, and disease
severity. Counties with large proportions of high school graduates fare best, followed by counties with
a large share of individuals without a high school degree. Places with many college graduates fare the
worst. Hence, we find little evidence that more disadvantaged locations (measured by education) fare
worse. These correlations, while informative, remain open for interpretation.
Health. Table A8 investigates whether underlying health conditions or the quality of health care have
an impact on outcomes. As measures of underlying health issues, we take the share of the population
that smokes and the share of the population that is obese. As measures of quality of health care,
we take the risk-adjusted 30-day mortality rates for heart attacks, heart failure and pneumonia. The
share of smokers and obese people does not seem to be a consistent driver of heterogeneity in COVID19 incidence across counties, though we find some evidence that the share of smokers is associated
with lower cases and the share of obese persons is positively correlated with deaths. Turning to
risk-adjusted mortality rates, we find some evidence that risk-adjusted mortality from pneumonia is
positively correlated with deaths, suggesting a role for the quality of the health infrastructure (on
the other hand the signs of the correlations on risk-adjusted mortality from heart attacks and heart
failures often have the opposite signs from what is expected, and are small in magnitude). These
results tend to be sensitive to the inclusion of more controls, as we show using a more comprehensive
specification discussed below. In sum, we find only weak evidence that often-hypothesized health
drivers of COVID-19 severity - either the prevalence of underlying health conditions or the quality
of the health care infrastructure - are first-order determinants of cross-county variation in cases and
deaths.
Inequality and Poverty. Table A9 reports results of an in-depth investigation of the role of inequality and poverty. In the baseline regressions we already included median household income. We
add three measures that capture inequality and poverty: the Gini index within the bottom 99%, the
poverty rate, and the top 1% income share. The share of top incomes is insignificant, the Gini index
among the lower 99% is positive in column (1) but not in the other specifications, and poverty positively predicts severity measured both by deaths and cases. The results are quantitatively meaningful:
for example, the poverty rate shows standardized coeﬃcients in the range of 16% to 28% when considering its impact on deaths. In sum, we find evidence that poverty (but not inequality) is a significant
determinant of deaths.

4.3

Comprehensive Specification

In Tables A5-A9 we entered new categories of variables one by one. Do the main results hold up
when all the putative determinants of cases and deaths are entered jointly? To answer this question
we examine results from a comprehensive specification that includes not only the baseline set of 11
correlates of disease severity, but also most of the additional regressors considered in Tables A5-A9
(two exceptions are the share of people who are obese and the share of people who smoke, because
their inclusion would result in the loss of close to one third of the sample). The results are reported
in Table A10. The estimates broadly conform to the results obtained earlier: our various measures of

12

density are positively related to severity, as are the share of county residents living in nursing homes
and the shares of African-Americans and Hispanics.

4.4

Stay-At-Home Orders

So far, we focused on time-invariant county determinants of the incidence of COVID-19. Some determinants may change over time. The prime example here is stay-at-home orders. These are aimed
at reducing the rate of infection, and hence slowing down the increase in cases and deaths. Needless
to say, identifying the causal eﬀect of stay-at-home orders is fraught with diﬃculty, since the local
severity of the disease is likely to prompt earlier policy intervention.8 Arguably, such endogeneity
concerns are somewhat mitigated when fixing the sample in terms of days since onset.9 In that case,
we are comparing counties with identical initial conditions in terms of cases or deaths per capita,
but possibly diﬀerent dates at which stay-at-home orders were imposed. Table A11 focuses only on
specifications where the sample is chosen based on reaching a specific threshold of cases and deaths,
as defined previously. We consider specifications with or without state fixed-eﬀects, to exploit withinstate variation in the timing of stay-at-home orders. We include a variable describing the number
of days since the first stay-at-home order applied to a particular county. As of April 30, all but 631
counties were under stay-at-home orders. Among those, the average number of days since the order
was issued was 26, and extended up to 44 days. We find no significant eﬀect of this variable on cases,
but a statistically significant and economically meaningful negative eﬀect on deaths.10
Figure A5 depicts the coeﬃcient estimates of the stay-at-home orders, defined as the number of
days since the first stay-at-home order was implemented in a county. The regression specifications are
identical to those in Figure A4, the diﬀerence being that we control for stay-at-home orders. There is
a slight positive correlation between the length of stay-at-home orders and the number of cases, but
it is only statistically significant during the first ten days after reaching the threshold of 1 case per
100 000. In contrast, there is a negative correlation between the duration of stay-at-home orders and
the number of deaths, and it remains statistically significant during much of the time period. The
correlation fades to zero past day 70 or so, because the relatively small set of counties that had an
early onset of deaths also tended to adopt stay-at-home orders early on. Thus, there is not much
variation in days since stay-at-home-orders for that small and selected sample of counties.11
8

Indeed, optimal lockdown policies are likely to diﬀer across locations. For an in-depth investigation of optimal spatial
lockdown policies, see Fajgelbaum et al. (2020).
9

Of course, the concern is not eliminated. For two counties with identical days since onset, some unobserved factor
may drive both disease severity and the decision to issue stay-at-home orders. Since the policy is not randomly assigned,
the endogeneity concern is hard to fully address.
10

Several studies look at the eﬀectiveness of lockdown policies. Jinjarak et al. (2020) show that countries with stricter
policies to limit social contact had later and less pronounced disease peaks. Dave et al. (2020) adopt an event study
approach finding large eﬀects especially among early adopters and dense locations. Kapoor et al. (2020) use rainfall
shocks to identify the eﬀect of staying at home, finding that social distancing has a persistent negative eﬀect on cases and
deaths across US counties. Lin and Meissner (2020) find that stay-at-home orders reduced mobility but not COVID-19
cases, looking at counties on either side of state borders.
11

For instance, when the number of days since reaching 05 deaths per 100 000 population is 80, there are only 959
counties in the sample, only 90 of which have no stay-at-home orders in place.

13

5

Spatial Patterns and Political Orientation

Many commentators have observed that there exists a political divide over attitudes toward the
COVID-19 pandemic (see for instance Pew Research Center, 2020). In turn, these disagreements
may reflect underlying diﬀerences in disease severity across locations with diﬀerent political orientations. Weniger and Ou (2020) and Kolko (2020a, 2020b) observe that the disease is more severe in
Democratic-leaning states and counties than in Republican-leaning locations.12 Does severity indeed
vary according to local political orientation? In this subsection, we try to better understand the
political divide in disease severity.
We start by observing that indeed, locations that voted for Donald Trump in the 2016 presidential
election had lower cases and deaths on June 29, 2020. Column (1) of Table 3 Panel A reports that
the coeﬃcient on the Trump vote share is negative, statistically significant and large in magnitude
(with a standardized beta of 11%) in a regression explaining log(1+cases), controlling only for log
county population. Column (1) of Table 3 Panel B finds the same for deaths (with a standardized
beta of 151%). The left-side panels of Figure 2 confirm these findings and extend them over time by
plotting the average residuals from regressions of log(1+cases) and log(1+deaths) on log population,
since March 15, for jurisdictions with diﬀerent political orientations.13 We see a large political divide
for both cases and deaths, which persists over time and even increases when it comes to deaths.
Obviously, these patterns do not represent a causal eﬀect of political orientation on disease severity.
Rather, they simply suggest that disease severity is geographically patterned according to political
orientation. These results may help explain the observed political fault lines over the desirability of
lockdown policies, with Republican-leaning locations seemingly much more eager to reopen early and
suspend the lockdowns as compared to Democratic-leaning locations.
What might explain this spatial pattern? The remaining columns in Panels A and B of Table 3
investigate this question using the cross-section of counties as of June 29.14 By including our baseline
set of control variables (those in Tables 1 and 2), the second column of Table 3 displays a statistically
unchanged eﬀect of Trump vote share. However, the third column adds the shares of various racial
groups (African-Americans, Hispanics, Asians, Native Americans), leading to a sign flip in the Trump
vote share eﬀect. Finally the fourth column adds all the variables included in the comprehensive
specification discussed in Section 4.3, leading still to a positive eﬀect of the Trump vote share. To
further explore these patterns, the right-side panels of Figure 2 display the average residuals from
12

Of course, preferences for lockdown policies are not solely determined by spatial patterns of disease severity. Ideological predilections and media influence may also play a role in the emerging political divide over the response to
COVID-19. See for instance Bursztyn et al. (2020) and Allcott et al. (2020).
13

Red counties are defined as those with a 2016 Trump vote share greater than 55%, blue counties are those with a
Trump vote share smaller than 45%, and purple counties represent the balance.
14

Table A12 carries out similar regressions using the set of counties 70 days from onset (for cases - Panel A) and
60 days from onset (for deaths - Panel B). Column 4 of this table additionally includes a regressor representing the
number of days a stay-at-home order has been in place. We find results very similar to those in Table 3. The inclusion
of length of stay-at-home orders does not reduce the coeﬃcient on Trump vote share, suggesting that it is not because
Trump-leaning counties put in place stay-at-home orders at diﬀerent times that they experienced more cases and deaths.
Beyond policies, it could be individual behaviors to avoid infection that diﬀer across political orientations.

14

the comprehensive specification, by county political orientation (red, purple and blue). We uncover
interesting patterns. We first confirm that at the end of the sample period, Democratic counties
experience lower disease severity than Republican counties, consistent with the regressions in the
fourth column of Table 3. We also show that this lower severity is the result of a reversal: even
after controlling for an exhaustive set of determinants of disease severity, the average residual in the
regression for log(1+cases) is higher in Democratic-leaning counties than in Republican-leaning ones
until about April 15, and in the regression for log(1+deaths) until May 15. This pattern reversed
after these dates in such a way that Republican areas, controlling for other determinants of cases and
deaths, now experience worse disease severity.
We can only speculate as to why the sign of the Trump eﬀect flipped when adding more controls, and
why the time pattern of partisan severity was also reversed over time. It is possible that public policies
and individual behaviors regarding the spread of COVID-19 in Republican-leaning areas became more
lax relative to Democratic-leaning areas, so that after controlling for major determinants of disease
severity like racial composition and eﬀective density, areas that voted for Donald Trump actually
started to fare worse.

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we study heterogeneity in the severity of the COVID-19 pandemic across counties of
the United States. We explore a wide range of correlates of severity jointly, in a unified estimation
framework that allows for the inclusion of state fixed eﬀects, controls for the diﬀerential timing of
disease onset in various locations, and accommodates variation on both the intensive and extensive
margins of cases and deaths. We document a strong and persistent role for population density, captured
using a variety of metrics, as a correlate of cases and deaths. We argue that it is important to measure
density correctly, using indicators of urbanicity, prevalent modes of transportation, household size
and housing arrangements, and local eﬀective density. We also show that the age structure and the
proportion of people living in nursing homes are powerful and persistent predictors of disease severity,
particularly the number of deaths. We explore correlations with a wide range of additional variables,
finding for instance that minorities are more severely aﬀected by the pandemic. Controlling for the
timing of disease onset, more days spent under stay-at-home orders negatively predicts the number of
deaths across counties. Finally, we find that areas with a large share of Trump voters are less severely
aﬀected by COVID-19, but that this eﬀect is reversed when controlling for variables that are correlated
with both Trump support and disease severity, in particular the shares of diﬀerent minority groups.
Once controlling for these, Trump-oriented counties are actually more severely aﬀected by the disease.
Many of these eﬀects rise between March 15 and June 29, and remain statistically significant as of the
end of our sample period. Time will tell whether this persistence persists.
Overall, our results suggest that policymakers should be sensitive to the specificities of diﬀerent
locations when designing policy responses to the spread of COVID-19, and their unwinding.

15

References
[1] Allcott, H., L. Boxell, J. C. Conway, M. Gentzkow, M. Thaler, D. Y. Yang (2020), "Polarization
and Public Health: Partisan Diﬀerences in Social Distancing during the Coronavirus Pandemic,"
NBER Working Paper #26946.
[2] Banerjee, A., L. Pasea, S. Harris, A. Gonzalez-Izquierdo, A. Torralbo, L. Shallcross, M. Noursadeghi, D. Pillay, N. Sebire, C. Holmes, C. Pagel, W. Keong Wong, C. Langenberg, B. Williams,
S. Denaxas, and H. Hemingway (2020), "Estimating Excess 1-year Mortality Associated with the
COVID-19 Pandemic According to Underlying Conditions and Age: A Population-Based Cohort
Study," The Lancet, May 12.
[3] Barnett, M. L. and D. C. Grabowski (2020), "Nursing Homes Are Ground Zero for COVID-19
Pandemic," JAMA Health Forum, 1(3): e200369-e200369.
[4] Bisin, A. and A. Moro (2020), "Learning Epidemiology by Doing: The Empirical Implications of
a Spatial SIR Model with Behavioral Responses", Working Paper, New York University.
[5] Bursztyn, L., A. Rao, C. Roth, D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2020), "Misinformation During a Pandemic", NBER Working Paper #27417.
[6] Dave, D., A. I. Friedson, K. Matsuzawa, J. J. Sabia (2020), "When Do Shelter-in-Place Orders
Fight COVID-19 Best? Policy Heterogeneity Across States and Adoption Time", NBER Working
Paper #27091.
[7] Desmet, K. and R. Wacziarg (2020), "Understanding Spatial Variation in COVID-19 Across the
United States", NBER Working Paper #27329, released on June 8.
[8] Ding, W., R. Levine, C. Lin, W. Xie (2020), "Social Distancing and Social Capital: Why U.S.
Counties Respond Diﬀerently to COVID-19", NBER Working Paper #27393.
[9] Fernández-Villaverde, J. and C. I. Jones (2020), "Estimating and Simulating a SIRD Model of
COVID-19 for Many Countries, States, and Cities," NBER Working Paper #27128.
[10] Ginsburgh, V., Magerman, G., Natali, I. (2020), "COVID-19 and the Role of Economic Conditions
in French Regional Departments", Working Paper, ECARES, June.
[11] Harris, J. E. (2020), "The Subways Seeded the Massive Coronavirus Epidemic in New York City,"
NBER Working Paper #27021.
[12] Hay, J. A., D. J. Haw, W. P. Hanage, C. Jessica, E. Metcalf and M. J. Mina (2020), "Implications
of the Age Profile of the Novel Coronavirus," Web Link.
[13] Israel, A., I. Feldhamer, A. Lahad, D. Levin-Zamir, G. Lavie (2020), "Smoking and
the Risk of COVID-19 in a Large Observational Population Study", MedRxiv, doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.20118877.
[14] Jinjarak, Y., R. Ahmed, S. Nair-Desai, W. Xin, and J. Aizenman (2020), "Accounting for Global
COVID-19 Diﬀusion Patterns," NBER Working Paper #27185.
[15] Kapoor, R., H. Rho, K. Sangha, B. Sharma, A. Shenoy, G. Xu (2020), "God is in the Rain:
The Impact of Rainfall-Induced Early Social Distancing on COVID-19 Outbreaks", COVID Economics, Vetted and Real-Time Papers, 24(1).
16

[16] Knittel, C. R., B. Ozaltun (2020), "What Does and Does Not Correlate with COVID-19 Death
Rates", NBER Working Paper #27391, released on June 22.
[17] Kolko, J. (2020a), "The Changing Geography of COVID19", Blog Post (Web Link), June 21.
[18] Kolko, J. (2020b), "Where COVID19 Death Rates are Highest", Blog Post (Web Link), April 15,
updated on May 13.
[19] Leamer, E. (2020), "What Explains the Large Diﬀerences in Rates of COVID-19 Infections Among
California Counties?" Working Paper, UCLA.
[20] Lin, Z. and C. M. Meissner (2020), "Health vs. Wealth? Public Health Policies and the Economy
During Covid-19", NBER Working Paper #27099.
[21] McLaren, J. (2020), "Racial Disparity in COVID-19 Deaths: Seeking Economic Roots with Census
Data", NBER Working Paper #27407, released on June 22.
[22] New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene COVID-19 Response Team (2020),
"Preliminary Estimate of Excess Mortality During the COVID-19 Outbreak - New York City,
March 11-May 2, 2020," MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep, 69: 603-605.
[23] Pew Research Center (2020), "Republicans, Democrats Move Even Further Apart in Coronavirus
Concerns", Web Link, June 25.
[24] Qi, H., S. Xiao, R. Shi, M. P. Ward, Y. Chen, W. Tu, Q. Su, W. Wang, X. Wang and Z.
Zhang (2020), "COVID-19 Transmission in Mainland China is Associated with Temperature and
Humidity: A Time-Series Analysis," Science of The Total Environment, 728(1).
[25] Rupasingha, A., S. J. Goetz and D. Freshwater (2006, with updates), "The Production of Social
Capital in US Counties," Journal of Socio-Economics, 35, 83-101.
[26] Sá, F. (2020), "Socioeconomic Determinants of COVID-19 Infections and Mortality: Evidence
from England and Wales", CEPR Discussion Paper #14781, May 19.
[27] Verwimp, P. (2020), "The Spread of COVID-19 in Belgium: a Municipality-Level Analysis",
ECARES Working Paper #2020-25, released in July.
[28] Weniger, B. G. and C.-Y. Ou (2020), "Straight Talk from ex-CDC for the Long Slog Ahead",
Blog Post (Web Link ), May 3.
[29] Wells, C. R., P. Sah, S. M. Moghadas, A. Pandey, A. Shoukat, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, L. A. Meyers,
B. H. Singer and A. P. Galvani (2020), "Impact of International Travel and Border Control
Measures on the Global Spread of the Novel 2019 Coronavirus Outbreak," Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 117(13): 7504-7509. Web Link.
[30] Xie, J. and X. Zhu (2020), "Association Between Ambient Temperature and COVID-19 Infection
in 122 Cities from China," Science of The Total Environment, 724(1).

17

Table 1 - OLS Regressions for log 1+Cases and log 1+Deaths, June 29, 2020
(Dependent variable listed in second row)
(1)
Log 1+Cases

(2)
(3)
(4)
Log 1+Cases,
Log 1+Deaths
Log 1+Deaths,
State FE
State FE
Log population
1.005
1.033
0.694
0.725
(0.026)***
(0.029)***
(0.026)***
(0.031)***
[0.704]
[0.723]
[0.627]
[0.656]
Log population density
0.106
0.065
0.005
-0.044
(0.022)***
(0.028)**
(0.022)
(0.029)
[0.088]
[0.054]
[0.006]
[-0.048]
Large central metro county or
0.048
0.011
0.671
0.603
large fringe metro county
(0.072)
(0.065)
(0.075)***
(0.067)***
[0.008]
[0.002]
[0.141]
[0.127]
Medium metro county or
0.056
0.006
0.180
0.166
small metro county
(0.051)
(0.045)
(0.052)***
(0.047)***
[0.011]
[0.001]
[0.046]
[0.042]
% people who commute by
0.029
0.024
0.083
0.070
public transportation
(0.006)***
(0.006)***
(0.007)***
(0.007)***
[0.042]
[0.035]
[0.155]
[0.130]
Share of people aged
-12.061
-10.896
-0.199
1.098
75 & above
(0.974)***
(0.955)***
(1.003)
(0.991)
[-0.132]
[-0.119]
[-0.003]
[0.016]
% nursing home residents
0.208
0.077
0.186
0.068
in pop.
(0.045)***
(0.043)*
(0.046)***
(0.044)
[0.044]
[0.016]
[0.050]
[0.018]
Log km to closest airport w/
-0.059
-0.059
-0.062
-0.093
flights from top 5 COVID countries
(0.019)***
(0.019)***
(0.020)***
(0.019)***
[-0.031]
[-0.032]
[-0.043]
[-0.065]
Average temperature, Feb., Mar. & Apr.
0.025
0.026
0.012
0.016
(0.002)***
(0.005)***
(0.002)***
(0.005)***
[0.123]
[0.126]
[0.075]
[0.104]
Log household median income
-0.008
-0.044
-0.082
-0.159
(0.099)
(0.100)
(0.102)
(0.103)
[-0.001]
[-0.005]
[-0.012]
[-0.023]
Social Capital Index, 2014
0.045
-0.010
0.054
0.055
(0.019)**
(0.019)
(0.020)***
(0.020)***
[0.026]
[-0.006]
[0.041]
[0.042]
Constant
-6.284
-5.361
-5.358
-4.534
(1.105)***
(1.146)***
(1.138)***
(1.188)***
R2
0.79
0.84
0.62
0.71
N
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets.

18

Table 2 - OLS Regressions for log Cases and log Deaths, Synchronized Days from Onset at 70 days from
Onset (for log cases) and 60 days from Onset (for deaths)
(1)
Log Cases

(2)
(3)
(4)
Log Cases,
Log Deaths
Log Deaths,
State FE
State FE
Log population
0.861
0.957
0.787
0.882
(0.030)***
(0.036)***
(0.044)***
(0.053)***
[0.605]
[0.673]
[0.605]
[0.678]
Log population density
0.175
0.059
0.071
-0.014
(0.026)***
(0.034)*
(0.040)*
(0.050)
[0.144]
[0.049]
[0.061]
[-0.012]
Large central metro county or
0.166
0.144
0.484
0.447
large fringe metro county
(0.082)**
(0.074)*
(0.112)***
(0.101)***
[0.031]
[0.027]
[0.120]
[0.111]
Medium metro county or
0.040
0.012
0.042
0.020
small metro county
(0.058)
(0.052)
(0.083)
(0.075)
[0.009]
[0.003]
[0.011]
[0.006]
% people who commute by
0.042
0.035
0.063
0.048
public transportation
(0.007)***
(0.007)***
(0.008)***
(0.008)***
[0.071]
[0.059]
[0.158]
[0.121]
Share of people aged
-10.662
-9.726
-0.112
0.372
75 & above
(1.204)***
(1.195)***
(1.675)
(1.745)
[-0.118]
[-0.107]
[-0.001]
[0.004]
% nursing home residents
0.292
0.099
0.877
0.553
in pop.
(0.062)***
(0.061)
(0.114)***
(0.114)***
[0.059]
[0.020]
[0.154]
[0.097]
Log km to closest airport w/ flights
-0.072
-0.065
-0.048
-0.058
from top 5 COVID countries
(0.021)***
(0.021)***
(0.024)**
(0.024)**
[-0.044]
[-0.040]
[-0.041]
[-0.048]
Average temperature, Feb.,
0.013
0.018
0.001
0.031
Mar. & Apr.
(0.002)***
(0.006)***
(0.003)
(0.009)***
[0.070]
[0.098]
[0.009]
[0.180]
Log household median income
-0.109
-0.238
-0.223
-0.346
(0.118)
(0.119)**
(0.164)
(0.166)**
[-0.014]
[-0.030]
[-0.034]
[-0.052]
Social Capital Index, 2014
0.034
-0.007
-0.051
-0.014
(0.024)
(0.025)
(0.035)
(0.035)
[0.020]
[-0.004]
[-0.028]
[-0.008]
Constant
-4.039
-2.908
-5.032
-5.631
(1.313)***
(1.373)**
(1.839)***
(1.932)***
R2
0.69
0.76
0.58
0.69
N
2,755
2,755
1,446
1,446
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets.
Onset day is defined as the day at which the number of cases reaches 1 per 100,000 (for cases) and 0.5
per 100,000 (for deaths).

19

Table 3 - An Investigation of Donald Trump Effects – Log(1+Cases), June 29
(1)
Short Spec.

(2)
(3)
(4)
Baseline
Adding Race
Comprehensive
Controls
Shares
Spec.
Panel A: Dependent Variable: Log (1+Cases), June 29
Trump vote share, 2016
-1.489
-1.576
1.129
0.700
general election
(0.138)***
(0.140)***
(0.182)***
(0.203)***
[-0.110]
[-0.116]
[0.083]
[0.053]
2
R
0.76
0.79
0.83
0.83
N
3,111
3,109
3,109
3,007
Panel B: Dependent Variable: Log (1+Deaths), June 29
Trump vote share,
-1.589
-1.333
1.318
1.473
2016 general election
(0.140)***
(0.145)***
(0.192)***
(0.217)***
[-0.151]
[-0.126]
[0.125]
[0.138]
2
R
0.59
0.63
0.68
0.70
N
3,111
3,109
3,109
3,007
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets.
All columns contain an intercept.
Column 1 (the short specification) includes only a control for log population.
Column 2 adds controls for the baseline set of variables in Tables 1 and 2.
Column 3 adds variables measuring the % Black or African American, % Hispanic or Latino, % American
Indian and Alaska Native and % Asian.
Column 4 adds controls for % high school graduate or higher (among persons age 25+), % with
bachelor's degree or higher (among persons age 25+), 30-day mortality for heart attacks, 30-day
mortality for heart failure, 30-day mortality for pneumonia, Gini index within bottom 99%, poverty rate,
top 1% income share, % housing units in multi-unit structures, persons per household and log effective
local density (i.e. the variables explored in Tables A5-A9, except share obese and share smoking).

20

Appendix to “Understanding Spatial Variation in COVID-19
across the United States”

Klaus Desmet

Romain Wacziarg

SMU and NBER

UCLA and NBER

July 2020

Abstract
This Appendix contains: A) Description and sources of the data used in the analysis. B)
Additional tables and …gures mentioned in the main text.

A. Data Sources
A1. Dependent Variables
COVID-19 cases and deaths. Daily county-level data on COVID-19 cases and deaths. Source: New
York Times, https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data. We adjusted the data in the following
ways:
1. The source reports data cumulated for New York City overall (all 5 boroughs/counties together).
We apportioned cases and deaths to each of the 5 boroughs/counties by county population shares.
2. The source reports data for all of Kansas City, which is made up of parts of several counties,
each independent entries with their own cases and deaths (exclusive of Kansas City). Most of Kansas
City is in Jackson County MO, so we added all Kansas City cases and deaths to that county’s tally.
3. We did not make any modi…cations regarding any of the additional geographic speci…cities
as described in the source data: "Counts for Alameda County (CA) include cases and deaths from
Berkeley and the Grand Princess cruise ship; counts for Douglas County (NE) include cases brought to
the state from the Diamond Princess cruise ship; all cases and deaths for Chicago are reported as part
of Cook County (IL); counts for Guam include cases reported from the USS Theodore Roosevelt."
4. The source reports non-monotonic evolutions of cumulative cases and deaths for a very small
set of counties, at the very beginning of the pandemic, when there were very few cases and deaths.
The reason is unknown. We recoded cases and deaths that subsequently became lower to the level of
the later lower number to ensure monotonic cumulative series for all counties.

A2. Independent Variables
Population and age. Age structure of population by county. Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 2018
American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates. https://data.census.gov/cedsci/.
Population density. Population divided by land in square miles. Source: U.S. Census Bureau.
Metro county. Classi…cation as large central metro county, large fringe metro country, medium
metro county or small metro county. Source: National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). UrbanRural Classi…cation Scheme for Counties 2013. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data_access/urban_
rural.htm#Data_Files_and_Documentation
Public transportation. Share of population that goes to work by public transportation. Source:
U.S. Census Bureau. 2018 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimates. https://data.census.
gov/cedsci/.
27

Nursing home residents. Percentage of population who are residents in nursing homes. Source:
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Nursing Home Compare Datasets: Provider Info. https:
//data.medicare.gov/data/nursing-home-compare.
Temperature. Average temperature in February, March and April, 2009 to 2019. Source: National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. NOAA’s Gridded Climate Divisional Dataset (CLIMDIV).
ftp://ftp.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/cirs/climdiv/.
Distance to airport. Data on all international ‡ights to the U.S. in 2019 come from Table T-100
from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics. For each U.S. airport, we take the average number of
monthly passengers on direct ‡ights from the top-5 countries in terms of COVID-19 cases on March
15, 2020 (China, Italy, Iran, South Korea and Spain). For each county in the U.S., we then compute
the geodesic distance to the closest airport that received at least 250 passengers per month on direct
‡ights from one of these 5 countries. https://www.transtats.bts.gov/
Household income. Log of median household income, 2009-2013. Source: U.S. Census Bureau.
Social capital. Social capital index created using principal component analysis using number of
associations and organizations (including non-pro…ts), voter turnout and census response rate in 2014
(variable sk14). Source: Rupasingha, A., S. J. Goetz and D. Freshwater (2006, with updates). https:
//aese.psu.edu/nercrd/community/social-capital-resources
Race. Black or African American alone, Hispanic or Latino, American Indian and Alaska Native
alone, percentage 2014. Source: U.S. Census Bureau.
Education. High school graduate or higher, percentage of persons age 25+, 2009-2013, and bachelor’s
degree or higher, percentage of persons age 25+, 2009-2013. Source: U.S. Census Bureau.
Housing arrangements. Percent of housing units in multi-unit structures, 2009-2013, and persons
per household, 2009-2013. Source: U.S. Census Bureau.
Smokers and obese. Percentage of the population that smokes and percentage of population that
is obese. Source: Bergeron et al. (2016). https://opportunityinsights.org/data/.
Risk-adjusted mortality. 30-day risk adjusted mortality for heart attacks, heart failure and pneumonia. Source: Bergeron et al. (2016). https://opportunityinsights.org/data/.
E¤ective local density. Expected density in a one square kilometer around a randomly drawn
individual from each county. If all county inhabitants are uniformly distributed across space, this
measure is identical to standard population density. If the population is concentrated in a small
subset of the county territory, this measure will be larger than standard population density. Own

28

calculations based on 2020 population data from GPW. Source: Center for International Earth Science
Information Network, Gridded Population of the World, Version 4: Population Count, Revision 11,
Palisades, NY: NASA Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC) (2018). https://
sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/set/gpw-v4-population-count-rev11.
Trump vote share in the 2016 general election. Source: Dave Leip’s Atlas of U.S. Presidential
Elections. https://uselectionatlas.org/.
Stay-at-home orders. Days since …rst stay-at-home order. https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/Data:Stay-at-home_orders_in_the_United_States.map#/map/0.

References
[1] Bergeron, A., R. Chetty, D. Cutler, B. Scuderi, M. Stepner, N. Turner (2016), “The Association
Between Income and Life Expectancy in the United States, 2001-2014,” Journal of the American
Medical Association, 315(16): 1750-1766.
[2] Rupasingha, A., S. J. Goetz and D. Freshwater (2006, with updates), “The Production of Social
Capital in US Counties,” Journal of Socio-Economics, 35, 83–101.

29

B. Additional Tables and Figures
Table A1 – Summary Statistics
Panel A - Summary Statistics for Various Indicators of Disease Severity (June 29, 2020)
Variable
Total cases
Cases per capita
Indicator for any case
Log 1 + Cases
Log Cases
Total Deaths
Deaths per capita
Indicator for any death
Log 1 + deaths
Log Deaths

# Obs.
3,142
3,142
3,142
3,142
3,045
3,142
3,142
3,142
3,142
1,934

Mean
822.580
501.226
0.969
4.380
4.461
39.964
16.996
0.616
1.408
2.025

Std. Dev.
4010.340
762.467
0.173
2.132
2.097
260.886
34.080
0.487
1.648
1.758

Min

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Max
100,772
15,481
1
11.521
11.521
6,723
375
1
8.813
8.813

Panel B - Summary Statistics for the Baseline Set of 11 Regressors
Variable
Log Population
Log Density
Large central or fringe metro county
Medium or small metro county
% people who commute by public
transportation
Share of people aged 75 or older
% nursing home residents in pop.
Log km to closest airport w/
flights from top 5 COVID countries
Average temperature,
Feb., Mar. & Apr.
Log household median
Income
Social Capital Index, 2014

# Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

3,142

10.275

1.494

4.317

16.129

3,140

3.786

1.784

-3.291

11.175

3,142

0.139

0.346

0

1

3,142

0.232

0.422

0

1

3,141

0.902

3.066

0

60.700

3,142

0.079

0.023

0.013

0.241

3,142

0.603

0.448

0

5.047

3,142

5.562

1.144

-4.605

8.264

3,141

45.126

10.453

-0.317

73.067

3,140

10.705

0.242

9.903

11.714

3,139

0.001

1.260

-3.183

21.809

30

Table A2 - OLS Regressions for log Cases and log Deaths, June 29, 2020
(Dependent variable listed in second row)
(1)
Log Cases

(2)
(3)
(4)
Log Cases,
Log Deaths
Log Deaths,
State FE
State FE
Log population
1.030
1.056
0.806
0.881
(0.027)***
(0.031)***
(0.039)***
(0.047)***
[0.701]
[0.719]
[0.605]
[0.661]
Log population density
0.110
0.076
0.105
0.027
(0.023)***
(0.030)**
(0.035)***
(0.045)
[0.089]
[0.062]
[0.089]
[0.023]
Large central metro county or
0.041
-0.007
0.398
0.381
large fringe metro county
(0.075)
(0.067)
(0.100)***
(0.091)***
[0.007]
[-0.001]
[0.091]
[0.088]
Medium metro county or
0.056
-0.003
0.016
0.022
small metro county
(0.053)
(0.047)
(0.072)
(0.066)
[0.011]
[-0.001]
[0.004]
[0.006]
% people who commute by
0.028
0.021
0.066
0.052
public transportation
(0.007)***
(0.007)***
(0.008)***
(0.008)***
[0.041]
[0.032]
[0.145]
[0.112]
Share of people aged
-13.250
-11.843
-1.229
-0.576
75 & above
(1.043)***
(1.027)***
(1.514)
(1.545)
[-0.142]
[-0.127]
[-0.014]
[-0.007]
% nursing home residents in pop.
0.252
0.100
0.731
0.503
(0.050)***
(0.048)**
(0.093)***
(0.094)***
[0.051]
[0.020]
[0.136]
[0.094]
Log km to closest airport w/ flights
-0.059
-0.056
-0.041
-0.055
from top 5 COVID countries
(0.020)***
(0.019)***
(0.023)*
(0.023)**
[-0.032]
[-0.031]
[-0.031]
[-0.042]
Average temperature, Feb.,
0.025
0.028
0.007
0.021
Mar. & Apr.
(0.002)***
(0.005)***
(0.003)**
(0.008)**
[0.125]
[0.138]
[0.043]
[0.118]
Log household median income
-0.082
-0.115
-0.268
-0.383
(0.104)
(0.105)
(0.148)*
(0.151)**
[-0.010]
[-0.013]
[-0.039]
[-0.056]
Social Capital Index, 2014
0.055
-0.003
-0.050
-0.017
(0.021)***
(0.021)
(0.032)
(0.033)
[0.032]
[-0.002]
[-0.027]
[-0.009]
Constant
-5.725
-4.974
-5.024
-4.704
(1.162)***
(1.205)***
(1.645)***
(1.749)***
R2
0.77
0.83
0.58
0.67
N
3,042
3,042
1,933
1,933
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets.

31

Table A3 - OLS Regressions for log Cases and log Deaths, June 29, 2020, CFR<0.1
(Dependent variable listed in second row)
(1)
Log Cases

(2)
(3)
(4)
Log Cases,
Log Deaths
Log Deaths,
State FE
State FE
Log population
1.031
1.058
0.858
0.959
(0.028)***
(0.032)***
(0.040)***
(0.048)***
[0.702]
[0.720]
[0.635]
[0.709]
Log population density
0.108
0.074
0.100
0.016
(0.024)***
(0.031)**
(0.036)***
(0.046)
[0.087]
[0.060]
[0.083]
[0.014]
Large central metro county or
0.023
-0.005
0.360
0.359
large fringe metro county
(0.078)
(0.070)
(0.101)***
(0.091)***
[0.004]
[-0.001]
[0.084]
[0.084]
Medium metro county or
0.062
0.002
0.014
-0.003
small metro county
(0.055)
(0.049)
(0.073)
(0.066)
[0.013]
[0.000]
[0.004]
[-0.001]
% people who commute by
0.028
0.023
0.066
0.050
public transportation
(0.007)***
(0.007)***
(0.008)***
(0.008)***
[0.042]
[0.035]
[0.148]
[0.114]
Share of people aged 75 & above
-13.405
-12.117
-2.627
-2.146
(1.084)***
(1.062)***
(1.544)*
(1.562)
[-0.144]
[-0.130]
[-0.030]
[-0.024]
% nursing home residents in pop.
0.219
0.070
0.613
0.414
(0.052)***
(0.050)
(0.100)***
(0.100)***
[0.044]
[0.014]
[0.110]
[0.074]
Log km to closest airport w/
-0.055
-0.054
-0.027
-0.044
flights from top 5 COVID countries
(0.020)***
(0.020)***
(0.023)
(0.023)*
[-0.030]
[-0.030]
[-0.021]
[-0.034]
Average temperature,
0.024
0.026
0.009
0.014
Feb., Mar. & Apr.
(0.002)***
(0.005)***
(0.003)***
(0.008)*
[0.121]
[0.129]
[0.052]
[0.083]
Log household median
-0.111
-0.120
-0.403
-0.467
Income
(0.109)
(0.109)
(0.151)***
(0.153)***
[-0.013]
[-0.014]
[-0.059]
[-0.069]
Social Capital Index, 2014
0.059
-0.002
-0.044
-0.025
(0.021)***
(0.021)
(0.033)
(0.032)
[0.034]
[-0.001]
[-0.024]
[-0.014]
Constant
-5.394
-4.823
-4.220
-4.182
(1.212)***
(1.245)***
(1.687)**
(1.760)**
R2
0.77
0.83
0.60
0.70
N
2,847
2,847
1,738
1,738
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets.

32

Table A4 - OLS Regressions for Log Cases and Log Deaths, Synchronized Days from Onset at 70 days
from Onset (for Cases) and 60 days from Onset (for Deaths), Sample with CFR<0.1
(1)
Log Cases

(2)
(3)
(4)
Log Cases,
Log Deaths
Log Deaths,
State FE
State FE
Log population
0.864
0.968
0.833
0.950
(0.032)***
(0.037)***
(0.046)***
(0.055)***
[0.612]
[0.685]
[0.635]
[0.724]
Log population density
0.165
0.043
0.053
-0.030
(0.027)***
(0.036)
(0.042)
(0.052)
[0.136]
[0.035]
[0.045]
[-0.025]
Large central metro county or
0.155
0.132
0.491
0.445
large fringe metro county
(0.087)*
(0.078)*
(0.118)***
(0.105)***
[0.029]
[0.025]
[0.125]
[0.113]
Medium metro county or
0.042
0.005
0.052
-0.006
small metro county
(0.061)
(0.055)
(0.089)
(0.078)
[0.010]
[0.001]
[0.014]
[-0.002]
% people who commute by
0.059
0.051
0.085
0.054
public transportation
(0.010)***
(0.011)***
(0.011)***
(0.011)***
[0.075]
[0.064]
[0.164]
[0.105]
Share of people aged 75
-10.497
-10.137
-1.368
-2.180
& above
(1.280)***
(1.266)***
(1.809)
(1.844)
[-0.116]
[-0.112]
[-0.015]
[-0.025]
% nursing home residents in pop.
0.261
0.069
0.774
0.421
(0.065)***
(0.064)
(0.127)***
(0.123)***
[0.053]
[0.014]
[0.131]
[0.071]
Log km to closest airport w/ flights
-0.058
-0.051
-0.026
-0.038
from top 5 COVID countries
(0.022)***
(0.022)**
(0.025)
(0.024)
[-0.035]
[-0.031]
[-0.022]
[-0.033]
Average temperature,
0.013
0.017
0.003
0.029
Feb., Mar. & Apr.
(0.003)***
(0.006)***
(0.004)
(0.010)***
[0.067]
[0.090]
[0.019]
[0.168]
Log household median income
-0.113
-0.249
-0.318
-0.477
(0.124)
(0.124)**
(0.173)*
(0.168)***
[-0.014]
[-0.032]
[-0.050]
[-0.075]
Social Capital Index, 2014
0.030
-0.013
-0.057
-0.030
(0.025)
(0.025)
(0.036)
(0.034)
[0.018]
[-0.007]
[-0.032]
[-0.017]
Constant
-4.061
-2.814
-4.653
-4.694
(1.376)***
(1.424)**
(1.924)**
(1.951)**
R2
0.68
0.76
0.59
0.71
N
2,498
2,498
1,233
1,233
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets.
Onset day is defined as the day at which the number of cases reaches 1 per 100,000 (for cases) and 0.5
per 100,000 (for deaths).

33

34

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Log 1+Cases,
Log 1+Cases,
Log 1+Deaths, Log 1+Deaths, Log 1+Deaths,
June 29
June 29
June 29
June 29
June 29
Log population density
0.146
0.117
0.022
0.019
0.043
(0.022)***
(0.022)***
(0.023)
(0.023)
(0.023)*
[0.122]
[0.098]
[0.024]
[0.021]
[0.046]
Large central metro county
0.041
0.080
0.682
0.667
0.722
or large fringe metro county
(0.072)
(0.073)
(0.074)***
(0.074)***
(0.076)***
[0.007]
[0.013]
[0.143]
[0.140]
[0.152]
Medium metro county or
0.050
0.045
0.170
0.164
0.137
small metro county
(0.050)
(0.051)
(0.052)***
(0.052)***
(0.054)**
[0.010]
[0.009]
[0.044]
[0.042]
[0.035]
Housing units in multi0.014
0.018
0.023
unit structures, percent
(0.003)***
(0.003)***
(0.004)***
[0.063]
[0.102]
[0.132]
Persons per household
1.022
0.634
0.686
(0.102)***
(0.104)***
(0.105)***
[0.117]
[0.094]
[0.102]
% people who commute
0.011
0.061
0.060
by public transportation
(0.007)
(0.008)***
(0.008)***
[0.016]
[0.113]
[0.111]
Log effective local density
0.002
0.100
-0.108
0.075
(0.031)
(0.027)***
(0.032)***
(0.029)***
[0.001]
[0.047]
[-0.065]
[0.045]
Constant
-7.525
-7.510
-5.611
-6.195
-7.006
-4.827
(1.092)***
(1.117)***
(1.121)***
(1.134)***
(1.157)***
(1.180)***
R2
0.80
0.80
0.79
0.63
0.63
0.61
N
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
3,137
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets. All columns contain an intercept and controls
for the remaining baseline set of regressors in Tables 1 and 2.

(1)
Log 1+Cases,
June 29
0.146
(0.022)***
[0.122]
0.041
(0.071)
[0.007]
0.050
(0.050)
[0.010]
0.015
(0.003)***
[0.063]
1.023
(0.100)***
[0.118]
0.011
(0.007)
[0.016]

Table A5 - An Investigation of Effective Density

Table A6 - An Investigation of Race Effects
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log 1+Cases,
Log Cases, 70
Log 1+Deaths,
Log Deaths, 60
June 29
days since onset
June 29
days since onset
% Black or
0.037
0.041
0.035
0.034
African American
(0.001)***
(0.002)***
(0.002)***
(0.002)***
[0.253]
[0.317]
[0.303]
[0.328]
% Hispanic or Latino
0.020
0.020
0.013
0.012
(0.001)***
(0.002)***
(0.002)***
(0.003)***
[0.124]
[0.132]
[0.102]
[0.082]
% American Indian
0.011
0.008
0.014
0.034
and Alaska Native
(0.002)***
(0.003)**
(0.003)***
(0.006)***
[0.039]
[0.027]
[0.062]
[0.093]
% Asian
-0.034
-0.025
0.006
-0.018
(0.007)***
(0.009)***
(0.008)
(0.012)
[-0.043]
[-0.035]
[0.010]
[-0.035]
2
R
0.83
0.74
0.68
0.64
N
3,137
2,755
3,137
1,446
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets.
Onset is defined as the day at which the number of cases reaches 1 per 100,000 (for cases) and 0.5 per
100,000 (for deaths). All specifications contain an intercept and controls for the baseline set of variables
in Tables 1 and 2.
Table A7 - An Investigation of Education Effects
(1)
Log 1+Cases,
June 29

(2)
(3)
(4)
Log Cases, 70 Log 1+Deaths,
Log Deaths,
days since
June 29
60 days since
onset
onset
High school graduate or higher,
-0.053
-0.065
-0.038
-0.056
percent of persons age 25+
(0.004)***
(0.005)***
(0.005)***
(0.008)***
[-0.172]
[-0.228]
[-0.160]
[-0.211]
Bachelor's degree or higher,
0.007
0.007
0.018
0.016
percent of persons age 25+
(0.003)**
(0.004)*
(0.003)***
(0.005)***
[0.030]
[0.031]
[0.096]
[0.097]
2
R
0.80
0.70
0.63
0.59
N
3,137
2,755
3,137
1,446
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets.
Onset is defined as the day at which the number of cases reaches 1 per 100,000 (for cases) and 0.5 per
100,000 (for deaths). All columns contain an intercept and controls for the baseline set of variables in
Tables 1 and 2.

35

Table A8 - An Investigation of Health Effects
(1)
Log 1+Cases,
June 29

(2)
(3)
(4)
Log Cases, 70
Log 1+Deaths,
Log Deaths, 60
days since
June 29
days since
onset
onset
Percentage of the
-1.686
-1.110
-0.442
0.022
population that smokes
(0.343)***
(0.395)***
(0.383)
(0.655)
[-0.054]
[-0.036]
[-0.015]
[0.001]
Percentage of the
0.404
0.577
0.669
0.200
population that is obese
(0.289)
(0.337)*
(0.322)**
(0.547)
[0.016]
[0.024]
[0.029]
[0.008]
30-day Mortality for
-1.991
-2.133
-1.395
-0.460
Heart Attacks
(0.750)***
(0.908)**
(0.838)*
(1.462)
[-0.031]
[-0.032]
[-0.023]
[-0.006]
30-day Mortality for
-0.154
-1.342
-3.630
-8.035
Heart Failure
(1.251)
(1.481)
(1.397)***
(2.318)***
[-0.001]
[-0.013]
[-0.037]
[-0.073]
30-day Mortality for
1.089
3.075
2.558
4.170
Pneumonia
(1.128)
(1.324)**
(1.260)**
(2.009)**
[0.012]
[0.033]
[0.029]
[0.044]
R2
0.75
0.66
0.63
0.59
N
2,334
2,250
2,334
1,334
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets.
Onset is defined as the day at which the number of cases reaches 1 per 100,000 (for cases) and 0.5 per
100,000 (for deaths). All columns contain an intercept and controls for the baseline set of variables in
Tables 1 and 2. Note the smaller number of observations due to lack of availability of data on obesity
and smoking. 30-day mortality measures are risk-adjusted so are likely to capture mostly the quality of
the health infrastructure / health care system in the county.

36

Table A9 - An Investigation of Inequality and Poverty Effects
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log 1+Cases,
Log Cases, 70
Log 1+Deaths,
Log Deaths, 60
June 29
days since onset
June 29
days since onset
Gini Index Within
0.874
0.536
0.615
0.984
Bottom 99%
(0.442)**
(0.520)
(0.445)
(0.721)
[0.037]
[0.024]
[0.032]
[0.050]
Poverty Rate
1.151
1.735
4.166
7.509
(0.558)**
(0.666)***
(0.562)***
(0.982)***
[0.036]
[0.058]
[0.162]
[0.282]
Top 1% Income
-0.102
-0.021
0.235
-0.872
Share
(0.593)
(0.686)
(0.597)
(0.922)
[-0.003]
[-0.001]
[0.007]
[-0.027]
Log household
0.279
0.273
0.673
1.299
median income
(0.144)*
(0.169)
(0.145)***
(0.234)***
[0.033]
[0.035]
[0.099]
[0.197]
2
R
0.77
0.68
0.65
0.60
N
3,026
2,728
3,026
1,441
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets.
Onset is defined as the day at which the number of cases reaches 1 per 100,000 (for cases) and 0.5 per
100,000 (for deaths). All columns contain an intercept and controls for the remaining baseline set of
variables in Tables 1 and 2. There is collinearity between poverty rate and median income (ρ = - 0.75).
The coefficient on median income is robust but the coefficient on the poverty rate is sensitive to the
inclusion of median income (it becomes zero without median income included).

37

Table A10 - Comprehensive Specification

Log population
Log population density
Large central metro county or
large fringe metro county
Medium metro county or
small metro county
% people who commute by public
transportation
Share of people aged 75 & above
% nursing home residents in pop.
Log km to closest airport w/
flights fr. top 5 COVID countries
Average temperature,
Feb., Mar. & Apr.
Log household median income
Social Capital Index, 2014
% Black or African American
% Hispanic or Latino
% American Indian and
Alaska Native
% Asian

(1)
Log 1+Cases,
June 29
1.035
(0.028)***
[0.704]
0.066
(0.024)***
[0.053]
-0.142
(0.065)**
[-0.024]
0.023
(0.045)
[0.005]
0.003
(0.007)
[0.004]
-0.280
(1.134)
[-0.003]
0.277
(0.046)***
[0.056]
-0.023
(0.018)
[-0.013]
-0.002
(0.003)
[-0.008]
0.556
(0.160)***
[0.066]
-0.024
(0.021)
[-0.014]
0.039
(0.002)***
[0.276]
0.007
(0.002)***
[0.048]
0.015
(0.003)***
[0.050]
-0.044
(0.009)***
[-0.056]

(2)
Log Cases, 70
days since onset
0.897
(0.033)***
[0.624]
0.140
(0.028)***
[0.114]
-0.043
(0.074)
[-0.008]
0.013
(0.051)
[0.003]
0.017
(0.008)**
[0.030]
2.700
(1.355)**
[0.030]
0.192
(0.059)***
[0.038]
-0.026
(0.020)
[-0.016]
-0.019
(0.003)***
[-0.100]
0.704
(0.191)***
[0.090]
-0.047
(0.025)*
[-0.026]
0.044
(0.002)***
[0.344]
0.009
(0.002)***
[0.061]
0.013
(0.004)***
[0.042]
-0.029
(0.010)***
[-0.041]
38

(3)
Log 1+Deaths,
June 29
0.773
(0.030)***
[0.650]
0.031
(0.025)
[0.031]
0.405
(0.070)***
[0.086]
0.093
(0.049)*
[0.024]
0.044
(0.007)***
[0.083]
10.342
(1.216)***
[0.139]
0.336
(0.050)***
[0.084]
-0.016
(0.019)
[-0.011]
-0.013
(0.003)***
[-0.078]
0.843
(0.171)***
[0.123]
-0.025
(0.022)
[-0.018]
0.033
(0.002)***
[0.294]
0.005
(0.002)**
[0.040]
0.015
(0.003)***
[0.060]
-0.010
(0.009)
[-0.016]

(4)
Log Deaths, 60
days since onset
0.842
(0.051)***
[0.645]
0.091
(0.047)*
[0.078]
0.245
(0.106)**
[0.061]
-0.008
(0.078)
[-0.002]
0.034
(0.010)***
[0.087]
11.514
(1.951)***
[0.132]
0.719
(0.112)***
[0.126]
-0.036
(0.025)
[-0.030]
-0.030
(0.004)***
[-0.178]
1.750
(0.301)***
[0.265]
-0.080
(0.036)**
[-0.043]
0.029
(0.003)***
[0.281]
0.001
(0.004)
[0.004]
0.022
(0.007)***
[0.061]
-0.024
(0.012)**
[-0.048]

(1)
Log 1+Cases,
June 29
-0.060
(0.005)***
[-0.201]
0.010
(0.004)***
[0.044]
-0.742
(0.489)
[-0.012]
2.500
(0.858)***
[0.024]
-1.500
(0.798)*
[-0.016]
-1.444
(0.414)***
[-0.061]
-4.333
(0.572)***
[-0.137]
1.826
(0.536)***
[0.045]
0.015
(0.004)***
[0.067]
0.627
(0.116)***
[0.073]
0.054
(0.033)*
[0.025]

(2)
(3)
(4)
Log Cases, 70
Log 1+Deaths,
Log Deaths, 60
days since onset
June 29
days since onset
High school graduate or higher,
-0.065
-0.035
-0.044
percent of persons age 25+
(0.006)***
(0.006)***
(0.010)***
[-0.229]
[-0.145]
[-0.166]
Bachelor's degree or higher,
0.007
0.008
0.004
percent of persons age 25+
(0.004)
(0.004)**
(0.006)
[0.032]
[0.043]
[0.023]
30-day Mortality for
-0.976
0.091
0.734
Heart Attacks
(0.626)
(0.524)
(1.173)
[-0.016]
[0.002]
[0.011]
30-day Mortality for
2.332
-0.815
-2.317
Heart Failure
(1.074)**
(0.920)
(1.997)
[0.023]
[-0.010]
[-0.022]
30-day Mortality for
-0.943
-0.859
0.016
Pneumonia
(0.986)
(0.856)
(1.687)
[-0.010]
[-0.011]
[0.000]
Gini Index Within
-1.659
-1.307
-0.010
Bottom 99%
(0.487)***
(0.443)***
(0.734)
[-0.075]
[-0.068]
[-0.000]
Poverty Rate
-4.348
-0.011
2.593
(0.681)***
(0.613)
(1.114)**
[-0.146]
[-0.000]
[0.097]
Top 1% Income Share
1.723
1.872
0.037
(0.622)***
(0.575)***
(0.908)
[0.046]
[0.057]
[0.001]
Housing units in multi-unit
0.010
0.008
0.001
structures, percent
(0.004)**
(0.004)*
(0.006)
[0.050]
[0.043]
[0.005]
Persons per household
0.502
0.309
0.364
(0.142)***
(0.125)**
(0.231)
[0.060]
[0.044]
[0.046]
Log effective local density
0.046
-0.008
-0.020
(0.039)
(0.035)
(0.063)
[0.023]
[-0.005]
[-0.011]
Days since lockdown began
-0.004
-0.005
(0 if no or before lockdown)
(0.001)***
(0.001)***
[-0.051]
[-0.074]
Constant
-8.977
-8.268
-14.125
-23.648
(1.748)***
(2.076)***
(1.874)***
(3.238)***
R2
0.83
0.76
0.70
0.65
N
3,020
2,726
3,020
1,440
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and
standardized betas in brackets. The comprehensive specification includes all control variables in Tables 1
and 2 and A5-A9 except the percentage of obese persons and the percentage of smokers (from Table A8),
due to the loss of observations that would result from their inclusion.

39

Table A11 - An Investigation of the Effects of Lockdowns
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Log Cases, 70
Log Cases, 70
Log Deaths, 60
Log Deaths, 60
days since
days since
days since
days since
onset
onset, State FEs
onset
onset, State FEs
Days since lockdown began
-0.002
-0.002
-0.004
-0.013
(0 if no or before lockdown)
(0.001)*
(0.002)
(0.001)***
(0.002)***
[-0.021]
[-0.027]
[-0.052]
[-0.179]
R2
0.69
0.76
0.58
0.69
N
2,755
2,755
1,446
1,446
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets. Onset
is defined as the day at which the number of cases reaches 1 per 100,000 (for cases) and 0.5 per 100,000
(for deaths). All columns contain an intercept and controls for the baseline set of variables in Tables 1 and
2.

Table A12 - An Investigation of Donald Trump Effects (days-since-onset specification)
(1)
Short Spec.

(2)
(3)
(4)
Baseline
Adding Race
Comprehensive
Controls
Shares
Spec.
Panel A – Dependent Variable: Log Cases, 70 Days from Onset
Trump vote share,
-1.774
-1.644
1.449
0.899
2016 general election
(0.156)***
(0.164)***
(0.214)***
(0.239)***
[-0.143]
[-0.133]
[0.117]
[0.073]
R2
0.66
0.70
0.75
0.76
N
2,744
2,742
2,742
2,716
Panel B – Dependent Variable: Log Deaths, 60 Days from Onset
Trump vote share,
-2.067
-1.743
0.866
0.735
2016 general election
(0.218)***
(0.230)***
(0.326)***
(0.380)*
[-0.192]
[-0.162]
[0.080]
[0.068]
R2
0.54
0.60
0.64
0.65
N
1,443
1,443
1,443
1,437
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01. Standard errors in parentheses and standardized betas in brackets.
All specifications contain an intercept.
Column 1 (the short specification) includes only a control for log population.
Column 2 adds controls for the baseline set of variables in Tables 1 and 2.
Column 3 adds variables measuring the % Black or African American, % Hispanic or Latino, % American
Indian and Alaska Native and % Asian.
Column 4 adds controls for % high school graduate or higher (among persons age 25+), % with bachelor's
degree or higher (among persons age 25+), 30-day mortality for heart attacks, 30-day mortality for heart
failure, 30-day mortality for pneumonia, Gini index within bottom 99%, poverty rate, top 1% income
share, % housing units in multi-unit structures, persons per household and log effective local density (i.e.
the variables explored in Tables A5-A9, except share obese and share smoking), plus number of days since
the first stay-at-home order.

40

Figure A1 – Maps of the Variables Used in the Analysis

41

42

43

44

45

46

