                        NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   TECHNICAL CHANGE, LEARNING,    AND WAGES




                               Ann P.   Barrel.


                            Frank R. Lichtenberg




                           Working Paper No. 2732




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                         1050 Masaachusetts Avenue
                           Cambridge, MA 02138
                                October 1988




This research is part of NBER's research programs in Labor Studies and
                                                                   those of
Productivity.  Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                      NBER Working Paper #2732
                                      October 1988


                   TECHNICAL CHANGE, LEARNING, AND   WAGES



                                 ABSTRACT




    This paper examines the relationship between technological change
                                                               several
and wages using pooled cross-sectional industry-level data and

alternative indicators of the rate of introduction of new technology.

Our main finding is that industries with a high rate of technical change
                                                                 to less
pay higher wages to workers of given age and education, compared
                                      This is Consistent with the notion
technologically advanced industries.

that the introduction of new technology creates a demand for learning,

that learning is a function of employee ability and effort, and that

increases in wages are required to elicit increases in ability and

effort.   A related finding is that the wages of highly educated workers
                                                                 workers
(especially recent graduates) relative to those of less educated

are highest in technologically advanced industries;    this is consistent

with the notion that educated workers are better learners.




Ann P. Bartel                          Frank R. Lichtenberg
Graduate School of Business            Graduate School of Business
Columbia University                    Columbia University
710 Uris Hall                          726 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027                     New York, NY 10027
I.      Introduction

        In a previous paper (Bartel and Lichtenberg (1987)) we investigated

the effect of technological change on the education distribution of

employment. We argued that the successful introduction of new technology

requires significant learning on the part of employees, and hypothesized

that highly educated employees enjoy a comparative advantage with respect

to such on-the-job learning.             This hypothesis implied that the "age" of a

firm    or   industry's technology enters its cost-function non-neutrally, and

that factor cost shares --          in   particular, highly-educated labor's share

in total cost -- should be functions of the age of technology.                Our

empirical results were consistent with this hypothesis. We found a

significant inverse relationship at the            industry   level between the age of

                         --   a proxy for   the age of technology -— and the    share
capital equipment
of highly     educated   workers    in total   employment or labor    cost.

        In this paper we examine the effect of technological change on the

wage rate, holding constant employee education,            age, and sex.      We postu-

late that in order to satisfy the increased demand for learning by

workers following the introduction of new technology,                firms will find it

expedient to pay higher wages to employees within given education and

demographic groups.           We test this hypothesis by estimating wage equations

which include indicators of technical change on pooled,                industry—level

data.

        In the next section we sketch a theory of technical change and
                                                                                        -

learning that implies the existence of a link between wages and technr-

Cal   change.     In Section III we briefly review previous theoretical and

empirical research concerning the effect of technological change on

wages.       Section IV describes the econometric model and data used to test
                                      2




our hypothesis.   Empirical results are presented and interpreted in

Section V, and Section VI provides a summary and concluding remarks.


II.   Theoretical Framework

      The replacement or modification of an existing technology by a new

one represents a major "shock" to the production environment, and workers

(and perhaps management as well) initially are very uncertain as to how

they should modify their behavior.   The transition from old to new

technology results in job tasks and operating procedures which are not

only different but, in the short run at least, less well-defined. Wells

(1972, pp. 8-9) has argued,   in the context of the "product life-cycle"

model, that in its infancy "the manufacturing process is not broken down

into simple tasks to the extent it will be later in the product's life."

The introduction of new technology into a firm therefore creates a need

or demand for learning on the part of the firm's employees.

      We postulate that the rate at which an employee learns is a function

of two variables: his or her ability and effort.    Ability and effort are

substitutes in the production of learning.   As any teacher in a classroom

setting knows, highly gifted (able) students may not perform any better

than less gifted ones, if the latter work much harder.

      The introduction of new technology, since it necessitates learning,

results in an increase in demand for employee ability and effort.     Both

of these are scarce resources, which therefore have positive (shadow)

prices attached to them.

      As we have argued previously, a worker's ability to learn is an

increasing function of his or her education, so that technical change

will increase the relative demand for highly-educated workers.   But even

among workers with a given amount of education, there is likely to be
                                       3



considerable variance in ability. Due to their high demand for learning,

firms undergoing technical change will want to employ the most talented

people within education groups, as well as employing relatively highly

educated workers.

     Since learning is a function of effort as well as ability, employers

introducing new technology will also seek to elicit high levels of effort

from workers. We assume that workers prefer providing less effort to

more effort, but tbat the firm can induce them to provide more effort by

paying higher wages.   There are two alternative possible justifications

for this:   compensating differentials, and efficiency wages.      These

differ according to whether or not the level of employee effort is

costlessly observable to the firm.     The compensating differentials

argument implicitly assumes that the firm can monitor employee effort
without cost, and that to induce workers to accept the greater disutility

associated with higher effort,     it needs to pay higher wages.   The effi-

ciency wage argument assumes that it is costly for the firm to monitor

employee effort,   and therefore that employees have the opportunity to

shirk, but that their propensity to shirk is inversely related to the

expected penalty of being detected a shirker.     This expected penalty is

the product of (a) the probability of being detected (a function of the

firm's expenditures on monitoring employees), and (b) the penalty of

being detected, assumed equal to the difference between the current wage

and the opportunity wage.    By paying a "wage premium' -- a wage in excess

of the opportunity wage --   the   firm can increase the expected penalty of

being detected a shirker and hence reduce the extent of shirking.

Whether or not effort is directly or costlessly observable to the firm,
                                       4




then,    the firm can elicit greater effort by paying higher wages to

workers of given ability.

        To summarize our argument, the introduction of new technology

creates a denand for learning, and a combination of employee ability and

effort is required for learning to occur.    To some extent an increase in

demand for ability can be satisfied by hiring more educated workers, but

even within education groups workers are quite heterogeneous with respect

to ability. Employers instituting technical change will tend to employ

the most able individuals with given amounts of education, and will have

to pay higher wages to do so.     Paying higher wages will also elicit

higher levels of employee effort, which will contribute further to the

successful introduction of new technology.

        The major implication of our argument is that workers in firms or

industries experiencing rapid technical change will tend to receive

higher wages than workers with similar education and demographic at-

tributes in other firms or industries.     These wage differences are due to

differences in both unobserved ability and effort.     In our empirical work

we test whether technology-related wage differentials exist, but we

cannot,    and do not attempt to, allocate these differentials into ability-

and effort—related components.

        If this hypothesis is correct, then it, in conjunction with our

earlier findings, suggests that "high—tech" industries (industries

experiencing rapid technical change) are high wage industries for two

distinct reasons, which we may refer to as between—group and

within-group. Our earlier paper indicated that the introduction of new

technology increases the relative quantity of highly educated workers,

who of course tend to receive the highest wages.     Technological change
                                        5



therefore increases the average wage rate by increasing the employment

share of high-wage workers.      But the hypothesis we have discussed implies

that technological change also increases wages within education groups,

thus further raising the average wage rate.

     A further issue is whether technology-related differences in the

demand for learning should result in differences in the relative wage

structure, e.g. the relative wages of different skill or occupational

groups.    Most efficiency wage theories do not address this issue because

they assume there to be only a single type of labor.      But Dickens and

Katz (1987) have shown empirically that industry wage premia tend to be

strongly positively correlated across occupations: all workers in

better-paid industries tend to receive high wage premia.       Akerlof and

Yellen (1988) have constructed a theoretical model based on sociological

equity and social exchange theories which may account for this finding.

They postulate two types of labor, and that work effort is inversely

related to the (between-group) variance of the wage distribution, on the

grounds that "firms with less variance in their compensation will have

more harmonious labor relations and thus achieve higher output per

worker."    (p.   45).   Their theory implies that differential demand for

effort would have little or no effect on relative wages; equity consider-

ations would force managers in industries requiring substantial learning

and effort to raise all wages more or less proportionately.

     In   sharp contrast,    the model developed by Lazear (1981) implies that

in the presence of costly monitoring increased demand for effort results

in a steeper age—earnings profile but not necessarily in a higher present

discounted value of earnings over the life cycle.       According to Lazear's

model, to induce employees not to shirk, the employer need pay them wage
                                         6




premia only towards the end of their careers, not throughout their

careers.    Indeed, the optimal wage policy is one of deferred

compensation: young workers tend to be paid less than the value

of their marginal product, old workers more.      If, as we have postulated,

industries experiencing rapid technical change have higher demand for

effort,    then the Lazear model suggests that these industries would

exhibit steeper age—earnings profiles than other industries.       The

high—tech wage premium would be higher for older workers than it would be

for younger workers; indeed,    the premium for younger workers might even

be negative.

     The Lazear model is not the only model that suggests that the slope

of an industry's age-earnings profile might be related to its rate of

technical change.     Such a relationship may also be implied by the theory

of on—the—job training (,    branch of   human capital theory).   The theory of

on-the-job training (OJT) was originally developed to explain why indi-

viduals' earnings tended to increase until late in their careers.        This

theory postulates that, early in a worker's career, his own time and other

resources are invested to develop skills which will increase his future

productivity. The upward slope of the age—earnings profile is inter-

preted to reflect the positive relationship between job tenure and
                                                  The greater the intensity of
productivity resulting from OJT investment.

training,    the steeper the profile.    Several investigators have hypothe-

sized that workers and firms in industries experiencing rapid technical
                                                                 Mincer
change tend to invest relatively heavily in on-the-job training.

and Higuchi (1988) postulated that "rapid technical change which induces

greater and continuous training,    is in part responsible for steeper

profiles." Similarly, Tan suggested that "skill acquisition is greater
                                        7




in more technologically progressive firms."      (p.3) In fact,   he cites

direct evidence that "higher rates of technical change are associated

with increased reliance on in-house company training, and a lower proba-

bility of training from outside sources such as academic institutions,

business and technical schools." (p.2).      He therefore hypothesizes that

"starting wages are lower, and subsequent rates of wage growth with

tenure are higher, the more rapid the rate of growth in total factor

productivity,"   (p.   12) a proxy for technological change.

     Even if the intensity of investment in OJT is greater in industries

experiencing rapid technical change, due to the possibility of skill

obsolescence it is not clear that such industries should exhibit steeper

age-earnings profiles.      The introduction of new technology might be

expected to reduce the current capital value of older workers' past

training investments, hence their wage rate relative to that of younger
        1
workers.

     In addition to influencing the age-structure of earnings, an indus-

try's rate of technical change could also affect the education-strrn*ure

of earnings.   Our previous paper indicated that the ratio of

highly-educated to less educated employment tends to be highest in

industries using relatively new capital equipment. If the supply of

labor to particular industries were less than perfectly elastic, then one

would expect the ratio of highly-educated to less educated wage rates to

also be higher in these industries. The effect of technical change on

this ratio, which- might be interpreted as the "returns to education,"




     1Tan acknowledges that "no account is taken of the possible
consequences of rapid technical change for the rate of skill deprecia-
tion" (p. 8) in his theoretical model.
                                        8




could differ across age groups if education were subject to "vintage

effects." If recently-acquired education confers a greater ability to

adapt to changing technology than education acquired long ago, then one

might expect technical change to increase the returns to education to

young workers more than it would to older workers.        We can investigate

this possibility by estimating the effect of technology indicators on

wage rates cross—classified by age and education.

     This concludes our brief survey of theories and hypotheses suggest-

ing the existence of a link between the level and/or structure of an

industry's wages and its rate of introduction of new technology.        In the

next section we briefly summarize the limited previous empirical evidence

concerning such a link.


III. Literature Review

     Dickens and Katz (1987) analyzed the relationship between wage rates

and the industry's ratio of research and development (R&D) expenditure to

sales -—   controlling   for a large number of other industry and worker

characteristics —-   using   data from the 1983 Current Population Survey.

Numerous studies (see, e.g. Griliches and Lichtenberg (1984)) have shown

that R&D—intensity is a significant determinant of an industry's rate of

total-factor-productivity (TFP) growth, a proxy for its rate of technical

change.    Dickens and Katz found that R&D-intensity was positively related

to wages in the nonunion sector (the correlations were significant about

half the time), but that this result was reversed in the union sector,

where most specifications had a negative coefficient which was sometimes

significant. Their evidence suggests that the union wage premium is

lower -- perhaps even negative --     in -R&D-intensive   industries, but the

effect of R&D-intensity on the overall (average) wage is unclear.
                                      9




     Tan also used Current Population Survey data (for both 1983 and

1984) to study the effect of technical change on wages, but his measures

of technical change were industry-level estimates of total factor produc-

tivity growth constructed by Gollop and Jorgenson. His major findings

were that starting wages (wages of young workers) were lower, and wage

growth with job tenure higher, the higher the industry's rate of produc-

tivity growth during 1973-79. Thus,       consistent with the Lazear and Ofl

models,   the age-earnings profile is steeper in industries experiencing

rapid technical change.   Tan's estimates implied that at the sample mean

value of job tenure, TIP growth has a positive net effect on wages; on

average, then, wage levels are higher in high TIP-growth sectors. Tan

also experimented with interactions between technical change and schooL-

ing but found these to be statistically insignificant.

     Mincer and Higuchi's study focused on differences between the U.S.

and Japan with respect to earnings profiles and turnover rates.      They

used data from the 1979 Japanese Employment Structure Survey and from the

U.S. Panel Study of Income Dynamics for the period 1976—81, in conjunc-

tion with TIP indices for (roughly 2-digit) U.S. and Japanese industries

constructed by Conrad and Jorgenson. Their evidence confirms Tan's

finding that high-TIP-growth industries exhibit steeper age-earnings

profiles than low—TIP—growth industries.       (The equations they estimated

do not reveal the effect of TIP growth on starting wages or on the

overall level of wages in the industry.) Age—earnings profiles in Japan

tend to be much steeper than those in the U.S., and their estimates imply

that as much as 80 percent of the difference in slopes may be accounted

for by Japan's much higher recent rate of productivity growth.
                                       10



      In the next section we re-examine the relationship between

technological change and wages, using a completely new data set which

includes several alternative indicators of the rate of introduction of

new technology.


IV.   Econometric Specification

      We have described several hypotheses that predict a positive rela-

tionship between technological change and wages and, in some cases, a

change in the slope of the age-earnings profile, and an increase in the

returns to education.    In this section of the paper, we describe the

wage equation and data that will be used to test those hypotheses.

      Our database consists of a sample of 35 manufacturing industries

observed in the three Census years, 1960, 1970 and 1980.    From the

Censuses of Population, we selected individuals who were employed in each

of these industries and created seventy age by education by sex cells for

each industry.    Our unit of observation is one of these cells, resulting

in approximately 2400 observations in each of the three years.     The

dependent variable is the mean wage rate of the individuals in the cell.

This specification assumes that age, education and sex are good proxies

for the individual's stock of human capital.

      For each of our 35 industries,   we have obtained three indicators of

technological change.    The first is the age of the industry's equipment

(AGEEQ) which is calculated from the Bureau of Industrial Economics'

Capital Stocks Data Base.    If one accepts the notion of embodied tech-

nological change, then the age of the capital stock is a perfect measure

of the age of the industry's technology. Even if technological change

is not completely embodied, there will be a strong relationship between

the age of the capital stock and the age of the technology for two
                                             11




reasons. First, the introduction of new technology increases equili-

brium industry output, leading to a higher rate of investment and a

younger capital stock.           Second, according to the product life cycle

approach, once a stable production technique is established, intense

capital investment occurs, thereby producing a correlation between age

of the capital stock and age of the technology in a cross section of

industries..        The second technology variable that we use is the ratio of

the industry's purchases of electronic and computing equipment divided

by the industry's output (COMPUTERS). This measure is obtained from

the input-Output Tables.            The third variable is the ratio of the indus-

try's own   R&D      expenditures to its sales (OWNRD) which is obtained from

the technology matrix constructed by Scherer (1984).               While information

on AGEEQ and COMPUTERS is available for each of the three time periods

in our analysis,        OWNR.D   can only be measured for one time period (1974),

thus making this variable a less reliable indicator.

     The following industrial characteristics are also included in the

wage equation: (1) UNION, the percentage of employees in the industry

that are unionized, obtained from Kokkelenberg and Sockell (1985); (2)

AGEPL, the average age of plant in the industry,             obtained from the Bureau

of Industrial Economics' Capital Stocks Data Base;              (3) CAPLAB,   the

capital/labor ratio in the industry,              and (4) GROWTH, the growth rate in

the industry's output over the last decade.              The latter two variables are

calculated from the Census/SRI/Penn Data Base which is derived primarily

from the Annual Survey of Manufactures and the Census of Manufactures.

     The equation that we estimate is:


mW..        a +a 1 AGE+a2 EDUC+a3 SEX+a4 TEJd+0 5 TECH
    lJt         o
            +a6 UNION+a 7 AGEPL+o8 CAPLAB+a9 GROWTH+Ôt                    +e..         (1)
                                                                               1Jt
                                             12




where   W..
               =   the   average wage of individuals in the     th   age by education

                   by sex cell in the jth industry in year t

        AGE    = a vector describing the seven age categories

        EDUC = a vector describing the five education categories

        SEX    = male or female

        YEAR = 1960, 1970 or 1980

        TECH       AGEEQ, COMPUTERS or OWNRD

               = a set of time dummies used to control for the effects of

                   changes over time in unmeasured determinants that are

                   common to all industries.

     We also estimate a 'fixed effects" variant of equation (1) where we

add industry dummies            to control for the effects of any permanent dif-

ferences across industries in unmeasured determinants of wages.                Within

this framework, the coefficients on the independent variables in equa-

tion (1) capture the partial relationships between deviations of these

variables from their respective industry means and deviations of 9n               W.
from its respective industry mean.           A    heuristic interpretation of this

estimation procedure is that it reveals whether an industry that experi-

enced an increase in AGEEQ above the average experienced by all indus-

tries between, say, 1960 and 1970, had a significantly below-average

increase in £n       W. during that period.
V.   Empirical Ana1ysi

        The results      of estimating equation (1) without and with fixed

effects are shown in Tables         1   and 2, respectively.    Note that in

Table 2, OWNRD has been excluded because we only have information on

that variable for one time period.            We begin with the results in Table 1

where in columns (1) through (3) each technology indicator is used
                                             13




                                           Table 1

         Dependent Variable:     Ln (Average Wage in Age By Education By
                                     Sex Cell in an Industry)

                             (t-statistics in parentheses)

                                Without Fixed Effects

Independent        (lj             (2)               (3)       (4)         (5)
Variable

                    - .051                                     - .022      — .022
AGEEQ
                 (—16.04)                                    (—5.28)     (—5.27)

OWN.RD                              .101                         .075          .058
                                 (17.07)                     (10.43)      (4.94)

COMPUTERS                                            3.19      1.93        2.24
                                                  (13.55)     (7.47)      (8.04)
AGEPL                                                             .004         .007
                                                              (2.40)      (4.16)

UNION                .336           .386              .388       .399          .412
                  (24.13)        (27.06)          (26.65)    (26.49)     (26.63)
CAPLAB                                                                     —.013
                                                                          (—   .38)
GROWTH                                                                         .971
                                                                          (6.90)
R2                   .986           .986              .986       .987          .987


N                 7284           7106              7227       7106        7106



Note:     All equations include age, education, sex and year vectors which
are   in all cases statistically significant.
                                      14



                                    Table 2

        Dependent Variable:   Ln (Average Wage in Age By Education By
                                  Sex Cell in an Industry)

                        (t-statistics in parentheses)

                              With Fixed Effects

AGEEQ                - .017                                   - .018
                                                      .
                    (—3.54)                                 (—3.67)

COMPUTERS                                     -1.68          -1.166
                                           (—1.04)           (—.71)

AGEPL                                                          .004
                                                             (1.79)

UNION                  .350                     .360           .387
                     (5,70)                   (5.87)         (5.23)

CAPLAB                                                         .001
                                                             (1.14)

GROWTH                                                        - .025
                                                             (-.15)

R2                     .920                     .920           .921

N                      7284                     7227           7227



Note: All equations include age, education, sex, year and industry
vectors that are in all cases statistically significant.
                                     15




separately and only the sex, age, education and union variables are

included.2    All three technology measures have the right signs and are

significant.    Individuals in industries with new equipment, high R&D

to   sales ratios, or a large share of computer purchases relative to

the value of output, are paid higher wages than observationally
                                                                equi-
valent individuals in other industries.      In column (4) all three tech-

nology variables, as well as AGEPL, are used together and each is still

significant. These results are consistent with the demand for learning

model discussed in Section II; workers in industries experiencing rapid

technical change receive higher wages than workers with similar educa-

tion and demographic attributes in other industries because of differ-

ences in both unobserved ability and effort.

      It is possible that our technology variables are highly correlated

with the capital/labor ratio and the growth rate of output in the indus-

try, two other possible determinants of wages.     These two variables are

added in column (5), and, remarkably,     all three of our technology varia-

bles are still significant.    CAPLAB has the wrong sign in column (5) but

was positive and very significant when the technology variables were

excluded.    Previous studies that report a positive effect of CAPLAB   on


wages may therefore have obtained   a spurious result that is due to the

positive correlation between the capital/labor ratio and the rate of

technological change in the industry.     Our analysis implies that it is

technological change, not the capital/labor ratio, that determines the

wage premium.




     2For the sake of brevity, the coefficients on sex, age, education
and year are not shown in the table. The standard findings were obtained
                                      16




        Table 2 reports the results of estimating equation (1) with fixed

effects.     Although the coefficient on AGEEQ declines about 213 in magni-

tude,    it remains negative and significant, consistent with our hypothesis

that the introduction of new technology increases the demand for learn-

ing.     COMPUTERS, however, is no longer significant. Hence, AGEEQ appears

to be the strongest indicator of technological change.

        The analysis so far has assumed that the impact of technological

change on wages is the same for all workers in the industry.    We dis-

cussed in Section II how and why technological change might have differ-

ent impacts on highly educated vs. less educated, and young vs. older

workers.     We now allow for unequal effects of technological change on

different demographic groups by creating interaction variables between

the technology measure and several age by education categories.     The age

categories are (1) ages 18-34 and (2) ages 35-64, and the education

categories are (1) less than college graduate and (2) at least a college

graduate. Tables 3 and 4 report these results from equations estimated

without and with fixed effects, respectively. In these tables, we show

the effects of technological change on the two age groups, the two

education groups and the four age by education groups.     The variables

included in the equations are UNION, CAPLAB, GROSQTH, AGE, SEX, EDUC, and

YEAR.     GROWTH is also interacted with age, education or both, depending

on the interaction structure that is used for the technology variable.

This means that if we do observe an impact of technological change on the




in all of our equations. Men earn more than women and earnings rise with
age and with education.
                                        17




                                      Table 3

                    Wage Effects By Age and Education,
                   from Equations without Fixed Effects


A.   AGEEQ
                            Total               Educ      15    Educ   1

      Total                  - .041                    — .038      — .056
                          (—12.19)               (-10.62)        (-6.67)

                             — .032                    - .028      - .066
      Ages 18-34
                           (-6.19)                (-5.45)        (-7.02)

                             — .046                    - .044      - .053
      Ages 35-64
                          (-11.10)               (-10.19)        (-6.05)

B.   COMPUTERS
                            Total               Educ      15    Educ   16

      Total                  3.31                   3.20           3.78
                           (14.25)                (12.54)         (7.25)

      Ages 18—34             3.24                   3.17           4.14
                            (9.35)                 (8.28)         (5.51)

      Ages 35—64             3.37                   3.23           3.77
                           (11.15)                 (9.85)         (5.35)

C.   OWNRD
                            Total               Educ      15    Educ   16

      Total                   .119                   .119           .117
                           (12.28)                (11.85)         (6.17)

      Ages 18-34              .123                   .123           .141
                            (9.83)                 (9.40)         (5.05)

      Ages 35-64              .118                   .118           .106
                           (10.67)                (10.35)         (4.50)

Note: The age, education, sex and year vectors as well as UNION and
CAPLAB are included in these equations.  In addition, age-education
interaction effects on GROQTh are used which correspond to the
interaction effects on the technology variable.
                                         18




                                       Table 4

                     Wage Effects By Age and Education,
                      from Equations with Fixed Effects


A.   AGEEQ
                            Total                Educ       15   Educ      16

        Total                 - .016                    - .014      - .029
                            (-3.38)                (-2.90)        (-3.33)
                             - .005                     - .002      - .037
        Ages 18-34
                             (—.89)                 (—.46)        (-393)
        Ages 35-64           - .023                     - .021      - .026
                            (-4.30)                (-3.93)        (-2.94)

B.   C01PUTERS
                            Total                Educ      15    Educ      16

        Total               -1.52                   -1.32           -.61
                              .92)                  (— .80)        (— .34)

        Ages 18-34          —1.64                   -1.41           -.26
                            (—.98)                  (—.85)         (—.   15)

        Ages 35-64          -1.48                   -1.31           -.66
                             (- .89)                (—.80)         (— .37)


Note:  The age, education, sex and year vectors as well as UNION and
CAPLAB are included in these equations. In addition, age-education
interaction effects on GROWTh are used which correspond to the
interaction effects on the technology variable.
                                       19



structure of wages in the industry, it cannot be attributed to a possible

correlation between technological change and output growth.

     In panel   A   of Table 3, the effect of technological change on rela-

tive wages is estimated with AGEEQ as the technology indicator. We see

that all workers in industries with new technology have higher wages,

ceteris paribus. Although all employed workers benefit from the intro-

duction of new technology in their industries, we do see that some

workers gain more than others.      In particular, the wages of college

graduates increase more than those of the less educated employees, but

this difference is not significant when older workers are compared.        The

increase in the relative wage of college graduates, especially younger

ones, is consistent with the comparative advantage theory proposed in

our earlier paper.      As new technology is introduced, there is an in-

crease in the relative demand for highly educated individuals (especial-

ly those whose education is recently acquired). Wages rise if the

supply of labor to particular industries is less than perfectly elastic.

     Regarding the impact of technological change on the age earnings

profile, the results in panel A are ambiguous. We find that the profile

is steeper when we do not disaggregate by education, and, after dis-

aggregating, only for the less-educated workers in the technologically

advanced industries.3 The fact that this does not hold for the college




     31t might be argued that the steeper age-earnings profiles in high-tec
industries result from the negative correlation between innovation and
percent unionized in the industry. Connolly at al. (1986) and Hirsch and
Link (1987) have documented this negative relationship. We tested for
this by adding an interaction term between UNION and AGE, and found that
the AGEEQ—AGE interaction was unaffected; age—earnings profiles are
steeper in industries introducing new technology.
                                         20



graduates casts doubt on the validity of the specific—training hypothesis
-—   at   least the one not allowing for skill obsolescence. If the introduc-

tion of new technology results in greater investments in the specific

human capital of employees, we should have seen this effect most strongly

for the highly-educated workers, given the positive correlation between

education and training that has been observed in other studies.          One

possible explanation is that skill obsolescence is much stronger for the

college graduates; thus, technological change reduces the'wages of older

college graduates relative to that of younger graduates. Finally, the

results could be consistent with the Lazear model of deferred compensa-

tion if employers find it more difficult to monitor the shirking of less

educated workers. We find this assumption rather implausible since the

less educated workers are more likely to be performing repetitive tasks

that are easily monitored.

          In panel B, we use   COUTERS   as our technology indicator.   The

results here are basically consistent with those in panel A.        All workers

in industries with large computer purchases have higher wages and the

relative wage of college graduates in both age groups rises.        There is no

support for the specific training hypothesis or the Lazear model since

neither of the two age-earnings profiles becomes steeper.        In panel C,

the R&D variable is used to measure technological change.        Again, all

four groups have higher wages in industries with high R&D to sales

ratios.       The relative wage of college graduates in the young age group

rises and there is no      evidenc that age—earnings profiles become

steeper.

          Finally, in Table 4, the relative wage results are presented from

equations with fixed effects.       The findings are virtually identical to
                                       21



those reported in Table   3.   The introduction of new technology leads to

an increase in the relative wage of college graduates, an increase in

the relative wage of older workers when we do not disaggregate by educa-

tion, and an increase in the slope of the age-earnings profile for the

less-educated workers.


VI.   Conclusions

      This paper examined the relationship between technological change

and wages using pooled cross—sectional industry-level data and several

alternative indicators of the rate of introduction of new technology.

Our main finding is that industries with a high rate of technical change

pay higher wages to workers of given age and education, compared to less

technologically advanced industries.        We have argued that this is consis-

tent with the notion that the introduction of new technology creates a

demand for learning,   and a combination of employee ability and effort is

required for learning to occur.    A related finding is that the wages of

highly educated workers (especially recent graduates) rise relative to

those of less educated workers; this is consistent with the notion that

educated workers are better learners.

      The evidence presented in this paper is important for the following

reasons. First, our results suggest that observed industry wage differen

tIals can, indeed, be market—clearing.        Industries that have a greater

need for employees who are good learners will pay higher wages, in

equilibrium, than industries less dependent on worker learning.        Some

researchers have argued that the existence of persistent industry wage

differentials is proof of market failure. But the fact that these

differentials are correlated with industry rates of technical change

suggests that they are not a consequence of market imperfections, but
                                   22



instead reflect differential demand for ability and effort.   A second

implication of our results is that the continued growth of the high-tech-

nology sector in the United States will require a steady supply of

workers who are good learners. This supply can be influenced by govern-

ment education policies that will teach students to be better learners as

well as by human resource management techniques that will elicit greater

worker effort.     -
                                          23



                                    REYERENCES




Akerlof, George and Yellen, Janet, Efficiency Wage Models of the Labor

     Market, Orlando:     Academic Press, 1986.

Akerlof, George, and Yellen, Janet, "Fairness and Unemployment,"

     American Economic Review, May 1988, 78, 44-49.

Bartel, Ann P. and Frank R. Lichtenberg, "The Comparative Advantage of

     Educated Workers in Implementing New Technology,"          The Review

     of Economics and Statistics, February 1987,        1-11.


Connolly, Robert A. ,   Barry T.   Hirsch and Mark Hirschey, "Union Rent

     Seeking, Intangible Capital, and Market Value of the Firm,"

     Review of Economics and Statistics, November 1986, pp. 562-577.

Dickens, William T. and Lawrence F. Katz, "Inter-Industry Wage Differ-

     ences and Industry Characteristics," in Kevin Lang and Jonathan

     Leonard, eds., Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets, Ne

     York: Basil Blackwell, 1987, pp. 48—89.

Griliches, Zvi, and Frank Lichtenberg, "Interindustry Technology Flows

     and Productivity Growth:      A   Re-Examination," Review of Economics   an

     Statistics, May 1984, pp. 324-328.

Hirsch, Barry T. and Albert N. Link,        "Labor Union Effects on Innovative

     Activity," Journal of Labor Research, Fall 1987, pp. 323-332.

Kokkelenberg, Edward C. and Donna R. Sockell, "Union Membership in the

     United States, 1973—1981," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,

     July 1985, 497-543.

Lazear, Edward P., "Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hour

     Restrictions," American Economic Review, September 1981, 71, 606-2(
                                   24




Mincer, Jacob, and Higuchi, Yoshio, "Wage Structures and Labor Turnover

     in the U.S. and in Japan," Journal of the Japanese and International

     Economy, forthcoming.

Scherer, Fredric M., "Using Linked Patent and R & D Data to Measure

     Interindustry Techiaology Flows," in Zvi Griliches (ed.), R & U,

     Patents and Productivity (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

     1984).

Tan, Hong W., "Technical Change and Its Consequences for Training and

     Earnings," Rand Corporation, mimeo.

Wells, Louis T., Jr. (ed.), The Product Life Cycle and International

     Trade (Boston: Harvard Business School Division of Research, 1972).
