                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   CIVIC CAPITAL AND SOCIAL DISTANCING DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

                                         John M. Barrios
                                        Efraim Benmelech
                                        Yael V. Hochberg
                                          Paola Sapienza
                                          Luigi Zingales

                                       Working Paper 27320
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27320


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by John M. Barrios, Efraim Benmelech, Yael V. Hochberg, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi
Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Civic Capital and Social Distancing during the Covid-19 Pandemic
John M. Barrios, Efraim Benmelech, Yael V. Hochberg, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 27320
June 2020
JEL No. K42,P16,Z1

                                          ABSTRACT

The success of non-pharmaceutical interventions to contain pandemics often depends greatly
upon voluntary compliance with government guidelines. What explains variation in voluntary
compliance?Using mobile phone and survey data, we show that during the early phases of
COVID-19, voluntary social distancing was higher when individuals exhibit a higher sense of
civic duty. This is true for U.S. individuals, U.S. counties, and European regions. We also show
that after U.S. states began re-opening, social distancing remained more prevalent in high civic
capital counties. Our evidence points to the importance of civic capital in designing public policy
responses to pandemics.

John M. Barrios                                  Paola Sapienza
The University of Chicago                        Kellogg School of Management
Booth School of Business                         Northwestern University
5807 S Woodlawn Ave                              2221 Campus Drive
Chicago, IL 60637                                Evanston, IL 60208
john.barrios@chicagobooth.edu                    and CEPR
                                                 and also NBER
Efraim Benmelech                                 paola-sapienza@northwestern.edu
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University                          Luigi Zingales
2001 Sheridan Road                               Booth School of Business
Evanston, IL 60208                               The University of Chicago
and NBER                                         5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
e-benmelech@kellogg.northwestern.edu             Chicago, IL 60637
                                                 and NBER
Yael V. Hochberg                                 luigi.zingales@ChicagoBooth.edu
Jones Graduate School of Business
Rice University
6100 Main Street, MS-531
McNair Hall Room 331
Houston, TX 77005
and Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and also NBER
hochberg@rice.edu
Introduction

   In their fight against COVID-19, governments around the world face technological and social
constraints. To date, technological constraints (e.g., how many tests per day can be administrated)
have been of primary concern. As the fight moves from the acute phase to a trench warfare, however,
social constraints (e.g., ensuring adequate compliance with public health recommendations) become
extremely important for the success of containment strategies until a vaccine is developed. Social
distancing behavior depends on the willingness of individuals to consider the welfare of the collective
when taking their own actions—a concept that has been linked to civic capital.
   In this article, we analyze how differences in civic capital—across individuals, U.S. counties, and
European regions—can account for varying degrees of voluntary compliance with social distancing
rules during the early phases of the COVID-19 pandemic. Building on Almond and Verba (1963) and
Guiso et al. (2011), we define the civic capital of a community as the "set of values and beliefs that
help a group overcome the free-rider problem in the pursuit of socially valuable activities" (Guiso et
al., 2011). In communities with higher civic capital, individuals display prosocial behavior that does
not have an immediate personal utility (such as voting, volunteering, or donating blood), and trust
other fellow citizens more in general. In these communities, citizens are able to solve coordination
games better and provide public goods (Herrmann et al., 2008).
   Thus far, the emerging literature on compliance with social distancing instructions during the
COVID-19 pandemic has focused on political leaning and trust in government. In the United States,
Trump leaning counties comply less (Alcott et al., 2020; Barrios and Hochberg, 2020). In Europe,
regions that trust the government more comply more (Bargain and Aminjonov, 2020). Our analysis
moves beyond political affiliation and shows that civic capital has a vital role in explaining the
behavior of individuals during the COVID crisis. We find that after controlling for political affiliation,
civic capital can explain compliance with social distancing not only in the United States but also in
Europe.

Results

   We begin by analyzing the relationship between social distancing behavior and civic capital across
U.S. counties. To measure social distancing behavior (SDB), we rely on Google Community Mobility
Reports. Google provides anonymized data on changes in the number of visitors to (or the time spent
in) certain categorized places, compared to a baseline represented by the average value for the same
day of the week during the period Jan 3 – Feb 6, 2020. Figure S1 in the Supplementary Material maps
                                                    2
trends in mobility behavior geospatially. In the supplementary material, we show the robustness of
our results to using mobility measures computed from a separate source assembled by Unacast, a large
location data products company.
   Civic capital is more challenging to measure. Our first indicator of civic capital is electoral
participation, since voting is the ultimate example of civic duty, with no personal payoff. We compute
average voter participation during the presidential elections from 2004 to 2016, obtained from the
MIT Election Data Science and Lab (MEDSL). We map this measure geospatially in Figure S2 in the
Supplementary Materials. In the supplementary material, we show that our results are robust when we
use the measure of Social Capital developed by the U.S. Joint Economic Committee (which adds
several other county-level measures of community behavior).
   In Figures S4 and S5, we present bin scatter plots relating social distancing behavior measures to
civic capital. Each of the plots controls for the log number of confirmed cases, population density,
income per capita, population, the day of the week, and the number of days since the first case in the
county. Increases in civic capital are associated with decreases in mobility data near restaurants, cafes,
shopping centers, theme parks, museums, libraries, and movie theaters (henceforth Retail &
Recreation). Note that this category explicitly excludes mobility around groceries and pharmacies,
and thus can be considered as the group of non-essential retailers. This negative association provides
preliminary evidence on the variation of SDB across levels of civic capital. In Figure S4, we also
present mobility results for the place of residence measure. If people are less likely to go out in
counties with high civic capital, they will spend more time in the proximity of their residences. The
results confirm this trend.
   We formally investigate the relation between SDB and civic capital by estimating the following
linear specification:

   (1) !"#$%& ($)*%+#$+, -.ℎ%0$"123 = 53 6$,ℎ 7$0$# 7%8$*%&2 ∗ (%:3 +
       < 6.%&*ℎ 7"+*1"&)2,3 + 7">+*:?@ + !*%*.A(%:?@ + B2,3

where 53 are time-varying coefficients on High Civic Capital, 6.%&*ℎ 7"+*1"&)2,3 is a vector of
controls for exposure to COVID-19 in the county, including the log number of new COVID-19 cases
and deaths measured on each county day. The specification includes county fixed effects to capture
the local economics and demographics at the county and State by Day fixed effects to capture time
variation in compliance measures at the state level through the sample period.

                                                    3
   We present the results of the estimation graphically in Figure 1, which plots the 53 from estimating
specification (1) with mobility data for Retail & Recreation as a dependent variable (blue line) and
mobility data for Residential areas (red line). Each of the 53 estimates include 95 percent confidence
intervals. Note that we expect different trends: mobility data for Retail & Recreation should go down,
while mobility data for Residential areas should go up after the outbreak of the pandemic. Starting
around March 10th 2020, the percent changes in mobility around Retail and Recreation (blue line)
shows a much steeper decline in counties with higher civic capital. If people are less likely to go out
and about in counties with high civic capital, they should also spend more time in proximity to their
residences. The red line in Figure 1 shows that to be the case. In counties with high civic capital, the
percentage increase in mobility in residential areas is higher than in counties with low civic capital.
The graph of mobility in residential areas exhibits sharp drops during the weekends. This is not
surprising since the difference in time spent at home before and after the pandemic should be smaller
during the weekends than during the week. Consequently, even the difference between high civic
capital areas and the rest is compressed. Notice, however, that the difference is significantly positive
even during the weekends. In Figure S6, we present the results of a similar estimation using our
alternative measures of SDB from Unacast, with similar patterns.
   In the Supplementary Material (Table S1), we also estimate a more explicit multivariate model
regressing changes in mobility on voter participation from presidential elections. In this model, we
include Day X State fixed effects, log population, log population density, per capita income, Trump
vote share, log(1+number of new COVID-19 cases), and log (1+number of new COVID-19 deaths).
The control variables replace the county fixed effect in (1). Substituting these controls does not change
the economic magnitude of the civic capital coefficient, further confirming that social distancing is
substantially higher in areas with higher civic capital compared to other areas, even once we account
for other characteristics, such as political orientation. Tables S2, S3 and S4 in the Supplementary
Material replicate this analysis using: (1) the alternative Unacast SDB outcomes (Table S2), and (2)
alternative measures of civic capital (Tables S3, S4).
   One potential objection is that social distance behavior may be driven not by voluntary
compliance, but by mandatory orders to close businesses or "stay home." If there are stricter social
distancing orders in areas with high civic capital, our civic capital variable may capture local
government mandates rather than voluntary behavior. In Figure 1, we absorbed any state-level order
in State X Day fixed effects. In Table 1, we explicitly examine the differential response of High Civic
Capital areas to state-level rules and a national guideline. We estimate the following regression:
                                                   4
           (2) !"#$%& ($)*%+#$+, -.ℎ%0$"12.3
                          = 5G H")* !*%*. I%+J%*$+, !*%: 6"K.L,3
                          + 5M H")* !*%*. I%+J%*$+, !*%: 6"K.L3 ∗ 6$,ℎ 7$0$# 7%8$*%&2
                          + 5N H")* O%*$"+%& P>$J.&$+.)3 ∗ 6$,ℎ 7$0$# 7%8$*%&2
                          + < 6.%&*ℎ 7"+*1"&)2,3 + 7">+*:?@ + (%:?@ + B2,3

where 6.%&*ℎ 7"+*1"&)2,3 is a vector of controls for exposure to COVID-19 in the county including
the log number of new COVID-19 cases and deaths measured on each county day and
H")* !*%*. I%+J%*$+, !*%: 6"K.L,3 is an indicator variable that is set to one in the state-days after
a state implements a mandatory stay at home ordinance. We also interact this variable with an
indicator variable for high civic capital counties (6$,ℎ 7$0$# 7%8$*%&2 ), allowing us to see the
differential response in SDB for these counties relative to others. As a control, we include a similar
interaction with an indicator for the day being post March 16th, when the White House issued a
national stay at home recommendation (Coronavirus Guideline for America). This allows us to look
directly at the effect of the national-level guidelines on compliance (H")* O%*$"+%& P>$J.&$+.)3 ).
The specifications also include county fixed effects and day fixed effects to capture time-invariant
county characteristics (such as the political orientation of the county) and time-varying changes in
responses to the pandemic.
   When we use changes in mobility around Retail & Recreation as our dependent variable, both the
coefficient on H")* !*%*. I%+J%*$+, !*%: 6"K.L,3 and the coefficient on the interaction between
this variable and the indicator for High Civic Capital county are negative and statistically significant
(Table 1 columns (1)). In other terms, when a state issues an order to stay home all counties reduce
mobility around non-essential businesses relative to the pre-COVID period, but high civic capital
counties more so. As predicted by the civic capital explanation, we observe the opposite effect in
column (3) where the dependent variable is mobility around residences: post state stay-home
mandates, all counties increase the amount of time spent in residential areas relative to the pre-COVID
period, but high civic capital counties more so.
   While we absorb all differences in political leaning in the above specification with county fixed
effects, these differences might still impact the response to mandatory rules. For this reason, in
columns (2) and (4), we add an interaction between H")* !*%*. I%+J%*$+, !*%: 6"K.L,3 and a
county's share of votes for Trump in the last presidential election. Similarly, we interact Trump's vote
share with the H")* O%*$"+%& P>$J.&$+.)3 dummy. Both these interactions exhibit estimated
                                                   5
coefficients with the expected sign (positive for the changes in mobility around retailers and negative
for the changes in mobility around residence). The coefficients of the interaction between Trump's
vote share and national guidelines (i.e., guidelines issued by Trump) are also statistically significant
at conventional levels. In contrast, the coefficient of the interaction between state-level mandates and
Trump's vote share is not significant at the conventional levels. Most importantly, both the economic
magnitude and the statistical significance of the interactions between the introduction of state and
national rules and the High Civic Capital dummy are unchanged by the introduction of the interactions
with Trump's vote share. This confirms that the civic capital explanation of voluntary compliance is
orthogonal to the “political affiliation " explanation. In supplementary material, we repeat this
analysis using our alternative mobility measures (Table S5) and alternative measures of civic capital
(Table S6). Our results remain robust in all these alternative specifications.
   While our county-based regressions account for most of the variation (R2 between 87% and 95%),
it is still possible, at least theoretically, that there could be some unobserved variable at the county
level that is correlated with High Civic Capital, and which drives our results. For example, it is
possible that more restrictive stay at home mandates are issued in counties with higher civic capital.
To address this potential limitation, in Table 2, we examine individual-level survey data. Since data
on individual cell phones is not available, we rely on a self-reported measure of social interaction that
estimates social distancing behavior. The survey was conducted for the Financial Trust Index via
telephone by SSRS, on April 6th, 2020–April 12th, 2020, among U.S. adults. A total of 980 interviews
were conducted, with a margin of error for total respondents of +/-3.43% at the 95% confidence level.
The question we use is, "how many people were you in close physical contact with socially in the past
seven days, not including people that live with you?" The possible answers were "None" (35% of the
respondents), "Less than 3" (26%), 3 to 5 (19%), 6 to 10 (8%), and more than 10 (12%).
   The survey does not contain questions on civic capital directly. However, it does contain a
question on generalized trust in others: "On a scale from 1 to 5 where 1 means "I do not trust them at
all" and 5 means "I trust them completely," Can you please tell me how much do you trust other people
in general?" 14% choose 1, 16% 2, 41% 3, 20% 4 and 9% 5. Since high civic capital individuals can
be trusted more not to cheat, civic capital and generalized trust are linked theoretically and
empirically. This is certainly true at the aggregate level (Putnam, 1993), but also at the personal level
to the extent one projects their own behavior onto others, as observed in the literature on trust (Glaeser
et al., 2000). For example, in the European Social Value Survey, the correlation between voting and
generalized trust in others at the individual level is 48%. This measure of cultural attitudes is
                                                    6
commonly used to measure subjective social capital (Alesina and Giuliano, 2015). The survey also
includes a question about trust in the government (where 30% respond either 4 or 5) and a question
about political leaning (where 30% lean Republican, 41% Democrat, and 29% neither).
   Table 2 reports the estimates from an ordered probit, where our dependent variable is the response
to the question on the number of people outside your household you were in contact with the previous
week. In column (1), our explanatory variables are the degree of trust in others and the degree of trust
in government. Consistent with our county-level results, more trusting people see fewer people outside
of their family, i.e., they self-distance more. An increase from the median level of trust (category 3)
to a complete level of trust (category 5) reduces the probability of interacting with 10 people or more
by 6 percentage points (60% of the sample probability). In contrast, people who trust the government
more tend to socialize more with people outside their family. This effect, however, is a proxy for
political leaning. When we insert a dummy equal to 1 if a respondent declares to lean Republican
(column 2), the effect of trust in government disappears, while the effect of trust in others remains
virtually unchanged. As was the case for the county data, there seem to be two sources of variation in
SDB: one related to political affiliation, and the other to civic capital, and the two are orthogonal to
each other. These results are unchanged when we control for fear of getting killed by the virus as self-
reported in the survey, and for other regional conditions (number of COID-19 cases in the country,
population density, income per capita), as we report in columns (3) and (4). Thus, the individual
survey results confirm the cell-phone based results at the county level.
   Is the effect of civic capital just a U.S. phenomenon, or does it apply to other countries as well?
To answer this question, we turn next to European data. National guidelines and shopping habits are
too different across countries to allow comparison across countries. We therefore conduct a within
country analysis, as we have done for the U.S. above. To do so, we cannot use a national measure of
civic capital like Coen et al. (2019), rather, we need sub-national measures of civic capital. The
European Social Survey (ESS) provides such a measure at the sub-regional level. For the 41 countries
participating in the survey, the ESS asks the question, "generally speaking, would you say that most
people can be trusted, or that you can't be too careful in dealing with people? Please tell me on a score
of 0 to 10, where 0 means you can't be too careful, and 10 means that most people can be trusted."
   The ESS countries are divided into sub-regions with different levels of coarseness. The NUTS 1
classification includes 82 sub-regions, while NUTS 2 includes 114. Since the number of observations
per country remains the same, there is a trade-off between going deeper into the sub-region
classification and more noisy civic capital measures. This is due to the sparsity of respondents as we
                                                   7
go deeper into sub-region classifications. In Figure 2 and Table 3, we use ESS data at the NUTS 1
level, utilizing the last eight waves of the ESS. Due to a change in the NUTS classification system for
France, we are only able to utilize the last wave of the ESS survey for France. In the Supplementary
Material, we show the robustness to using NUTS2 level classifications (Table S7). To measure SDB,
we use the same Google mobility data we used for the United States.
    Figure 2 plots the estimated 53 of a specification similar to (1) based on European data, where
High Civic Capital areas are defined based on the average level of generalized trust of an area vis-à-
vis the national average. We plot in the same figure the 53 of the regression of the mobility around
Retail and Recreation locations (blue line) and those of the regression of the mobility around
Residences (red line). As expected, and consistent with our U.S. county and individual-level findings,
mobility around retail and recreation locations declines after the beginning of March 2020 and more
so in high civic capital areas. By contrast, the mobility in the residential areas goes up, and the more
so in high civic capital areas.
    In Table 3, we reports the estimates from richer multi-variate regressions in the spirit of Table S1.
For each of the dependent variables, the first specification (columns (1) and (4) contains our measure
of civic capital (average trust in the region), the log number of COVID-19 deaths per million
inhabitants (as a proxy for the severity of the pandemic in the area), and population density. We also
include country fixed effects and calendar-day fixed effects. Even after controlling for the severity of
the disease in the region and population density, we observe that more civic areas experience a steeper
decline in mobility around retailing and a steeper rise in mobility in residential areas. A one standard
deviation increase in the average trust is associated with a 0.1 standard deviation change in mobility
near retailing. This effect, which is statistically significant at the conventional level, is unchanged in
column (2) and (5) where we control for the average share of votes to right-wing parties (as defined
by the ESS). Finally, in columns (3) and (6) we control for the percentage of people in the region
trusting the politician more than the country average as in Bargain and Aminjonov (2020). While the
generalized trust coefficient is slightly reduced, it remains similar in magnitude and statistically
different from zero at the conventional level. Consistently with the results from the U.S. survey data,
trust in others and trust in politicians capture two separate effects.
    Overall, our findings show that civic capital is correlated with social distancing behavior
consistently across individuals, European regions, and U.S. counties.



                                                     8
Discussion

   Understanding voluntary compliance with government guidelines is an essential step towards
designing any government policy, but especially so during a pandemic. If citizens cannot be trusted
to comply voluntarily with reasonable social distancing rules, the government has to either mandate
rigid rules and enforce them, or use alternative mechanisms to contain the disease.
   As many countries and states are re-opening their economies, epidemiologists can only predict
how individuals respond to the new rules (and thus how the disease will spread) by looking at the
mobility of individuals after the restrictions have been lifted. Any variable able to predict compliance
can significantly improve their predictions and thus provide better policy guidance. Our analysis
shows that the level of civic capital is an important factor in explaining voluntary compliance not only
across U.S. counties, but also across regions of Europe, and even across individuals. These findings
help explain why Sweden (a very high civic capital country) has chosen a very different (and less
economically costly) approach to fight the disease. It did not need to order businesses to close down,
because it could expect shoppers and businesses to behave safely. By contrast, Italy (a low civic capital
country in Europe) had to kill its economy via strict lockdown to achieve the same result.
   We can further confirm the predictive ability of civic capital on SDB by looking at the changes in
mobility around the time U.S. states began to loosen their restrictions. Figure 3 plots the changes in
mobility near Retail & Recreation for high civic capital counties (in blue) and low civic capital
counties (in red). As before, the high civic capital counties are defined as those in the top quartile of
voter participation, and the low civic capital ones are those in the bottom quartile. As Figure 3 shows,
even as states began loosening restrictions, social distancing compliance remained steady in high civic
capital counties (blue line), even when it was not mandated by the law. By contrast, in low civil capital
counties (red line), mobility around Retail & Recreation increased steadily even before the loosening
of restrictions and continued to increase afterwards. In the Supplemental Material Figure S7, we
perform the same analysis for mobility near residences, with symmetric results. We also perform the
same analysis with Unacast data, with similar results.
   While crucial in designing a response to the pandemic, our results have implications beyond
COVID-19. They confirm the idea that a local region's civic capital is a source of collective capital,
enabling societies to function better in general. For example, from a government perspective, in high
civic capital regions, government programs (such as unemployment insurance) may be more effective
because their deadweight cost is lower. Furthermore, from a private sector perspective, high civic

                                                   9
capital may enable to private businesses to function better. For example, Gennaioli et al. (2020) show
that in high civic capital countries, private risk-sharing can be more wide-spread because insurance
contracts are less likely to be abused. Ultimately, civic capital is an essential source of a country's
comparative advantage.




                                                  10
References

    Alesina, Alberto, and Paola Giuliano (2015), “Culture and Institutions,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 53(4), 898–944

   Allcott H., Boxell L., Conway J., Gentzkow M., Thaler M., Yang D. (2020), “Polarization and
Public Health: Partisan Differences in Social Distancing during the Coronavirus Pandemic”

  Almond, Gabriel A. and Sidney Verba (1963), ―The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes and
Democracy in Five Nations, Princeton: Princeton University Press.

    Bargain Olivier and Ulugbek Aminjonov (2020), “Trust and Compliance to Public Health
Policies in Time of COVID-19.”

   Barrios, John and Yael V. Hochberg, 2020, "Risk Perception Through the Lens of Politics in the
Time of the COVID-19 Pandemic, 2020, Becker Friedman Institute Working Paper # 2020-32

   Cohn, Alain, Michel, André Maréchal, David Tannenbaum, Christian Lukas Zünd, 2019, “Civic
honesty around the globe, Science 365, 70–73.

   Glaeser, Edward, E. L., D. I. Laibson, J. A. Scheinkman, C. L. Soutter, 2000, "Measuring
Trust," Quarterly Journal of Economics. 115, 811–846.

   Gennaioli, Nicola, Rafael LaPorta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2020,
“Trust and Insurance Contracts” NBER working paper.

   Guiso Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales (2011) "Civic Capital as the Missing Link,"
Handbook of Social Economics, edited by Jess Benhabib, Alberto Bisin and Matthew Jackson,
Volume 1, pp. 417-480, Elsevier.

   Hermann, Benedikt, Christian Thöni, and Simon Gächter (2008) "Antisocial Punishment Across
Societies," Science, March 7th, vol. 319, p 1362-1367.

    Putnam, Robert D., 1993, "Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy,
Princeton University Press.




                                                11
Tables and Figures



                                                 Figure 1: Mobility and High Civic Capital
                          0




                                                                                                                              .04
                          -.02




                                                                                                                              .03
                          -.04




                                                                                                                              .02
                          -.06




                                                                                                                              .01
                          -.08
                          -.1




                                                                                                                              0
                             25


                                       29


                                                .4


                                                          .8


                                                                     2


                                                                               6


                                                                                        0


                                                                                                  4


                                                                                                            9


                                                                                                                       4
                                                                   .1


                                                                             .1


                                                                                       .2


                                                                                                .2


                                                                                                          .2


                                                                                                                    r.
                                              ar


                                                        ar
                          b.


                                    b.




                                                                                                                  Ap
                                                                 ar


                                                                           ar


                                                                                     ar


                                                                                              ar


                                                                                                        ar
                                             M


                                                       M
                        Fe


                                  Fe




                                                               M


                                                                         M


                                                                                   M


                                                                                             M


                                                                                                       M
                                                      Retail and Recreation                       Residential



Figure 1— The plotted estimates are obtained by regressing the percent change in mobility measures on the interaction between high voter
participation county and the day indicator. The specification includes county fixed effects, state by day fixed effects, and controls for COVID-19 cases
and deaths. Each of the estimates includes 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. The plot captures the
difference in social distance behavior between high civic capital counties and the rest of the counties on each day. The change in mobility in retail
(excluding groceries and pharmacies) and recreation is plotted in blue. The percent changes in Retail and Recreation show a much higher decline in
mobility in counties with higher civic capital. In red, we plot Residential mobility, which shows the opposite trend; the reference y-axis is on the right.
When practicing social distancing, people tend to move more in the proximity of their residence. In areas with high civic capital, the percentage
change in residential mobility is greater than in areas with low civic capital. The graph shows sharp differences on weekends.




                                                                           12
                                        Table 1: Civic Capital and Social Distancing Behavior
                                                              (1)                       (2)                       (3)                    (4)
   VARIABLES                                           Chg. Retail Visits        Chg. Retail Visits         Chg. Residential       Chg. Residential

   Post Stay Home Order                                    -0.035***                  -0.034***                 0.013***               0.012***
                                                             (0.00)                     (0.00)                    (0.00)                 (0.00)
   High Civic Capital X Post National Guideline            -0.069***                  -0.062***                 0.019***               0.018***
                                                             (0.01)                     (0.01)                    (0.00)                 (0.00)
   High Civic Capital X Post Stay Home                       0.007*                     0.007*                   0.003**                0.003**
                                                             (0.00)                     (0.00)                    (0.00)                 (0.00)
   High Trump X Post National Guideline                                               0.034***                                         -0.014***
                                                                                        (0.01)                                           (0.00)
   High Trump X Post Stay Home                                                          0.011*                                           -0.003
                                                                                        (0.01)                                           (0.00)

   Observations                                              90,239                     90,239                    43,152                 43,152
   Adjusted R-squared                                         0.868                      0.869                     0.948                  0.948
   Day FE                                                      Yes                        Yes                      Yes                     Yes
   County FE                                                   Yes                        Yes                      Yes                     Yes
   Health Controls                                             Yes                        Yes                      Yes                     Yes

Table 1 presents estimates from multi-variable regression, where we regress our two mobility measures on indicators for state stay at home orders. To
examine the differential social distancing behavior, we interact Post Stay Home Order and Post National Guidelines with an indicator for high voter
participation (county being in the top quartile of voter participation). Post National Guidelines is an indicator variable for days after March 16th, when
the White House issued a national stay at home recommendation (Coronavirus Guideline for America). We also control for the interaction between the
share of Trump voters and Post Stay Home Order and Post National Guidelines to separate the potential confounding effect of civicness and political
leaning. Each specification includes controls for the log number of confirmed cases, county fixed effects, and day fixed effects. Standard errors are
clustered by county.




                                                                           13
                                    Table 2: Trust toward others and social distancing behavior
                                                          # people socially (excluding people living with)
                      VARIABLES                              (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)
                      Trust in other people               -0.082**    -0.081***     -0.086**     -0.085**
                                                           (0.033)      (0.033)      (0.035)      (0.035)
                      Trust the US Government               0.059        0.025        0.031         0.029
                                                          (0.028)**     (0.029)      (0.030)      (0.030)
                      Lean Republican                                  0.331***     0.306***     0.312***
                                                                        (0.074)      (0.080       (0.080)
                      Fearful of getting sick                                         0.041         0.040
                                                                                     (0.036)      (0.036)
                      Log of population density in county                            -0.029        -0.006
                                                                                     (0.023)      (0.027)
                      Income per capita in the county                                 0.000         0.000
                                                                                     (0.000)      (0.000)
                      Number of cases in the county                                                -0.030
                                                                                                   -0.022

                      Observations                                      940              929             871              871

Table 2 presents estimates from multi-variable ordered probit regressions where the dependent variable is the answer to the question: “About how
many people were you in close physical contact with socially in the past seven days not including people that live with you? This includes the number
of family members, friends, people at religious services, and people at other social gatherings you saw in person. (IF NECESSARY: Please do not
include those you saw for work-related reasons.)” The main variable of interest is “trust in other people” which is the answer to the question” On a
scale from 1 to 5 where 1 means “I do not trust them at all” and 5 means “I trust them completely,” Can you please tell me how much do you trust
other people? We include controls such as trust in the U.S. government, Lean Republican (a dummy variable equal to one if respondents answer
republican to the question “As of today do you lean more to the Republican Party or more to the Democratic Party?”) Fearful of getting sick (a
variable that takes higher values if individual reports to be fearful of getting sick from coronavirus), and county-level measures for population density,
income per capita and the number of cases.




                                                                           14
                                           Figure 2: Mobility and High Trust (International)




Figure 2 plots the estimates obtained by regressing the percent change in mobility measures on the interaction between high trust regions and the day
indicator. We define regions at the NUTS level 1. The specification includes country by day fixed effects. Each of the estimates includes 95 percent
confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the regional level. The plot captures the difference in social distance behavior between high trust
regions and the rest of the regions on each day. We plot in blue the change in mobility in retail (excluding groceries and pharmacies) and recreation,
while in red, we plot the change in Residential mobility during the sample period. We find that high trust regions reduce their visits to retail locations to
a larger extent than low trust regions. Moreover, when practicing social distancing, people tend to move more in the proximity of their residence. In
areas with high civic capital, the percentage change in residential mobility is higher than in areas with low civic capital.




                                                                            15
                                   Table 3: Trust toward others and social distancing behavior
                                    (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)                  (5)                   (6)
VARIABLES                        Chg. Retail         Chg. Retail        Chg. Retail       Chg. Resident        Chg. Resident         Chg. Resident

Avg. Trust                  -0.034***                 -0.031***           -0.023**           0.018***              0.018***              0.013***
                              (0.01)                    (0.01)              (0.01)             (0.00)                (0.00)                (0.00)
Lag Num of Death per million-0.009***                 -0.009***          -0.011***           0.004***              0.004***              0.005***
                              (0.00)                    (0.00)              (0.00)             (0.00)                (0.00)                (0.00)
Log(Population Density)     -0.018***                 -0.018***          -0.015***           0.009***              0.008***              0.007***
                              (0.00)                    (0.00)              (0.00)             (0.00)                (0.00)                (0.00)
Avg. Political Leaning                                  -0.012              -0.003                                  -0.001                 -0.002
                                                        (0.01)              (0.01)                                   (0.00)               (0.003)
Trust in Politicans                                                        -0.096*                                                       0.037**
                                                                            (0.06)                                                         (0.02)

Observations                        4,404               4,404              4,404               4,404                4,404                 4,404
Adjusted R-squared                  0.888               0.888              0.887               0.892                0.892                 0.892
Mean. Outcome                       -0.41               -0.41              -0.41                0.13                 0.13                  0.13
Date Fixed Effect                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes                   Yes
Country Fixed Effect                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                  Yes                   Yes

Table 3 presents estimates from multi-variable regression, where we regress international mobility measures on indicators for the level of trust in the
NUTS 1 regions. To measure trust, we averaged ESS data over 8 waves, including France only in the last survey because NUTS classifications have
changed over time in France. We control for the lag number of deaths in the region, population density, the average voting preferences and trust in
politicians in the NUTS region, country fixed effects, and day fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by country.




                                                                         16
                                                                                 Figure 3: Mobility Around State Reopenings
                                                                      30
                        Retail and Recreation mobility relative to T-14
                                                         20
                                        % change in

                      -10          0         10




                                                                           -14              -5          0           5                    14
                                                                                            Days around State Openings

                                                                                     High Civic Counties            Low Civic Counties



Figure 3 analyses changes in social distancing behavior (percent changes in phone mobility near Retail and Recreation) around the time of the loosening
of U.S. state restrictions. The figure traces in event time the changes in mobility for high civic capital counties (top quartile of voter participation) in
blue and the low civic capital counties (lowest quartile of voter participation) in red. The plotted estimates are obtained by regressing the percent change
in mobility measures on event day dummies, and we set the base date as 14 days before the state opens. The specification includes calendar day fixed
effects, and controls for COVID-19 cases, the population density, Trump voter share, and per capita income in the counties. Each of the estimates
includes 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. The graph shows sharp differences between the two groups
with high compliance in high civic areas when the states open up. We provide various alternative specifications to the above figure in the supplemental
material.




                                                                                                    17
18
                          Supplementary Materials for


         Civic Capital and Social Distancing Compliance during the Covid-19

                                            Pandemic



       John Barrios, Efraim Benmelech, Yael V. Hochberg, Paola Sapienza, Luigi Zingales




                                Correspondence to: hochberg@rice.edu




This PDF file includes:

        Materials and Methods
        Supplementary Text
        Figs. S1 to S6

        Tables S1 to S7




                                                 1
Overview

This Supporting Online Material provides details on the data used, the methods followed in the analysis and
the robustness of the analysis for the results derived in the paper.

Materials and Methods for the U.S. Analysis

Mobility data

    We use two different sources of data to measure people's mobility at the county level. Our primary

measure of mobility, which we use for both the U.S. and the international analysis, comes from the

Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Report, which reports aggregated location data from users

who have opted-in to Location History for their Google Account. Google calculates visits and length

of stay at different places change compared to a baseline. Changes for each day are compared to a

baseline value for that day of the week: Google uses as a baseline the median value, for the

corresponding day of the week, during the 5-week period Jan 3–Feb 6, 2020. The data contain

information on community mobility based on the type of location: Retail and Recreation, Grocery and

Pharmacy, Parks, Transit stations, Workplaces, and Residential, with Residential and Parks having

the opposite trends than all the other measures in the presence of social distancing rules, as people are

more likely to spend time in parks and be in their residence. In the primary analysis in the paper, we

use two of these community mobility measures: "Retail and Recreation" and "Residential." Retail and

recreation is defined as the percent change in visits to places like restaurants, cafes, shopping centers,

theme parks, museums, libraries, and movie theaters. In contrast, the Residential measure is defined

as the percent change in time spent by individuals' at their place of residence. Figure S1 Panel A maps

the two Google mobility-based measures used in the main text geospatially.

    The second source of mobility data is from Unacast, a location data products company that

combines granular location data from tens of millions of anonymous mobile phones and their

interactions with each other each day. They then extrapolate the results to the population level. The
                                                         2
data spans the period of February 24th to May 17th, 2020. They provided data to us on the change in

average daily distance traveled from baseline (avg. distance traveled for the same day of the week

during the pre-COVID-19 period for a specific county) and the change in visits to non-essential retail

and services from baseline (avg. visits for the same day of the week during the non-COVID-19 period

for a specific county). The pre-COVID baseline period is defined as January 1, 2020, to March 8th,

2020. The company uses the guidelines issued by various state governments and policymakers to

categorize venues into essential vs. non-essential, with essential locations including venues such as

food stores, pet stores, and pharmacies. They calculate the average visitation for each day of the week

prior to the COVID-19 outbreak (defined as March 8th and earlier) as a baseline and compare those

baselines to visits on the corresponding days of the week post-outbreak (March 9th to the present).

By always comparing Saturdays to Saturdays, Tuesdays to Tuesdays, and so forth, social distancing

in these measures is captured in the context of the regular visitation rhythm of the 7-day week. Figure

S1 Panel B maps the average daily level of the Unacast social distancing behavior measures

geospatially. On the left, we plot the daily average of the percentage change in distance traveled in

the county relative to the pre-COVID period, while on the right, we plot the daily average of the

percentage change in visits to non-essential business in the county relative to the pre-COVID-period.

Figure S1 Panel B maps these geospatially in a similar manner to Figure S1 Panel A.

Civic and Social Capital Data

   We use three different measures of civic and social capital. The first is voter participation,

calculated by using data from the 2004 to 2016 presidential elections, obtained from the MIT Election

Data Science and Lab (MEDSL). For each county and election, we calculate voter participation as the

number of votes cast divided by the number of voting-age individuals in the county. We then take the

average across the five elections to generate the Civic Capital measure. Figure S2 maps the measure

geospatially across the U.S.
                                                  3
   The second measure is a social capital composite index developed by the Social Capital Project

from the U.S. Joint Economic Committee. The index is constructed from four sub-indexes at the

county level: (1) a family Unity sub-index; (2) a Community health sub-index; (3) an institutional

health sub-index; (4) and a collective efficacy sub-index. The data are downloaded from

https://www.jec.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/republicans/2018/4/the-geography-of-social-capital-in-

america. We denote this measure Social Capital Measure 1.

   The second measure is a social capital composite index from Rupasingha et al. 2006 that uses a

principal component analysis to include four social capital factors: (1) The aggregate of various civic,

religious, business, labor, political associations in the county divided by population per 1,000; (2)

Voter turnout in the 2012 election; (3) Census response rate; (4) Number of non-profit organizations

without including those with an international approach. The four factors are standardized to have a

mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, and the first principal component is considered as the

index of social capital. We denote this measure Social Capital Measure 2.

Individual Survey Data

   We augment our analysis with survey level data, where we ask respondents about their specific

behavior and how much they trust people in general. This information comes from a special edition

of the Financial Trust Index. A survey used to study the level of trust in institutions that a

representative sample of Americans have. This wave of the survey was conducted for the Financial

Trust Index via telephone by SSRS on April 6th, 2020 – April 12th, 2020, among U.S. adults. A total

of 980 interviews were conducted, with a margin of error for total respondents of +/-3.43% at the 95%

confidence level. The survey collects information on demographics and various other variables

(http://www.financialtrustindex.org/). For the purpose of our study, we focus on the answer to the

question "About how many people were you in close physical contact with socially in the past seven

days not including people that live with you? This includes the number of family members, friends,
                                                   4
people at religious services, and people at other social gatherings you saw in person. (IF

NECESSARY: Please do not include those you saw for work-related reasons.) "We correlate the

above answer with: (1) a measure of generalized trust, the answer to the question "On a scale from 1

to 5 where 1 means "I do not trust them at all" and 5 means "I trust them completely," Can you please

tell me how much do you trust other people?"; (2) a measure of trust in the U.S. government; (3) a

measure of political preferences (measured by the answer to the question "As of today do you lean

more to the Republican Party or more to the Democratic Party?"); and (4) a control for fear of the

virus (a variable that takes higher values if individual reports to be fearful of getting sick from

coronavirus).

Controls

      To account for different risk factors, we control for exposure to COVID-19 in the county by

including the log number of new COVID-19 cases and deaths measured on each county day. The

number of confirmed COVID-19 cases and deaths in a county are obtained from the COVID Tracking

Project.1 The Project collects data on cases and deaths from COVID-19 from state/district/territory

public health authorities (or, occasionally, from trusted news reporting, official press conferences, and

social media updates from state public health authorities or governors). The data includes the location

and date of each case and death, allowing us to geo-assign them to a county-day.

      To control for differential effects driven by state mandates, we code the information on when each

state government-issued "Stay Home" (shelter-in-place) directive. Data is through April 2, 2020. Data

is obtained from FINRA (https://www.finra.org/rules-guidance/key-topics/covid-19/shelter-in-place).

Figure S3 maps these mandates geospatially across the U.S. We finally include the following socio-

economic variables at the county level: population, population density, per capita income, and the




1
    The data can be obtained from: https://coronavirus.1point3acres.com/en.
                                                             5
percentage of Trump votes in the county obtained in the 2016 election.

Materials and Methods for the International Analysis

Mobility data

    For the international analysis, we used the same source of data to measure people's mobility at the

international level. The measure comes from Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Report, which

reports aggregated location data from users who have opted-in to Location History for their Google

Account. Google calculates the change in visits and length of stay at different places compared to a

baseline. Changes for each day are compared to a baseline value for that day of the week: Google uses

as a baseline the median value for the corresponding day of the week during the 5-week period Jan 3–

Feb 6, 2020. As for the domestic survey, we focus on two measures of mobility: Retail and Recreation

and Residential. Retail and Recreation does not include essential retail, such as grocery and pharmacy.

Proxy for civic capital: trust

    To study social distancing internationally, we perform an analysis within countries that allows us

to absorb country-level characteristics, using country fixed effects. There are very limited measures

of civic capital at the regional level within a country that are available for a large enough set of

countries. The most comprehensive option is the European Social Value Survey (ESS), which contains

data at the regional level for European countries. The ESS is a biennial cross-national survey of

attitudes and behavior established in 2001 and conducted in 41 European countries over time. The

ESS uses cross-sectional probability samples, which are representative of all persons aged 15 and over

residing within private households in each country. The ESS contains information on regions using

the NUTS system, the Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics, a standardized system for

referencing subnational regions within European countries created by the European Union. NUTS is

a hierarchical system, with three levels of NUTS defined. Each E.U. Member State is subdivided into


                                                  6
several regions at the NUTS 1 level. Each of these regions is then subdivided into subregions at

NUTS level 2, and these, in turn, into lower regions at NUTS level 3. To generate a regional measure

of civic capital, we face a trade-off. The finer the regional classification, the closer is the match with

the mobility data, but the coarser are the civicness measures, as they average fewer responses in each

given area. For that reason, we start with NUTS1 classifications, for larger macro-regions (92 sub-

regions corresponding to 82 unique regions in ESS). We then do additional robustness tests with

NUTS2 regions (244 sub-regions corresponding to 114 unique regions in ESS), knowing that our

measure of civic capital may become noisier in the process. In the main analysis, to generate a trust

variable, we average all ESS surveys responses to the question, "generally speaking, would you say

that most people can be trusted, or that you can't be too careful in dealing with people? Please tell me

on a score of 0 to 10, where 0 means you can't be too careful, and 10 means that most people can be

trusted." Because France has changed its definition of NUTS regions over time, in our main analysis,

we exclude France. In supplementary analysis, we only average responses in the last survey, and we

can include France.

Controls

   Similar to our U.S. analysis, we control for several characteristics at the country level. To account

for different risk factors, we control for exposure to COVID-19 in the country, including the log

number of new COVID-19 deaths per million population at the country level measured on each

preceding day (source: Johns Hopkins CSSE data https://coronavirus.jhu.edu ). We also control for

(log) population density (source: Eurostat) and a measure of political leaning based on the regional

average of the answer to ESS question: "In politics people sometimes talk of 'left' and 'right.' Using

this card, where would you place yourself on this scale, where 0 means the left and 10 means the

right?"



                                                    7
Supplementary Text

   In this section, we reinforce the results presented in the main text of the paper and perform

additional analysis using alternative measures of mobility and civic capital at the U.S. level. We also

demonstrate additional robustness of our results at the international level.

U.S. Social Distance Results

   Figure S1 illustrates the spatial distribution of mobility behavior in the U.S. The top two panels

use Google data on the percentage change in retail and recreation visits (left) and staying in residential

areas (right). The bottom two panels report percentage changes in distance traveled (left) and non-

essential business visits (right) using Unacast data. The figure demonstrates the heterogeneity in

mobility behavior across the country–with the largest declines in mobility and non-essential and retail

visits in the North-East region and lowest declines in the South and Southwest areas of the U.S.

   In Figure S2 we present the geographical variation in voter participation – one of our measures of

civic capital across the U.S. Voter participation is calculated by taking the average voter participation

in the 2004, 2008, 2012, and 2016 presidential elections in a county. The figure demonstrates the

heterogeneity in voter participation – with voter participation tending to be higher in the North East,

Mid-West, and Mid-West and Northern Mountain and Pacific areas.

   Next, we provide graphical relations between the various google social distancing measures and

our measure of civic capital in Figure S3. Figure S3 presents bin scatter plots relating google social

mobility data to the measure of civic capital based on electoral participation. Each of the plots controls

for the log number of confirmed cases, population density, income per capita, population, the day of

the week, and the number of days since the first case in the county. The various plots clearly show

that increases in civic capital are associated with decreases in the various measures of social distance

behavior. Figure S4 repeats the same exercise using Unacast mobility data. The patterns are consistent

with those displayed in Figure S3.
                                                    8
   We display the temporal variation in state-level social distancing mandates in Figure S5.

Specifically, Figure S5 shows the timing of state-level social distancing guidance using darker shades

for the states that issued "stay home" and "shelter-in-place" directives later.

   Figure S6 replicates Figure 1 from the main text, using the Unacast measures of mobility rather

than the Google mobility measures. The plotted estimates are obtained by regressing the Unacast

mobility measures on the interaction between High Voter Participation county and the day indicator.

The specification includes county fixed effects, state by day fixed effects, and controls for COVID-

19 cases and deaths. The lower the coefficient, the higher the social distancing compliance in the

counties in the bottom three quartiles of voter participation relative to the high vote participation

counties (Q4). Each of the estimates includes 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are

clustered at the county level. The plot exhibits similar patterns to those obtained with Google data,

with slightly larger magnitudes: counties with higher voter participation comply more with social

distancing guidelines, reducing mobility relative to lower civic capital counties.

   Table S1 reports estimates from a multivariate regression of changes in mobility (based on Google

data) as a dependent variable on voter participation from presidential elections as the main explanatory

variable (our proxy for civic capital). We include as explanatory variables voter participation (our

main measure of civic capital in the U.S.), Trump vote share in the county in the 2016 Presidential

election, log population, income per capita, population density, log (1+number of new COVID-19

cases), log (1+number of new COVID-19 deaths) as well as Day X State fixed effects. Panel A reports

results from a regression that uses the change in retail and recreation visits, and Panel B uses the

change in time spent in residential areas as the dependent variable. Consistent with the inferences in

Figure 1, we observe that areas with higher civic capital are associated with greater social distancing

as reflected by lower daily visits to retail and recreational locations and higher amounts of time spent

in the residence.
                                                    9
   Table S2 conducts a similar analysis to Table S1 using Unacast data to measure social distancing.

The table reports the estimate for two social distancing measures: change in distance traveled

(columns 1-7) and change in non-essentials visits (columns 8-14). Consistent with our prior results,

we again observe greater social distancing as reflected by lower daily distance traveled and fewer

visits to non-essential businesses relative to the pre-COVID period in areas with higher civic capital.

   To demonstrate the robustness of our analysis, in Table S3, we replicate the analysis in Tables S1

and S2 using an alternative measure of civic capital: Social Capital Measure 1 (see definition above).

The table presents an analysis using measures of social distancing from both Google and Unacast.

Consistent with the analysis in Table S1, we observe greater social distancing compliance in areas

with high social capital. The magnitude of the association is consistent across the various social

distancing outcomes and statistically significant across specifications. Table S4 replicates the analysis

in Tables S3 using Social Capital Measure 2 (see discussion above) as the alternative measure of civic

capital. In line with our previous results, we continue to observe greater social distancing as reflected

by lower daily distance traveled and fewer visits to non-essential businesses relative to the pre-COVID

period in areas with higher social capital. These results are of similar magnitude as those observed in

Table S3.

   We next examine the robustness of our results from Table 1 to alternative social distancing

outcomes. Specifically, Table S5 replicates the analysis in Table 1 in the main text. It explores the

differential response of High Civic Capital areas to state-level social distancing mandates and a

national guideline. Here, we use data from Unacast to construct our dependent variable instead of

Google data. In line with our initial inferences in Table 1, we obtain similar results using the Unacast

measures of social distancing. Finally, to conclude our analysis of the robustness of the results from

Table 1, in Table S6, we replicate that analysis using the two alternative measures of civic capital—

Social Capital 1 and Social Capital 2 (see definitions above)—along with mobility measures from
                                                   10
both Google and Unacast. We find results highly consistent with our main inferences in Table 1. Both

measures of social capital are significantly associated with higher social distancing compliances

around state distancing mandates across the various outcome measures. Overall, our robustness

analysis of the U.S. data further reinforces significant relations between civic capital and social

distancing compliance.

   Finally, Figure S7 presents robustness to the results presented in Figure 3 in the main text. We

show the patterns for social distancing in high (Q4) and low (Q1) voter participation counties around

the re-opening of states. Panel A replicates Figure 3 using the Google residential measure, while Panel

B replicates Table 3 using the two Unacast mobility measures. The patterns are similar to those in

Figure 3 in the main text: in high civic capital counties, even with the reopening of states, residents

continue to exhibit high levels of social distancing and do not increase their mobility much, if at all.

In contrast, residents of low civic capital counties begin to increase their mobility even prior to re-

opening, and this increase continues to rise after re-opening steadily.

International Results

   In the principal analysis, we provided international evidence of the correlation between social

distancing behavior and civicness, using NUTS1 regions. In Table S7, we replicate the results of Table

3 in the main text utilizing NUTS2 areas. Because there are much fewer observations in the NUTS2

region, this potentially adds noise to our regressions. Consistent with this, the coefficients are lower

than in Table 3, but they retain the same sign, and they remain statistically significant.




                                                   11
Supplementary Materials Tables and Figures




                    12
Figure S1: Trends in Mobility Behavior


                                                     Trends in Mobility Behavior - Google
                Percentage Change In Retail Visits                                                  Percentage Change Residential




                                                             -0.030 − 0.572                                                                   0.084 − 0.163
                                                             -0.067 − -0.030                                                                  0.072 − 0.084
                                                             -0.097 − -0.067                                                                  0.063 − 0.072
                                                             -0.129 − -0.097                                                                  0.054 − 0.063
                                                             -0.171 − -0.129                                                                  0.021 − 0.054
                                                             -0.660 − -0.171                                                                  -0.040 − 0.021
                                                             No data                                                                          No data

We plot the average daily level of two mobility behavior measures based on Google data. In the left panel, we plot the daily average of the percentage
change in visits to retail and recreation for the county (relative to the pre-COVID period). In contrast, in the right panel, we plot the average percentage
change in time in the residence in the county (relative to the pre-COVID-period).




                                                     Trends in Mobility Behavior – Unacast
         Percentage Change In Avg. Distance Traveled                                  Percentage Change in Visits to Non-Essential Business




                                                           -0.088 − 0.197                                                                    -0.157 − 0.059
                                                           -0.120 − -0.088                                                                   -0.200 − -0.157
                                                           -0.143 − -0.120                                                                   -0.239 − -0.200
                                                           -0.171 − -0.143                                                                   -0.279 − -0.239
                                                           -0.204 − -0.171                                                                   -0.323 − -0.279
                                                           -0.407 − -0.204                                                                   -0.591 − -0.323
                                                           No data                                                                           No data

We plot the average daily level of two mobility behavior measures based on Unacast data. In the left panel, we plot the daily average of the percentage
change in distance traveled in the county (relative to the pre-COVID period). In contrast, in the right panel, we plot the daily average of the percentage
change in visits to non-essential businesses in the county (relative to the pre-COVID-period).




                                                                               13
Figure S2: Civic Capital


                                                                  Voter Participation




                                                                                                      > 90%
                                                                                                      80% - 90%
                                                                                                      60% - 80%
                                                                                                      40% - 60%
                                                                                                      20% - 40%
                                                                                                      < 20%
                                                                                                      No data

This figure plots our measure of civic capital based on voter participation for each of the counties. Our measure is calculated by taking the average voter
participation in the 2004, 2008, 2012, and 2016 presidential elections it the county. The data is obtained from the MIT Election Data Science and Lab
(MEDSL).




                                                                           14
Figure S3: Bin-Scatter Plots of Social Distancing Behavior vs. Voter Participation - Google

Mobility Measures

                                                 Grocery and Pharmacy                                                                                  Parks
                               6




                                                                                                                      20
           Visits to Grocery and Pharmacy




                                                                                                                         15
                                      4
              % Change in % Change in




                                                                                                  % Change in % Change in
                                                                                                      Visits to Parks
                                                                                                                 10
                           2




                                                                                                       5
              0




                                                                                                                      0
                               -2




                                                                                                                      -5
                                            .4     .5              .6              .7   .8                                               .4    .5              .6               .7        .8
                                                         Avg Voter Participation                                                                     Avg Voter Participation


                                                        Residential                                                                                 Recreation
                            9




                                                                                                                            -5
                                                                                                       Visits to Retail and Recreation
                                 8
         % Change in % Change in




                                                                                                         % Change in % Change in
           Visits to Residential




                                                                                                                            -10
                      7




                                                                                                           -15
         6                  5




                                                                                                                            -20




                                            .4     .5              .6              .7   .8                                                .4   .5              .6              .7    .8
                                                         Avg Voter Participation                                                                     Avg Voter Participation




                                                         Transit                                                                                    Workplace
                                                                                                                             -12
                              0




                                                                                                                                -14
                                 -5
          % Change in % Change in




                                                                                                         % Change in % Change in
                                                                                                            Visits to Workplace
              Visits to Transits
                      -10




                                                                                                                     -16
                              -15




                                                                                                        -18
                              -20




                                                                                                                             -20




                                            .4     .5              .6              .7   .8                                                .4   .5              .6              .7    .8
                                                         Avg Voter Participation                                                                     Avg Voter Participation



Figure S4 plots the various measures of social distancing from google against the county voter participation rate. In addition to examining the change in
mobility in retail and recreation (excluding groceries and pharmacies) and residential, we also include visits to grocery stores, parks, transit stations, and
the workplace. Each plot controls for log 1+ number of new confirmed cases that day, log 1+ number of COVID-19 deaths that day, population density,
income per capita, population, and day of the week.




                                                                                             15
Figure S4: Bin-Scatter Plots of Social Distancing Behavior vs. Voter Participation – Unacast

Mobility Measures

                              Panel A:                                                                       Panel B:

           Percent Change in Daily Distance Traveled                               Percent Change in Visits to Non-Essential Businesses




Figure S5 plots our two measures of social distancing against the county voter participation rate. Panel A uses the percent change in daily distance
traveled while Panel B uses the percent change in visits to non-essential businesses. Each plot controls for log 1+ number of new confirmed cases that
day, log 1+ number of COVID-19 deaths that day, population density, income per capita, population, and day of the week.




                                                                         16
Figure S5: State-Level Social Distancing Guidance

                                                    Stay Home – Work Safe Mandates




                                                                                             Yet to Adopt
                                                                                             Mar. 25 - Apr. 2
                                                                                             Mar. 22 - Mar. 25
                                                                                             Before Mar. 22

Figure S3 plots the date when each state government-issued "Stay Home" (shelter-in-place) directive. Data is through April 2, 2020. The dates are
obtained from FINRA (https://www.finra.org/rules-guidance/key-topics/covid-19/shelter-in-place).




                                                                      17
Figure S6: Replication of Figure 1 using Unacast Mobility Data




Figure S6 plots the differential changes in mobility (the percentage change in travel distancing (right panel) and visits to non-essential businesses (left
panel)) for High Voter Participation counties versus all others by calendar time (day). The plotted estimates are obtained by regressing the Unacast
mobility measures on the interaction between High Voter Participation county and the day indicator. The specification includes county fixed effects,
state by day fixed effects, and controls for COVID-19 cases and deaths. The lower the coefficient, the higher the social distancing compliance in the
counties in the bottom three quartiles of voter participation relative to the high vote participation counties (Q4). Each of the estimates includes 95
percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the county level.




                                                                            18
Figure S7: Social Distancing Around State Openings

                                                                  Panel A: Replication of Figure 3 (main text) using Google Residential Measure




                                                                                                      2
                                                                             residential mobility relative to T-14
                                                                                                             0
                                                                                         % change in

                                                                                   -4           -2    -6




                                                                                                                     -14                               0                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                           Days around State Openings

                                                                                                                                   High Civic Counties                                                      Low Civic Counties




                                                               Panel B: Replication of Figure 3 (main text) for Unacast Social Distancing Measures

                                                     Chg. in Daily Distance Traveled                                                                                                                             Chg. In visits to Non-Essential Businesses
                                .15




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .3
                                                                                                                                                          daily non-essential visits relative to T-14
     daily distance travled relative to T-14
                                       .1




                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                  % change in




                                                                                                                                                                       % change in
                           .05




                                                                                                                                                                                   .1
                   0




                                                                                                                                                                        0
        -.05




                                                                                                                                                                -.1
                                -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                         -.2




                                               -14                        0                                                                 14                                                             -14                               0                               14
                                                              Days around State Openings                                                                                                                                         Days around State Openings

                                                       High Civic Counties                                            Low Civic Counties                                                                                 High Civic Counties            Low Civic Counties




This figure replicates the specification used in Figure 3 of the main text. In Panel A, we repeat the analysis using the residential measure. Panel B is
done using our two Unacast social distancing measures the percentage change in the average distance traveled (left panel) and change in visits to non-
essential businesses (righty panel). The figures trace in event time the changes in mobility for high civic capital counties (top quartile of voter
participation) in blue and the low civic capital counties (lowest quartile of voter participation) in red. The plotted estimates are obtained by regressing
the percent change in mobility measures on event day dummies, and we set the base date as 14 days before the state opens. The specification includes
calendar day fixed effects, and controls for COVID-19 cases, the population density, Trump voter share, and per capita income in the counties. Each of
the estimates includes 95 percent confidence intervals. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. The graph shows sharp differences between the
two groups with high compliance in high civic areas when the states open up. We provide various alternative specifications to the above figure in the
supplemental material.




                                                                                                                                                  19
Table S1: Alternative Specification for Table 1 (Main Text)

Panel A:

                                                (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)               (5)          (6)         (7)
         VARIABLES                                                                   Chg. Retail_Recreation


         Voter Participation                -0.311***       -0.247***      -0.252***      -0.250***           -0.241***   -0.227***   -0.227***
                                              (0.03)           (0.03)         (0.03)         (0.03)              (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)
         Trump Vote Share                                    0.188***       0.134***       0.132***            0.127***    0.121***    0.121***
                                                               (0.01)         (0.02)         (0.02)              (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)
         Lop Population                                                    -0.012***      -0.011***             -0.004      -0.001      -0.001
                                                                              (0.00)         (0.00)              (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
         Income Per Cap                                                                     -0.000              -0.000      -0.000      -0.000
                                                                                             (0.00)              (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
         Pop Density                                                                                           -0.007**    -0.007**    -0.007**
                                                                                                                 (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
         Log(New COVID Cases +1)                                                                                          -0.013***   -0.013***
                                                                                                                             (0.00)      (0.00)
         Log (New Death +1)                                                                                                             -0.001
                                                                                                                                         (0.01)

         Observations                         89,993          89,993        86,981          86,981             86,981      86,907       86,897
         Adjusted R-squared                   0.818           0.827         0.830           0.831               0.831       0.832       0.832
         DayXState FE                          Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes                 Yes         Yes         Yes
         Health Controls                       No              No            Yes             Yes                 Yes         Yes         Yes


Panel B:

                                                (8)             (9)           (10)            (11)              (12)         (13)        (14)
          VARIABLES                                                                     Chg. Residential


          Voter Participation                0.193***        0.154***       0.131***       0.132***            0.121***    0.108***    0.108***
                                               (0.01)          (0.01)         (0.01)         (0.01)              (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)
          Trump Vote Share                                  -0.084***      -0.053***      -0.053***           -0.043***   -0.039***   -0.039***
                                                               (0.00)         (0.01)         (0.01)              (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
          Lop Population                                                    0.009***       0.008***              0.001      -0.002*     -0.002*
                                                                              (0.00)         (0.00)              (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
          Income Per Cap                                                                     0.000               0.000       -0.000      -0.000
                                                                                             (0.00)              (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
          Pop Density                                                                                          0.008***    0.007***    0.007***
                                                                                                                 (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
          Log(New COVID Cases +1)                                                                                          0.009***    0.008***
                                                                                                                             (0.00)      (0.00)
          Log (New Death +1)                                                                                                             0.002*
                                                                                                                                         (0.00)

          Observations                        42,918          42,918        41,628          41,628             41,628      41,605       41,596
          Adjusted R-squared                  0.906           0.922         0.929           0.929               0.932       0.937       0.937
          DayXState FE                         Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes                 Yes         Yes         Yes
          Health Controls                      No              No            Yes             Yes                 Yes         Yes         Yes

This provides a multivariate analysis of changes in social distancing behavior with respect to voter participation at the county level. The dependent
variable is the percentage change in: visits to retail and recreational POI (Panel A) and residential time (Panel B). In each specification, we regress the
SDB on average voter participation (average of voter participation from presidential elections 08-16). Each of the specifications includes Day X State
fixed effects. The second column of each set begins to add controls for county characteristics that may affect SDB: log population, log population
density, per capita income, and trump vote share. Additionally, we add COVID-19 risk-related controls: log one plus the number of new COVID-19
cases and log one plus the number of new COVID-19 deaths. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis and are clustered at the county level.




                                                                           20
Table S2: Replication of Table S1 using Unacast Social Distancing Measures
                                                (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)         (7)            (8)         (9)         (10)          (11)          (12)        (13)        (14)
      VARIABLES                                                                   Chg. Dist                                                                               Chg. NE Visits

      Voter Participation                    -0.138***   -0.133***    -0.242***   -0.233***   -0.217***    -0.191***   -0.190***     -0.270***    -0.149***   -0.116***     -0.121***      -0.101***    -0.074**    -0.074**
                                               (0.05)       (0.05)      (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.02)       (0.04)       (0.03)       (0.03)        (0.03)         (0.03)      (0.03)      (0.03)
      Trump Vote Share                                    0.091***     0.026**       0.022       0.011        0.002       0.002                   0.330***     0.173***      0.179***       0.167***    0.156***    0.156***
                                                            (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)                    (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)
      Lop Population                                                  -0.014***   -0.012***      0.005      0.009***    0.009***                              -0.038***     -0.044***      -0.032***   -0.026***   -0.026***
                                                                        (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)                                 (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
      Income Per Cap                                                               -0.000**    -0.000**      -0.000      -0.000                                              0.000***       0.000***    0.000***    0.000***
                                                                                     (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)                                               (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
      Pop Density                                                                             -0.018***    -0.017***   -0.017***                                                           -0.014***   -0.013***   -0.014***
                                                                                                 (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)                                                              (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
      Log(New COVID Cases +1)                                                                              -0.023***   -0.023***                                                                       -0.024***   -0.025***
                                                                                                              (0.00)      (0.00)                                                                          (0.00)      (0.00)
      Log (New Death +1)                                                                                                  0.001                                                                                       0.002
                                                                                                                          (0.00)                                                                                      (0.00)

      Observations                            101,252     101,252      97,994      97,994       97,994      97,918       97,907        64,722      64,722       62,033       62,033         62,033      61,967      61,956
      Adjusted R-squared                       0.646       0.649        0.658       0.658        0.660       0.664        0.664         0.713       0.740        0.759        0.760          0.761       0.765       0.765
      DayXState FE                              Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes
      Soc-Econ Controls                         No          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           No          Yes          Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes
      Health Controls                           No          No           Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes           No          No           Yes          Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes


   This table provides a multivariate analysis of changes in social distancing behavior with respect to voter participation at the county level. The dependent variable is the percentage change in: distance traveled in the
   county (column 1-7) and non-essential visits (columns 8-15). In each specification, we regress the SDB on average voter participation (average of voter participation from presidential elections 08-16). Each of the
   specifications includes Day X State fixed effects. The second column of each set begins to add controls for county characteristics that may affect SDB: log population, log population density, per capita income, and
   trump vote share. Additionally, we add COVID-19 risk-related controls: log one plus the number of new COVID-19 cases and log one plus the number of new COVID-19 deaths. Standard errors are reported in
   parenthesis and are clustered at the county level.




                                                                                                              21
Table S3: Replication of Tables S1 and S2 using Alternative Social Capital Measure 1
                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)            (4)           (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)          (11)          (12)        (13)        (14)
        VARIABLES                                                                Chg. Retail Recreation                                                                     Chg. Residential

        Social Capital 1                      -0.012***    -0.033***   -0.033***       -0.033***    -0.032***   -0.031***   -0.031***    0.010***     0.020***    0.019***      0.019***       0.018***    0.017***    0.017***
                                                (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)          (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
        Trump Vote Share                                    0.269***    0.202***        0.201***     0.193***    0.184***    0.184***                -0.130***   -0.087***     -0.087***      -0.075***   -0.069***   -0.070***
                                                              (0.01)      (0.02)          (0.02)       (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)                   (0.00)      (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
        Lop Population                                                 -0.015***       -0.014***      -0.007*     -0.004      -0.004                              0.010***      0.010***        0.003**      -0.001     -0.001
                                                                          (0.00)          (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)                               (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
        Income Per Cap                                                                   -0.000        -0.000     -0.000       0.000                                              0.000          0.000      -0.000*    -0.000**
                                                                                          (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)                                             (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
        Pop Density                                                                                  -0.008**    -0.007**    -0.007**                                                          0.008***    0.008***    0.008***
                                                                                                       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)                                                            (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
        Log(New COVID Cases +1)                                                                                 -0.013***   -0.013***                                                                      0.009***    0.008***
                                                                                                                   (0.00)      (0.00)                                                                        (0.00)      (0.00)
        Log (New Death +1)                                                                                                    -0.002                                                                                   0.003***
                                                                                                                               (0.00)                                                                                    (0.00)

        Observations                            87,729      87,646       84,735          84,735       84,735     84,664      84,654       42,663      42,663       41,373       41,373         41,373      41,350      41,341
        Adjusted R-squared                       0.816       0.833       0.837           0.837         0.837      0.838       0.838        0.892       0.928        0.937       0.937           0.939       0.945       0.945
        DayXState FE                              Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes
        Soc-Econ Controls                         No          Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          No          Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes
        Health Controls                           No          No          Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          No          No           Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes
                                                  (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)        (6)         (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)          (11)          (12)        (13)        (14)
        VARIABLES                                                                      Chg. Dist                                                                             Chg. NE Visits

        Social Capital 1                      -0.013***    -0.026***   -0.029***       -0.028***    -0.026***   -0.024***   -0.024***    0.009**     -0.022***   -0.023***     -0.024***      -0.022***   -0.020***   -0.020***
                                                (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)          (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
        Trump Vote Share                                    0.155***    0.090***        0.083***     0.066***    0.050***    0.050***                 0.381***    0.218***      0.227***       0.214***    0.198***    0.198***
                                                              (0.01)      (0.01)          (0.02)       (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)                   (0.02)      (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)
        Lop Population                                                 -0.015***       -0.013***      0.005*     0.009***    0.009***                            -0.039***     -0.045***      -0.035***   -0.029***   -0.029***
                                                                          (0.00)          (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)                               (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
        Income Per Cap                                                                  -0.000**     -0.000**     -0.000      -0.000                                            0.000***       0.000***    0.000***    0.000***
                                                                                          (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)                                             (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
        Pop Density                                                                                 -0.019***   -0.018***   -0.018***                                                         -0.011***   -0.010***   -0.010***
                                                                                                       (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)                                                            (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
        Log(New COVID Cases +1)                                                                                 -0.025***   -0.025***                                                                     -0.024***   -0.024***
                                                                                                                   (0.00)      (0.00)                                                                        (0.00)      (0.00)
        Log (New Death +1)                                                                                                     0.001                                                                                     0.001
                                                                                                                               (0.00)                                                                                    (0.00)

        Observations                            95,368      95,097       92,007          92,007       92,007     91,937      91,926       63,467      63,419       60,772       60,772         60,772      60,710      60,699
        Adjusted R-squared                       0.650       0.665       0.672           0.672         0.675      0.679       0.679        0.717       0.749        0.768       0.770           0.770       0.774       0.774
        DayXState FE                              Yes         Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes
        Soc-Econ Controls                         No          Yes         Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          No          Yes          Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes
        Health Controls                           No          No          Yes             Yes           Yes        Yes         Yes          No          No           Yes         Yes             Yes         Yes         Yes
This table provides a multivariate analysis of changes in social distancing behavior with respect to our Social Capital Measure 1 at the county level. The dependent variables in the top panel are the percentage change in: distance
traveled in the county (column 1-7) and non-essential visits (columns 8-15) from google, while the bottom panel used the two measures from Unacast: the percentage change in distance traveled in the county (column 1-7) and
non-essential visits (columns 8-15). In each specification, we regress the SDB the Social Capital Measure 1 (taken from the U.S. Joint Economic Committee). Each of the specifications includes Day X State fixed effects. The
second column of each set begins to add controls for county characteristics that may affect SDB: log population, log population density, per capita income, and trump vote share. Additionally, we add COVID-19 risk-related
controls: log one plus the number of new COVID-19 cases and log one plus the number of new COVID-19 deaths. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis and are clustered at the county level.


                                                                                                                    22
Table S4: Replication of Table S2 using Alternative Social Capital Measure 2 (2014 Measure)
                                              (1)         (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)            (8)          (9)         (10)          (11)          (12)        (13)        (14)
    VARIABLES                                                                   Chg. Dist                                                                                 Chg. NE Visits

    Social Capital 2                       -0.003**    -0.006***    -0.012***   -0.011***    -0.011***   -0.010***    -0.010***       0.008**       0.002     -0.016***     -0.017***      -0.017***   -0.016***   -0.016***
                                             (0.00)      (0.00)        (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)       (0.00)       (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
    Trump Vote Share                                   0.102***      0.044***    0.038***       0.023*      0.012        0.012                    0.341***     0.176***      0.183***       0.168***    0.156***    0.156***
                                                         (0.01)        (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)                     (0.02)       (0.02)        (0.02)         (0.02)      (0.02)      (0.02)
    Lop Population                                                  -0.016***   -0.013***      0.007**    0.011***     0.011***                               -0.042***     -0.049***      -0.034***   -0.028***   -0.028***
                                                                       (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)                                  (0.00)        (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
    Income Per Cap                                                               -0.000**     -0.000**     -0.000       -0.000                                               0.000***       0.000***    0.000***    0.000***
                                                                                   (0.00)       (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)                                                (0.00)         (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
    Pop Density                                                                              -0.021***   -0.021***    -0.021***                                                            -0.016***   -0.015***   -0.015***
                                                                                                (0.00)      (0.00)       (0.00)                                                               (0.00)      (0.00)      (0.00)
    Log(New COVID Cases +1)                                                                              -0.025***    -0.026***                                                                        -0.024***   -0.025***
                                                                                                            (0.00)       (0.00)                                                                           (0.00)      (0.00)
    Log (New Death +1)                                                                                                   0.004                                                                                        0.003
                                                                                                                         (0.00)                                                                                       (0.00)

    Observations                            101,771     101,252      97,994       97,994      97,994       97,918      97,907         64,856       64,722      62,033        62,033         62,033      61,967      61,956
    Adjusted R-squared                       0.634       0.647        0.654        0.655       0.657        0.662       0.662          0.709        0.739       0.759         0.761          0.762       0.766       0.766
    DayXState FE                              Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes
    Soc-Econ Controls                         No          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            No           Yes         Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes
    Health Controls                           No          No           Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            No           No          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes         Yes


 This table provides a multivariate analysis of changes in social distancing behavior with respect to our Social Capital Measure 2 at the county level. The dependent variable is the percentage change in: distance traveled
 in the county (column 1-7) and non-essential visits (columns 8-15). In each specification, we regress the SDB on average voter participation (average of voter participation from presidential elections 08-16). Each of the
 specifications includes Day X State fixed effects. The second column of each set begins to add controls for county characteristics that may affect SDB: log population, log population density, per capita income, and
 trump vote share. Additionally, we add COVID-19 risk-related controls: log one plus the number of new COVID-19 cases and log one plus the number of new COVID-19 deaths. Standard errors are reported in parenthesis
 and are clustered at the county level.




                                                                                                              23
Table S5: Replication of Table 1 (main text) using Unacast Mobility Measures

                                                                                  (1)              (2)                  (3)                    (4)
          VARIABLES                                                             Chg. Dist        Chg. Dist         Chg. NE Visits         Chg. NE Visits

          Post Stay Home Order                                                 -0.018***        -0.019***            -0.021***              -0.022***
                                                                                 (0.00)           (0.00)                (0.00)                (0.00)
          High Civic Capital X Post National Guideline                         -0.039***        -0.038***            -0.047***              -0.043***
                                                                                 (0.01)           (0.01)                (0.01)                (0.01)
          High Civic Capital X Post Stay Home                                  -0.014***        -0.013***             -0.009**               -0.008*
                                                                                 (0.00)           (0.00)                (0.00)                (0.00)
          High Trump X Post National Guideline                                                     0.008                                    0.028***
                                                                                                  (0.00)                                      (0.01)
          High Trump X Post Stay Home                                                             0.009*                                    0.021***
                                                                                                  (0.00)                                      (0.01)

          Observations                                                          101,927          101,927               64,936                 64,936
          Adjusted R-squared                                                     0.711            0.711                 0.839                  0.839
          Day FE                                                                  Yes              Yes                   Yes                    Yes
          County FE                                                               Yes              Yes                   Yes                    Yes
          Health Controls                                                         Yes              Yes                   Yes                    Yes

     Table S5 presents estimates from multi-variable regression, where we regress the two alternative social mobility measures from Unacast on indicators for
     state stay at home orders. The dependent variable is the percentage change in: distance traveled in the county (column 1-2) and non-essential visits (columns
     3-4). To examine the differential social distancing behavior, we interact Post Stay Home Order and Post National Guidelines with an indicator for high
     voter participation (county being in the top quartile of voter participation). Post National Guidelines is an indicator variable for days after March 16th,
     when the White House issued a national stay at home recommendation (Coronavirus Guideline for America). We also control for the interaction between
     the share of Trump voters and Post Stay Home Order and Post National Guidelines to separate the potential confounding effect of civic capital and political
     leaning. Each specification includes controls for the log number of confirmed cases, county fixed effects, and day fixed effects. Standard errors are
     clustered by county.




                                                                                24
 Table S6: Replication of Table 1 for Alternative Social Capital Measures and Outcomes
                                                  Google Outcomes                                                                                                      Unacast Outcomes
                                                        (1)         (2)                (3)              (4)                                                                   (1)         (2)                   (3)            (4)
 VARIABLES                                          Chg. Retail Chg. Retail      Chg. Residential Chg. Residential       VARIABLES                                         Chg. Dist    Chg. Dist         Chg. NE Visits Chg. NE Visits

 Post Stay Home Order                            -0.034*** -0.032***                 0.013***           0.012***         Post Stay Home Order                            -0.018***          -0.019***        -0.023***       -0.023***
                                                   (0.00)     (0.00)                   (0.00)             (0.00)                                                           (0.00)              (0.00)          (0.00)           (0.00)
 High Social Capital 1 X Post National Guideline -0.050*** -0.045***                 0.022***           0.021***         High Social Capital 1 X Post National Guideline -0.014**            -0.014**        -0.033***       -0.029***
                                                   (0.01)     (0.01)                   (0.00)             (0.00)                                                           (0.01)              (0.01)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 High Social Capital 1 X Post Stay Home            -0.004    -0.004                  0.003**            0.003**          High Social Capital 1 X Post Stay Home          -0.017***          -0.017***          -0.007          -0.007
                                                   (0.00)     (0.00)                   (0.00)             (0.00)                                                           (0.00)              (0.00)          (0.01)           (0.01)
 High Trump X Post National Guideline                       0.040***                                   -0.014***         High Trump X Post National Guideline                                 0.011**                         0.032***
                                                              (0.01)                                      (0.00)                                                                               (0.00)                           (0.01)
 High Trump X Post Stay Home                                  0.008                                      -0.003          High Trump X Post Stay Home                                          0.011**                         0.022***
                                                              (0.01)                                      (0.00)                                                                               (0.00)                           (0.01)

 Observations                                          90,239       90,239            43,152             43,152          Observations                                         101,927        101,927          64,936          64,936
 Adjusted R-squared                                    0.868         0.869            0.948               0.948          Adjusted R-squared                                    0.710          0.710           0.838           0.839
 Day FE                                                 Yes           Yes              Yes                 Yes           Day FE                                                 Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
 County FE                                              Yes           Yes              Yes                 Yes           County FE                                              Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
 Health Controls                                        Yes           Yes              Yes                 Yes           Health Controls                                        Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes

                                                  Google Outcomes                                                                                                      Unacast Outcomes
                                                        (1)         (2)                (3)              (4)                                                                   (1)         (2)                   (3)            (4)
 VARIABLES                                          Chg. Retail Chg. Retail      Chg. Residential Chg. Residential       VARIABLES                                         Chg. Dist    Chg. Dist         Chg. NE Visits Chg. NE Visits

 Post Stay Home Order                            -0.030*** -0.028***                 0.014***           0.013***         Post Stay Home Order                           -0.015***           -0.016***        -0.019***       -0.020***
                                                   (0.00)     (0.00)                   (0.00)             (0.00)                                                          (0.00)              (0.00)           (0.00)          (0.00)
 High Social Capital 2 X Post National Guideline -0.055*** -0.051***                   0.001              0.000          High Social Capital 2 X Post National Guideline -0.008               -0.008           -0.009          -0.007
                                                   (0.01)     (0.01)                   (0.00)             (0.00)                                                          (0.01)              (0.01)           (0.01)          (0.01)
 High Social Capital 2 X Post Stay Home          -0.026*** -0.025***                 0.005**            0.005**          High Social Capital 2 X Post Stay Home         -0.029***           -0.029***        -0.037***       -0.036***
                                                   (0.01)     (0.01)                   (0.00)             (0.00)                                                          (0.00)              (0.00)           (0.01)          (0.01)
 High Trump X Post National Guideline                       0.039***                                   -0.017***         High Trump X Post National Guideline                                0.011**                         0.034***
                                                              (0.01)                                      (0.00)                                                                              (0.00)                           (0.01)
 High Trump X Post Stay Home                                  0.008                                      -0.004          High Trump X Post Stay Home                                        0.013***                         0.022***
                                                              (0.01)                                      (0.00)                                                                              (0.00)                           (0.01)

 Observations                                          90,239       90,239            43,152             43,152          Observations                                        101,927         101,927          64,936          64,936
 Adjusted R-squared                                    0.869         0.869            0.946               0.947          Adjusted R-squared                                   0.710           0.710            0.838           0.839
 Day FE                                                 Yes           Yes              Yes                 Yes           Day FE                                                Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
 County FE                                              Yes           Yes              Yes                 Yes           County FE                                             Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
 Health Controls                                        Yes           Yes              Yes                 Yes           Health Controls                                       Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes

Table S6 presents estimates from multi-variable regressions, where we examine the relation between our two alternative social capital measures and social distancing behavior around the state stay at home orders. In the top panel,
we examine Social Capital Measure 1 whine the bottom panel examines the Social Capital Measure 2. The dependent variables on the left panels are the percentage change in: distance traveled in the county (cols. 1-2) and non-
essential visits (cols. 3-4) from google, while the right panels use the two measures from Unacast: the percentage change in distance traveled in the county (cols. 1-2) and in non-essential visits (cols 3-4). To examine the differential
social distancing behavior, we interact Post Stay Home Order and Post National Guidelines with an indicator for high Social Capital Measure 1 (2) (county being in the top quartile of social capital 1 (2)). Post National Guidelines
is an indicator variable for days after March 16th, when the White House issued a national stay at home recommendation (Coronavirus Guideline for America). We also control for the interaction between the share of Trump voters
and Post Stay Home Order and Post National Guidelines to separate the potential confounding effect of social capital and political leaning. Each specification includes controls for the log number of confirmed cases, county fixed
effects, and day fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by county.

                                                                                                                    25
Table S7: Alternative International Specification using NUTS 2 Region Variation

                                      (1)                (2)                 (3)                (4)                  (5)                  (6)
VARIABLES                        Chg. Retail        Chg. Retail        Chg. Retail        Chg. Resident        Chg. Resident       Chg. Resident


Avg. Trust                          -0.004           -0.014***           -0.012**            0.007***            0.010***              0.012***
                                    (0.00)              (0.00)             (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.00)               (0.00)
Lag Num of Death per million-0.012***                -0.012***           -0.012***           0.006***            0.006***              0.006***
                                    (0.00)              (0.00)             (0.00)              (0.00)              (0.00)               (0.00)
Log(Population Density)                              -0.012***           -0.012***                               0.009***              0.009***
                                                        (0.00)             (0.00)                                  (0.00)               (0.00)
Avg. Political Leaning                                                     0.007                                                       0.005***
                                                                           (0.01)                                                       (0.00)

Observations                        6,150               6,150              6,150               6,028               6,028                6,028
Adjusted R-squared                  0.877               0.878              0.878               0.885               0.891                0.892
Mean. Outcome                       -0.41               -0.41              -0.41                0.13                0.13                 0.13
Date Fixed Effect                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Country Fixed Effect                 Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                 Yes                  Yes


This table presents estimates from multi-variable regression where we regress international mobility measures on indicators for the level of trust in
the NUTS 2 regions. To measure trust, we averaged ESS data over eight waves, including France only in the last survey, because NUTS
classifications have changed over time in France. We control for the lag number of deaths in the region, population density, the average voting
preferences in the NUTS region, country fixed effects, and day fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered by country.




                                                                        26
