                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DID THE WISCONSIN SUPREME COURT RESTART A COVID-19 EPIDEMIC?
                  EVIDENCE FROM A NATURAL EXPERIMENT

                                       Dhaval M. Dave
                                      Andrew I. Friedson
                                      Kyutaro Matsuzawa
                                       Drew McNichols
                                        Joseph J. Sabia

                                      Working Paper 27322
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27322


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




Sabia acknowledges research support from the Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies
(CHEPS) at San Diego State University, including grant support received from the Charles Koch
Foundation and the Troesh Family Foundation. We thank Alicia Marquez for outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Dhaval M. Dave, Andrew I. Friedson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, Drew McNichols, and
Joseph J. Sabia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Did the Wisconsin Supreme Court Restart a COVID-19 Epidemic? Evidence from a Natural
Experiment
Dhaval M. Dave, Andrew I. Friedson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, Drew McNichols, and Joseph
J. Sabia
NBER Working Paper No. 27322
June 2020
JEL No. H75,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

Both the White House and state governors have explicitly linked thresholds of reduced
COVID-19 case growth to the lifting of statewide shelter-in-place orders (SIPOs). This
“hardwired” policy endogeneity creates empirical challenges in credibly isolating the causal
effect of lifting a statewide SIPO on COVID-19-related health. To break this simultaneity
problem, the current study exploits a unique natural experiment generated by a Wisconsin
Supreme Court decision. On May 13, 2020, the Wisconsin Supreme Court abolished the state’s
“Safer at Home” order, ruling that the Wisconsin Department of Health Services
unconstitutionally usurped legislative authority to review COVID-19 regulations. We capitalize
on this sudden, dramatic, and largely unanticipated termination of a statewide SIPO to estimate
its effect on social distancing and COVID-19 case growth. Using a synthetic control design, we
find no evidence that the repeal of the state SIPO impacted social distancing, COVID-19 cases, or
COVID-19-related mortality during the fortnight following enactment. Estimated effects were
economically small and nowhere near statistically different from zero. We conclude that the
impact of shelter-in-place orders is likely not symmetric across enactment and lifting of the
orders.
Dhaval M. Dave                                             Drew McNichols
Bentley University                                         Center for Health Economics
Department of Economics                                    & Policy Studies (CHEPS)
175 Forest Street, AAC 195                                 University of San Diego-California
Waltham, MA 02452-4705                                     9500 Gilman Drive #0508
and IZA                                                    La Jolla, CA 92093-0043
and also NBER                                              dmcnichols@ucsd.edu
ddave@bentley.edu
                                                           Joseph J. Sabia
Andrew I. Friedson                                         San Diego State University
Department of Economics                                    Department of Economics
University of Colorado Denver                              Center for Health Economics
Lawrence Street Center 460T                                & Policy Studies
Campus Box 181                                             5500 Campanile Drive
P.O. Box 173364                                            San Diego, CA 92182
Denver, CO 80217-3364                                      and IZA & ESSPRI
andrew.friedson@ucdenver.edu                               jsabia@sdsu.edu

Kyutaro Matsuzawa
Center for Health Economics and Policy Studies
San Diego State University
San Diego, CA
USA
qmatsuzawa@gmail.com
                                                    1. Motivation

         The speed and breadth with which COVID-19-related government restrictions on

business operations, personal movements, and assembly rights should be lifted has sparked an

intense public policy debate (Jarvie 2020, Vainshtein 2020). Proponents of lifting non-

pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) such as blanket shelter-in-place orders (SIPOs) 1, non-

essential business closings, bans on large gatherings, and school closings argue that the costs of

these policies — including increased unemployment (Baek et al. 2020, Couch, Fairlie and Xu

2020), decreased human capital acquisition (Doyle 2020), diminished consumption of

preventative and emergency care (Lazzerini et al. 2020, Santioli et al. 2020), and poorer

psychological health (Galea, Merchant and Lurie 2020, Hsing et al. 2020) — may be substantial.

Opponents argue that a rapid, broad-based reopening would quickly reduce social distancing,

create a false sense of optimism about contagion, and reignite the coronavirus pandemic,

overwhelming hospital resources (i.e. ventilators, hospital beds, and medical professionals) and

increasing coronavirus-related deaths. These arguments have framed the political debate over

the efficacy of lifting SIPOs and reopening non-essential businesses (Colliver 2020, Fadel 2020,

Usero 2020).

         However, it is also possible that lifting SIPOs may have much smaller effects on social

distancing, COVID-19 cases, and unemployment rates than both proponents and opponents

suggest. If most social distancing behavior and job loss are not caused by mitigation policies,

but rather are explained by demand shocks caused by rapid diffusion of COVID-19 information

or via Bayesian updating of coronavirus risk assessment (Barrios and Hochberg 2020, Holtz et



1
 Individuals under a SIPO are only allowed to leave their homes for “essential” activities such as shopping for food
or medicine, reporting for work in an industry deemed essential, or caring for a sick relative.

                                                         1
al. 2020), the effects of lifting SIPOs may be quite small. 2 Moreover. the elasticity of social

distancing (and COVID-19 cases) with respect to mitigation policies may fall over time as

individuals learn about healthier options for population mixing (i.e. mask-wearing, 6-feet social

distancing with non-household members). 3

         Using a standard difference-in-differences approach to estimate the effect of lifting a

statewide SIPO on COVID-19 cases faces two first-order identification problems. First,

policymakers explicitly tie the decision to allow a SIPO to expire to COVID-19 case growth, a

textbook case of policy endogeneity. White House reopening guidelines, issued jointly with the

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend a “downward trajectory of documented

cases within a 14-day period” before a state or region proceeds to a phased reopening (White

House 2020; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2020). This national recommendation

is in-line with state and local policies with regards to ending SIPOs. 4 For instance, Oregon rules

require that “counties where more than 5 people have been hospitalized for severe COVID-19

symptoms in the past 28 days must see declining hospitalizations for 14 days in order to begin

reopening” (Oregon Health Authority 2020). Similarly, New York requires “a downward

trajectory of hospitalizations and infections over a 14-day period,” as well as “a sustained decline

in the three-day rolling average of daily hospital deaths over the course of a 14-day period,”

which like the national recommendations explicitly links trends in the outcome variable of

interest to implementation of the policy (New York Forward 2020).




2
  It is also possible that SIPO adoption or lifting may impact perceptions of coronavirus risk as well as information
about the virus’s spread.
3
  This argument suggests that the social distancing (and case) effects of SIPO adoption and SIPO lifting may be
asymmetric.
4
  While the federal government can make recommendations with regards to social distancing policies, the power to
enact or revoke most of these policies lies with state and local governments.

                                                          2
         These ties of policy to trend are not simply made explicit in the written policies, but are

also publicly communicated by state leadership. To take one prominent example, in a May 22,

2020 news conference, New York governor Andrew Cuomo commented on reopening plans for

the Mid-Hudson region (immediately north of New York City) as well as parts of Long Island,

saying, “If the number of deaths continue to decline … both regions could reopen” (Newsday

Staff 2020).

         Second, an emerging literature documents that the enactment of statewide SIPOs,

particularly those that were adopted early and in areas with low case growth (Friedson et al.

2020; Dave et al. 2020a, b) were successful at “bending the case curve” for COVID-19

(Courtemanche et al. 2020; Dave et al. 2020a). For instance, Dave et al. (2020a) find that SIPO

adoption is associated with a 44 percent reduction in COVID-19 cases. Taken at face value,

these results imply that pre-treatment trends in a difference-in-differences-based statewide SIPO

expiration analysis will not be parallel. 5

         Together, the above insights suggest that using a difference-in-differences approach to

estimate the impacts of SIPO expiration will be highly problematic for causal inference. 6,7 Thus,

rather than examine gubernatorial decisions on SIPO lifting, we instead turn to a unique natural

experiment to identify the causal effect of SIPO expiration on social distancing and COVID-19


5
  This would be true among early adopting SIPO states, which were the only states for which SIPOs were found to
“bend the case curve”.
6
  We hypothesize that the expiration of a SIPO is much more endogenous to COVID-19 cases than was its
enactment. No state or Federal guidelines of which we were aware recommended jurisdictions enact a SIPO if a
case growth rate rose above a particular threshold. Further, there is little evidence of any non-SIPO policy flattening
the COVID-19 case curve. The only significant estimates show benefits from bar and restaurant closures that are
modest when compared to the effects of SIPOs (Courtemanche et al. 2020).
7
  Note that there is no problem of insufficient policy variation, just that the available variation is likely to be
endogenous in most cases. There is a considerable amount of variation in the timing of the end of state or local
SIPO, with 37 states lifting some form of social distancing policy between April 20, 2020 and May 13, 2020 (Gupta
et al. 2020b). However, policies regarding coronavirus provide numerous challenges to the difference-in-differences
strategy, in particular with regards to the assumption of parallel pre-policy trends (Goodman-Bacon and Marcus
2020), concerns that are exacerbated in the context of examining reopening states by ending social distancing
policies as both national guidance and explicit state level policy rules tie opening behaviors to the trends themselves.

                                                           3
cases. This sudden, dramatic, and somewhat unexpected policy shock was generated by a state

court ruling on the constitutionality of a statewide SIPO.

        On May 13, 2020 in Wisconsin Legislature v. Palm, the Wisconsin State Supreme Court

struck down Wisconsin’s “Safer at Home Order” (Ruthhart 2020). The Court ruled that Andrea

Palm, the secretary-designee of the Wisconsin Department of Health Services, violated state law

by issuing the stay-at-home decree as an “order” instead of a “rule.” This distinction allowed the

Executive Branch (the governor’s office) to circumvent weeks-long legislative oversight and

possible veto, and instead immediately implement the policy (Supreme Court of Wisconsin

2020). While Palm argued that the specificity of the COVID-19 crisis permitted her to issue an

order, the Court ruled that by bypassing a lengthy administrative rulemaking process and

legislative review (Johnson 2020; Millhiser 2020), the Safer at Home Order was “unlawful,

invalid, and unenforceable” (Vetterkind and Schmidt 2020; Hagemann 2020).

        The force and effect of this legal ruling was dramatic and immediate. The entire

statewide order was overturned (with the exception of the school closures; see Deliso 2020; Beck

2020), making Wisconsin the only U.S. state without a single statewide protective measure in

place (Ruthhart 2020).8 The legal ruling immediately allowed non-essential businesses to reopen

without restriction, with many bars opening on the night of the decision, gaining national media

attention (O’Kane 2020). Observing the night’s events, Wisconsin’s Governor Tony Evers said

that the ruling had “throw[n] the state into chaos,” and predicted that “people are going to get

sick” (Evers 2020).

        This study exploits this unique experiment to identify the causal effect of Wisconsin’s

SIPO termination on social distancing and COVID-19 cases. First, using anonymized, geospatial


8
 This decision also marked the first successful legal challenge of a SIPO (Deliso 2020; Beck 2020; Jimenez and
LeBlanc 2020).

                                                        4
smartphone data from SafeGraph, Inc. from May 3 through May 24, and a synthetic control

approach, we find no evidence that the statewide legal order significantly affected several

measures of state-level social distancing: the percent of the time spent at home full-time, median

hours spent at home, part-time work behavior, and full-time work behavior. 9 While we detect

some evidence of a modest decline in stay-at-home behavior in the first four days following the

order’s enactment, the trend reverses itself thereafter producing a net null effect over the full

post-treatment period.

         Then, turning to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data from May 3 through

May 26 on COVID-19 cases and deaths, synthetic control estimates fail to detect any evidence

that the Wisconsin Supreme Court order affected COVID-19 health, including during the period

following the coronavirus’s incubation. These null results are robust to (i) choice of donor

states, including states that had a statewide SIPO in effect beyond the median incubation period

and SIPO states that either had no reopenings or limited reopenings, and (ii) choice of observable

matching variables to create synthetic weights, including COVID-19 case rates per all pre-

treatment days, urbanicity rate, population density, COVID-19 testing rates, pre-treatment social

distancing, and other business reopening policies.

         The remainder of the paper explores the explanation for this null result and examines

heterogeneous treatment effects that may be masked by our zero net effect result. We draw three

conclusions from this analysis. First, while 5 of 72 Wisconsin counties enacted longer-term local

safer-at-home orders to try to counter the Supreme Court decision, accounting for these county

policies does not change our main finding. Second, we find no evidence that urbanized or

densely populated counties were differentially affected by SIPO termination. Finally, we do find


9
 Goodman-Bacon and Marcus (2020) recommend that in the context of COVID-19 policies, researchers focus
especially on techniques “that impose balance in pre-policy infection levels and trends,” such as synthetic control.

                                                          5
some evidence of heterogeneity in the response to the Wisconsin Supreme Court decision by

2016 voting behavior of residents. In counties where a majority of residents voted for

Republican President Donald Trump, the termination of the SIPO was associated with a larger

short-run decline in social distancing. However, there is little evidence of higher growth in

COVID-19 cases for these counties relative to the others over the post-repeal period.


                2. Background and Reaction to Wisconsin Supreme Court Decision

       Wisconsin saw its first case of COVID-19 on February 5, 2020 (Wisconsin Department

of Health Services 2020; Wiscontext 2020). More than a month passed before the second

documented case emerged on March 9. By March 25, there were 583 new confirmed cases,

bringing the total number of cases to 585 or 10 cases per 100,000 population (Wisconsin

Department of Health Services, 2020; Wiscontext, 2020). In an attempt to “flatten the case

curve,” at 8:00 a.m. on Wednesday, March 25, 2020, Andrea Palm, secretary-designee of the

Wisconsin Department of Health Services (under the direction of Governor Tony Evers) signed

Emergency Order 12, a statewide “Safer at Home Order” (State of Wisconsin 2020).

       This SIPO required all individuals within the state of Wisconsin to stay in their place of

residence at all times except for essential activities. Essential activities were defined as those

activities necessary to maintain health and safety, such as obtaining medication or seeking

emergency health care, grocery shopping, outdoor exercise, performing work at essential

businesses or operations and related travel, and provision of care for others (State of Wisconsin

2020). Additionally, the SIPO required social distancing of six feet whenever residents leave

their houses, and prohibited all non-essential travel. The order also required all non-essential

business operations to cease, performing only Minimum Basic Operations (State of Wisconsin




                                                  6
2020). 10 Exempt from this order were businesses deemed essential, including but not limited to

stores that sell food and medicine, transportation, funeral establishments, take-out services,

transportation, and social service organizations (State of Wisconsin 2020).

         This order was set to remain in effect until 8:00 a.m. on Friday, April 24, 2020.

However, eight (8) days prior to the expiration date, Andrea Palm issued Emergency Order 28,

which extended the Safer at Home order until 8:00 a.m. on Tuesday, May 26, 2020 (Office of the

Governor 2020). The order also implemented changes to the original order, which were to be

effective on April 24. Included in these changes were modest reopenings for non-essential

businesses. Public libraries were allowed to open for curbside pick-up, golf courses were

permitted to open with restrictions to ensure social distancing, in-person retail was allowed for

up to five customers at a time at particular shops, arts and craft stores were allowed to offer

curbside pick-up, and aesthetic work was permitted with one worker (State of Wisconsin 2020;

Office of the Governor 2020). In addition, guidelines for safe business practices, including

disinfecting practices and safe waiting areas or lines were also announced. Finally, all public

and private schools were ordered to remain closed for the remainder of the school year.

         The revised Safer at Home order was set to expire on May 26. But on April 21, the

Republican-controlled Assembly and Senate, led by Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald and

Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, filed a lawsuit, Wisconsin Legislature v. Palm, which sought to

overturn the Safer at Home order on separation of powers grounds (Wisconsin Legislature v.

Palm 2020; Millhiser 2020). While state law allows the Department of Health Services extensive

power when dealing with a communicable disease, the Republican legislature claimed that the

Office of the Secretary had exceeded its legal authority. In a 4 to 3 decision, issued on March


10
  These include the necessary activities to maintain the value of the inventory and capital, process payroll, facilitate
remote work, and other related functions.

                                                           7
13, 2020, the Wisconsin State Supreme Court struck down the statewide SIPO, siding with the

plaintiffs that the administration had exceeded its authority (Ruthhart 2020; Vetterkind and

Schmidt 2020; Deliso 2020; Beck 2020; Jimenex and LeBlanc 2020; Hagemann 2020). In

addition to striking down the SIPO, the order declared all new COVID-19 public health

restrictions in Wisconsin subject to review and potential veto by legislative committee.

         Political opinion in Wisconsin was divided. While Republican Senate Majority Leader

Fitzgerald said that “the public started to become skeptical” of Democrat Governor Evers’ ability

to guide the state through the pandemic (Beck 2020), polls taken during the week the Supreme

Court decision was handed down showed that the public trusted Evers with reopening of the state

more than the state legislature. Additionally, polls found that nearly 70 percent of voters believed

that Evers’s order was appropriate given the severity of the pandemic (Ruthhart 2020; Beck

2020).11

         Reaction to the Supreme Court decision was swift and partisan. Governor Tony Evers

declared:



         “Republican legislators convinced four members of the Supreme Court to throw the state

         into chaos. They have no plan. People are going to get sick, and those Republicans own

         this chaos” (Ruthhard 2020).



whereas Republican Steve Nass, co-chairman of the Wisconsin legislature’s rules committee

claimed:



11
  During the decision process, dissenting justice Ann Bradley stated that “the lack of a stay would be particularly
breathtaking given the testimony yesterday before Congress by one of our nation’s top infectious disease experts,
Dr. Anthony Fauci. He warned against lifting too quickly stay-at-home orders” (Ruthhart 2020).

                                                          8
        “I have great faith that people will make the decisions necessary to fight COVID-19 on

        their own without excessive government intervention” (Richmond 2020).



Of course, the actual response by individuals within Wisconsin remains an empirical question,

and is the focus of the analyses to follow.



                                             3. Data and Methodology
3.1 Data

        To examine the effect of the Wisconsin Supreme Court decision on social distancing, we

utilize data from SafeGraph Inc. 12 SafeGraph provides an anonymized population movement

dataset representing approximately 45 million smartphone devices. The number of smartphone

devices is aggregated to the census block level and these aggregated data are made available to

members of the public who apply for them via SafeGraph. These data have been used by a

growing number of scholars studying social distancing in the United States following the

COVID-19 outbreak (Maclean et al. 2020; Dave et al. 2020a,b; Friedson et al. 2020; Abouk and

Heydari 2020), as well as by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Lasry et al. 2020).

Our analysis period is 22 days from May 3, 2020 through May 24, 2020, which envelopes the

Supreme Court decision that abolished the SIPO. 13 The start of our sample period also ensures

that any effects we find are not confounded by the modest re-openings of non-essential

businesses that were allowed starting on April 24th with the extension of the original SIPO.



12
   Data and detailed descriptions of variable construction are available at:
https://www.safegraph.com/dashboard/covid19-shelter-in-place
13
   This is well after the April 7, 2020 Wisconsin primary election, which has been shown to have had an effect on
COVID-19 cases in Wisconsin (Cotti et al. 2020).

                                                         9
           From these data we collect four key state-by-day measures of social distancing. Our first

measure, Stay-at-Home Full Time, captures the percent of the state population who remain at

home for the entire day. A person’s home is defined as a 153-meter by 153-meter area that

receives the most frequent GPS pings during the overnight hours of 6pm to 7am. To construct

this measure, each smartphone phone is assigned a “home” (or 153m by 153m square) based on

a common nighttime location over a baseline period. SafeGraph then calculates the percent

staying at home, i.e. the fraction of cell phones in a geographic unit (state, county, or census

block) that do not leave the “home” for any given day. 14 This extensive measure of social

distancing is one that we expect to be substantially affected by a state SIPO. We find that in the

state of Wisconsin, 35.7 percent of respondents remained at home full-time over the sample

period.15

           Second, we measure Median Hours at Home, the median number of hours spent at home.

This measure captures social distancing behavior at the intensive margin as well. We find that

those in Wisconsin remained in their homes for a median number of 12.1 hours per day.

           Third, we measure the Median Percent Time Spent at Home, the median percent of the

time that cell phones are located at home. Our data show a median home time of 88.8 percent

among those residing in Wisconsin.

           Finally, we measure work behavior of state residents by whether the cell phone device

was tracked as leaving the “home” area for the same destination for at least 6 hours between the

hours of 8am and 6pm during the day, which is termed Full-Time Work Behavior. If the cell

phone instead left for the same destination for 3 to 6 hours between 8am and 6pm, we define it as

Part-Time Work Behavior Over the sample period, we find that an average of 3.5 percent of


14
     SafeGraph makes adjustments for small geographic units which are not relevant for a state-level analysis.
15
     At the start of our sample period (May 3), this fraction was 36.8 percent.

                                                           10
Wisconsinites engaged in full-time work behavior and 5.6 percent engaged in part-time work

behavior.

           Appendix Figure 1 shows trends in these four measures of social distancing for each

state, with Wisconsin highlighted in black. Trends in social distancing are flat or slightly

declining over this period.

           To examine the short-run effects of the Wisconsin Supreme Court decision on COVID-

19, we utilize a panel of state-specific daily counts of cases and deaths from May 3, 2020

through May 26, 2020. These data are collected by the Centers for Disease Control and

Prevention (CDC) and made public by the Kaiser Family Foundation. 16 As of May 26, there

were a total of 1,684,404 confirmed COVID-19 cases in the United States, 0.9 percent (15,923)

of which were in Wisconsin, and 95,871 coronavirus-related deaths, 0.5 percent (517) of which

were in Wisconsin. Our central public health outcomes of interest are 𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 , measuring

the cumulative number of confirmed coronavirus cases, and 𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷𝐷ℎ 𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑅𝑠𝑠𝑠𝑠 , which is the number

of coronavirus-related deaths per 100,000 population, in state s at day t. Appendix Figure 2

shows state-specific trends in cumulative coronavirus case and death rates per 100,000

population in Wisconsin as well as for the remaining 49 states and the District of Columbia.



3.2 Methods

           The main aim of this study is to capitalize on the unanticipated policy shock, generated

by the Wisconsin State Supreme Court’s ruling, in order to identify the causal effects of the

termination of the statewide shelter-in-place order on social distancing and public health. Our

empirical analysis proceeds in a sequential manner to address these questions.



16
     See data available here: https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-us-cases.html

                                                          11
       Before we turn to estimating effects of the termination of the SIPO, it important to

establish that the original adoption of the statewide SIPO in Wisconsin (on March 25) causally

impacted (i) social distancing, and (ii) the number of confirmed coronavirus cases and deaths in

the state. We do so by using the synthetic control method introduced by Abadie et al. (2010) and

applied by Friedson et al. (2020) for the implementation of the California SIPO, which relies on

data from pre-treatment outcomes and observable characteristics of states that may influence the

spread of the virus or its detection to generate a counterfactual for Wisconsin in the absence of

the statewide shelter-in-place order.

       Next, we continue with our synthetic control approach to infer the causal impact of the

Supreme Court’s ruling in Wisconsin (lifting the statewide SIPO) on social distancing and the

number of confirmed COVID-19 cases and deaths. To generate a counterfactual for Wisconsin

in the absence of the Supreme Court decision, we draw on our primary donor pool comprised of

17 states and the District of Columbia. For our measures of social distancing, where estimated

effects of a SIPO expiration may materialize immediately, our donor pool consists of states that

had a statewide SIPO in effect during the entire analysis period for which we have SafeGraph

data (May 3 through May 24). For cases and deaths analysis, we expand our donor pool to

include both those states that had a SIPO in effect during the entire analysis period (May 3

through May 26) as well states that allowed their SIPOs to expire, but had fewer than five days

of post-treatment data, which is the median incubation period for COVID-19.

       We estimate the unobserved counterfactual (“synthetic Wisconsin”) as a weighted linear

combination of states included in the donor pool. The weights are chosen so as to generate a

synthetic state that is as similar as possible to Wisconsin on key observables. Given the

importance of our selection (i) of states to be included in the donor pool, and (ii) observable



                                                 12
characteristics on which to closely match Wisconsin to its synthetic counterpart, we explore the

sensitivity of our estimates to these choices (Ferman 2019).

        Our choice of the donor pool is informed by requiring that all control states had a SIPO in

effect during the entire period under study. We also experiment with limiting the donor pool

further by excluding (i) any state that even partially permitted reopening of restaurant and other

food services with in-room dining (even at limited capacity) or retail, mall, or movie theatre

reopenings beyond curbside pickup or drive-in movies, or (ii) any state wherein more than 50

percent of the population resides in counties that permitted any reopening of these non-essential

businesses and services.

        With regard to the choice of observables used to select our synthetic control from among

the donor states, we take several approaches. In one strategy, we match on each of 10 days (May

3 through May 12) of pre-treatment social distancing and confirmed COVID-19 case rates per

100,000 population, which effectively requires growth rates to be identical. While choosing a

counterfactual based only on pre-treatment outcomes eliminates concerns of ‘p-hacking’ (Hansen

et al. 2020; Botosaru and Ferman 2017), this approach also effectively eliminates the role of

other factors that could affect COVID-19 outbreak (Kaul et al. 2018). 17

        Thus, in other approaches, we match on (i) state population density and a state urbanicity

index, factors that play an important role in COVID-19 spread (Friedson et al. 2020; Dave et al.

2020a,b), (ii) COVID-19 testing rates, which may play an important role in coronavirus

detection, (iii) other pre-treatment COVID-19 policies (i.e. whether the state permitted state

parks to be open and whether the state permitted roadside pickup of retail, both of which

Wisconsin had prior to the Supreme Court decision), and (iv) social distancing prior to the


17
   As shown by Kaul et al. (2018), matching on all periods of pre-treatment outcomes renders all covariates
irrelevant in the prediction of the outcome.

                                                        13
Supreme Court Decision. To conduct hypothesis tests, we conduct placebo tests following the

method suggested by Abadie et al. (2010) to generate permutation-based p-values.

        Next, we carry over the control states identified in the synthetic control approach and also

estimate the following baseline difference-in-differences specification, drawing upon county-by-

day data from Wisconsin and the control states:

            Ycst = β0 + β1*SIPOEXPcst + β2*BUSINESSREOPENst + β3*CAREREOPENst

             + β4*ACTIVITYREOPENst + αcs + γt + εcst                                         (1)

where Ycst measures one of our outcome variables (social distancing, log COVID-19 cases, log

deaths) in county c in state s on day t, and SIPOEXP is an indicator set equal to 1 if the

observation is drawn from Wisconsin in the post-Supreme Court period. The sample is

comprised of counties in Wisconsin and in each of the donor states that received a positive

weight in the synthetic control model. BUSINESSREOPENst is an indicator for whether the

state had begun a partial reopening of restaurants, bars, and retail stores such as roadside pick-up,

and limited capacity. CAREREOPENst is an indicator for whether the state had begun a

reopening of personal or pet care, including barber, salons, and pet grooming services.

ACITIVTYREOPENst is an indicator for whether the state had begun a partial reopening of

activities and entertainment including gyms, state parks, and drive-in movie theatres. In

addition, αc is a set of county fixed effects to control for fixed differences across states in social

distancing or COVID-19 infections due to, for example, baseline hospital capacity differences,

population density, the presence of an important airport hub, or baseline testing capacity; γt is a




                                                  14
set of day fixed effects to control for national factors that commonly affect our outcomes. 18

Regressions are weighted using synthetic weights.

        In alternate specifications, we also add controls for state-specific linear time trends (αs*t)

to capture any unmeasured area-level time trends that could be coincidentally associated with

COVID-19 growth and with the Supreme Court decision. The locality-specific trends can help

account for unobserved factors driving the exponential growth trajectory of transmissions, and

effects in this case would be identified off deviations from this trend growth (Dave et al 2020a).

        The advantage of the county-by-day difference-in-differences setup is that it allows us to

explore heterogeneity in the effect of the Wisconsin Supreme Court decision across several

margins, as follows:

         Ycst = β0 + β1* (Xc*SIPOEXPcst) + β2*BUSINESSREOPENst + β3*CAREREOPENst

                          + β4*ACTIVITYREOPENst + αcs + γt + εcst                      (2)

        In equation (2), Xc denotes the specific dimension that may drive potential differential

responses in Wisconsin to the Supreme Court’s rescinding of the statewide SIPO.

        First, we consider whether the county issued a local stay-at-home order in response to the

statewide termination. Fourteen of the state’s 72 counties responded to the Supreme Court ruling

by enacting policies to mitigate the potential effects of the lifting of the statewide order.

Extenders included Dane and Milwaukee counties – population centers that contain the cities of

Madison and Milwaukee, respectively – as well as several other less urban counties. These

localities effectively extended the governor’s shelter-in-place order by re-issuing makeshift local

public health orders, and conveying to residents and businesses that a local order remains in



18
  The day fixed effects also flexibly control for any intra-week cyclical variation (for instance, weekday vs.
weekend or holiday effects) that may be driving the demands for time, economic and non-economic activity, and
hence social distancing.

                                                       15
effect in spite of the state order being overturned. For most of these localities, the extensions and

stays were temporary, on average lasting only three to four days beyond the Supreme Court

ruling, and enacted mainly as a stop-gap measure to give businesses some leeway to prepare to

open or resume. Five counties, representing 30.9 percent of the state’s population, however

prolonged their local stay-at-home orders longer, and residents in these counties continue to be

bound by their local SIPOs as of the end of our sample period. 19

        While the Supreme Court ruling was binding for most Wisconsinites, we assess whether

there were any differential effects in social distancing and COVID-19 cases across counties that

strictly abided by the ruling and its timing vs. counties that responded to the ruling by extending

their local orders either temporarily or for a more protracted period. We estimate equation (2) by

interacting an indicator (Xc) for whether the county issued an extension (either a stop-gap

temporary or prolonged local order) in response to revocation of the statewide SIPO.

        Next, we explore heterogeneity in the effects of the repeal of the SIPO by urbanicity and

population density, by alternately interacting the SIPO repeal (SIPOEXP) by (i) whether the

county had an urbanicity rate of at least 50 percent (Xc; 26 of all 72 Wisconsin counties); and (ii)

whether the county had population density of at least 75 persons per square mile (Xc; 24 of 72

Wisconsin counties). Prior work has established that state SIPOs as well as localized SIPOs are

more effective in states and counties that are highly urbanized and densely populated (Dave et al.

2020a, b). The larger gains from SIPOs in these areas derive from urbanicity and population

density being important predictors of social interactions and potential magnifiers of infection

transmission. These studies find that shelter-in-place orders tend to elicit a larger response vis-a-



19
   These five counties are: Dane, Eau Claire, Florence, Milwaukee, and Racine. The other nine counties with
temporary stays are: Kenosha, Calumet, Outagamie, Winnebago, and Brown, with extensions of local orders ranging
from 1-3 days; and Marquette, Green, Door, and Rock, with extensions ranging from 5-9 days.

                                                      16
vis social distancing in more urban and populated areas, and also that a given level of social

distancing may translate into larger gains in the containment of COVID-19 infection in these

areas. While we do not expect the effects of the initial adoption of the statewide SIPO and its

subsequent repeal to be symmetric, these considerations warrant an exploration of whether the

average statewide effect is masking important heterogeneity across these dimensions. Moreover,

behavioral responses in terms of mobility and sheltering-in-place to the lifting of a SIPO may

vary depending on options for outside activities, risk perceptions, and population mixing, all of

which are likely to differ across urban (more densely populated) vs. non-urban (sparsely

populated) areas.

       Finally, we consider whether the effects of the Supreme Court decision differed based on

political preferences, by interacting the main effect in equation (2) with an indicator (Xc) for

whether a majority of the county voters voted for Republican presidential candidate Donald

Trump in 2016. Given the divided political opinion in the state, and the split decision across

party lines, ideology may well impact the degree to which residents heeded the Democratic

governor’s admonition to continue sheltering-in-place after the repeal of the statewide SIPO.

       For the difference-in-differences analyses, with a single treated state and a few control

states, deriving inferential statistics based on state-clustered standard errors is not an option as

these would likely overestimate statistical significance (Cameron and Miller 2015; Cameron,

Gelbach, and Miller 2008). We therefore conduct statistical inference via permutation-based p-

values generated by rank tests, which imposes a very high standard for achieving statistical

significance (Cunningham and Shah 2018). This involves comparing our treatment effect

generated from the difference-in-differences model (equation 1 or 2) with placebo estimates

obtained by running additional specifications, in each case replacing Wisconsin (the true treated



                                                  17
unit) with an indicator for one of the other control states. Since the number of control states

identified from the synthetic control approach is a small subset of the donor pool, achieving 5

percent and 10 percent significance is often not possible in our case. For instance, if the total

number of states (WI + control states) in a given difference-in-differences model is nine, then

achieving at best 11.1 percent statistical significance requires that Wisconsin be ranked at the

very extreme of the placebo distribution. We present these rank tests for all estimates, and draw

conclusions from the weight of the evidence from the magnitudes, any consistent patterns, and

inferential statistics.



                                                        4. Results

           We present our main findings of Wisconsin’s statewide SIPO repeal, driven by the abrupt

and unanticipated Supreme Court ruling, on measures of mobility and on COVID-19 related

health outcomes in Tables 1 and 2, and in Figures 1-3. Estimates of the heterogeneity analyses

are presented in Table 3 and in Figures 4-6, and additional analyses addressing specific issues are

presented in the Appendix.



4.1 Wisconsin’s SIPO Repeal and Social Distancing

           Figure 1 presents trends in the four measures of social distancing and mobility, drawn

from the anonymized cell-phone geotagged data from Safegraph, for both Wisconsin and its

synthetic control. 20 The synthetic control assigns weights based on close matches in each of three

days in the pre-repeal period (May 3, 7 and 12) with respect to the social distancing outcome

under consideration as well as the urbanicity rate of the state. This constructed synthetic control



20
     Appendix Table 1 reports the covariate match for the synthetic control analyses of social distancing outcomes.

                                                           18
serves as our counterfactual for trends in social distancing that would have unfolded in the

absence of Wisconsin’s Supreme Court decision.

        Panel (a) plots Wisconsin and synthetic Wisconsin for the outcome of the percent of

respondents staying at home throughout the day, Panel (b) repeats this exercise for an intensity

measure capturing the median daily hours spent at home, and Panel (c) utilizes another intensity

measure, the median percent of daily hours spent at home. These analyses highlight three key

points. First, the trends in staying-at-home behaviors in Wisconsin and synthetic Wisconsin are

nearly identical and move lock-step in the pre-repeal period. Second, there is a slight declining

trend in these measures of social distancing throughout the sample period for both Wisconsin and

its control, with some intra-week variance driven by weekday vs. weekend effects. Third, there

is little evidence of any significant or substantial break in the trend or a sustained decrease in

sheltering-in-place in Wisconsin, relative to synthetic Wisconsin, after the statewide repeal.

There is some suggestive indication of dynamics in the very short run, with the percent staying at

home (and to some extent the percent of time spent at home) in Wisconsin declining by May 15th

(Friday) relative to the control; the magnitude of the effect is about 2 percentage points (about 5

percent relative to the baseline mean in the state). 21 However, sheltering-in-place quickly

rebounds over the next two days, with little discernible difference in subsequent trends between

treated Wisconsin and its synthetic control. For the last 3 days of the sample (over a week after

the SIPO was struck down), both median hours at home and median percent of time at home

experience a small decrease in Wisconsin relative to synthetic Wisconsin, though neither effect is

statistically distinguishable from zero at conventional levels.


21
   Appendix Figure 3 presents the placebo tests for each of the social distancing and mobility measures. The short-
term dynamics in sheltering-at-home are more apparent here (Panels a, b and c) when contrasted against the placebo
effects. The decline in the percent staying at home and the median hours spent at home within 2 or 3 days post-
repeal have one-sided, one-tailed permutation based p-values of 0.167 and 0.278, respectively.

                                                        19
        Since the repeal of the statewide order allowed non-essential businesses to reopen

without restriction, we also assess effects on part-time and full-time work outside the home

(Panels d and e). As with the stay-at-home behaviors, trends in working outside the home are

virtually identical across Wisconsin and its control, both before and after the repeal, providing

extremely little evidence that the Supreme Court ruling led to any substantial or detectable

increase in mobility outside the home. 22

        In Table 1, we report estimates of the average daily effect of the repeal of the state’s

SIPO on each of the social distancing measures. 23 The above discussion of the visual trends

between Wisconsin and synthetic Wisconsin prefigures the effect magnitudes and their statistical

significance reported in the table. Column (1) presents estimates of the average policy effect

over the post-repeal period, comparing Wisconsin to its synthetic control, where the synthetic

control is formed by matching on the outcome in each of three pre-treatment days (May 3, 7, and

12) and urbanicity (as presented in Figure 1). While the effects of the repeal on stay-at-home

behaviors at the intensive margin are negative, the magnitudes are not economically or

statistically significant. We also do not uncover any substantial increases in working outside the

home during the day.

        The remaining columns in Table 1 assess the robustness of these findings to the choice of

observable controls and donor states. In columns (2) and (3), we show the robustness of findings

in column (1) to matching on population density and both urbanicity and population density, as

well as three pre-treatment days of social distancing data. The results are unchanged.




22
   The intra-week cycle, capturing weekend vs. weekday effects, is expectedly more pronounced for outside-the-
home full-time work than for part-time work.
23
   Appendix Table 2 reports the donor states receiving positive weights for each analysis in Table 1.

                                                       20
       To ensure that endogenous COVID-19 testing is not biasing the estimated effect of

Wisconsin’s repeal, in column (4) we supplement the matching strategy by assuring similarity

across Wisconsin and its control on testing rates across the pre-policy period, in addition to pre-

treatment matches on the social distancing outcome for three days (May 3, May 7 and May 12).

       Given that Wisconsin’s overturning of its statewide SIPO was a policy shock, largely

unanticipated and abrupt, being a result of the state Supreme Court deeming it unconstitutional,

we are less concerned with policy endogeneity. Nevertheless, column (5) augments the

matching strategy to ensure that Wisconsin and its control also explicitly match on COVID-19

cases. The results are unchanged.

       Next, we explore the sensitivity of findings to matching on similar reopening policies as

Wisconsin had in place before the Supreme Court decision, specifically opening of public parks

and limited retail openings (i.e. roadside pickup and some in-shop openings). Our findings from

this synthetic control match, shown in column (6) are generally consistent with prior estimates.

       While our donor pool is restricted to states that had a statewide SIPO in place throughout

much of the sample period, one concern is that some of these states nevertheless permitted partial

re-openings of non-essential services and business or contained counties that may have permitted

limited re-openings. The endpoint of our sample period ensures that we are not capturing effects

of any other state fully reopening; nevertheless, even partial reopenings for some services and

businesses may contaminate the donor pool and bias Wisconsin’s SIPO repeal effect toward

zero. In column (7), we assess sensitivity to excluding all states from the donor pool that

permitted any partial re-opening of restaurants or bars, or contained counties (covering at least

50 percent of the state population) that permitted such partial re-opening. Our results are

unchanged.



                                                 21
           Finally, in column (8), we explore the sensitivity of our findings to matching on each of

the 10 days of pre-treatment days of social distancing data. The weight of the evidence across

this matching scheme, for each of the social distancing measures, points to no significant or

meaningful increase in mobility outside the home or working outside the home.



4.2 Wisconsin’s SIPO Repeal, COVID-19 Confirmed Cases and Mortality

           Our findings thus far indicate that the overturning of the statewide shelter-in-place order

in Wisconsin did not effectively lead residents to spend more time outside their homes, except

perhaps in the very immediate term following the repeal. Given the integral role played by

person-to-person contact in the infection transmission mechanism, if the lifting of the statewide

order did not lead to any substantial or sustained first-order effects in increasing mobility outside

one’s home, it would be unlikely that there would be strong effects on COVID-19 cases and

deaths. We confirm this in the next set of results.

           Figure 2 visually presents effects of the repeal on confirmed cases, by graphing trends

between Wisconsin and its synthetic counterfactual. 24 Panel (a) matches on pre-treatment cases

per 100,000 population as well as urbanicity, Panel (b) augments the matching to include

COVID-19 testing rates, and Panel (c) matches on sheltering-at-home measures (in addition to

outcome matches at interim points over the pre-policy period). Finally, in Panel (d), we

explicitly match on COVID-19 cases per 100,000 population in each of the 10 days prior to the

SIPO repeal in Wisconsin, effectively matching on the case growth rate. Expectedly, trends in

confirmed cases identically track across Wisconsin and synthetic Wisconsin over the entire

sample period, providing no sign that the repeal of the statewide SIPO led to any discernible



24
     Appendix Table 3 reports the covariate match for the synthetic control analyses of COVID-19 cases and deaths.

                                                          22
increase in confirmed infections. Estimates in Panel I of Table 2 largely confirm these

findings. 25

            One concern regarding the lack of any strong effects for COVID-19 cases is that the post-

repeal sample period might not be sufficiently long enough as of yet to detect a resurgence or

increase in the infection rates. While this is a possibility, we note that our sample includes 14

days of data following the revocation of the statewide SIPO. The median incubation period for

COVID-19 is 5.1 days, with 75 percent of all infected individuals seeing symptoms within 6.7

days and 97.5 percent seeing symptoms in 11.5 days (Li et al. 2020). Prior work has uncovered

strong effects of shelter-in-place orders on confirmed cases within five to ten days following the

adoption of the policy (Friedson et al. 2020; Dave et al. 2020 a, b; Courtemanche et al. 2020).

Hence, if there are any meaningful changes in COVID-19 cases as a result of the repeal, our

post-repeal window of 14 days is long enough to be able to capture them.

            Is it possible that the lack of an effect of the SIPO repeal on social distancing and cases is

due to the original SIPO not being effective in driving social distancing and containment of cases

in Wisconsin? That is, if the original statewide order was ineffective, then its repeal would likely

be policy neutral and also expected to have no major impact. This explanation is unlikely for

two reasons. First, there is consistent evidence in the literature that SIPOs have been effective in

reducing the growth in COVID-19 cases and mortality (Friedson et al. 2020; Dave et al. 2020 a,

b; Courtemanche et al. 2020), particularly among states and localities that act early. Wisconsin

was among the early adopters, enacting its statewide order on March 26, relatively early during

its outbreak cycle – precisely the conditions under which statewide SIPOs have been found to




25
     Appendix Table 4 reports the donor states receiving positive weights for each analysis in Table 2.

                                                            23
reap the largest public health benefits (Dave et al. 2020a). 26 Second, when we compare

Wisconsin to synthetic Wisconsin over the period that enveloped the initial SIPO adoption

(March 15 through May 9) but predated the repeal, we find strong evidence that the statewide

SIPO was effective in reducing COVID-19 cases (see Appendix Figure 4). In fact, the statewide

shelter-in-place order significantly flattened the growth curve in WI relative to its counterfactual,

and is predicted to have reduced the number of cases by 300 per 100,000 as of May 9.

        As we do not find any strong effects on COVID-19 cases, we would not expect any

effects on mortality, which operates with an even longer lag given the amount of time from

exposure to presentation of symptoms to acute respiratory distress and hospitalization to death.

Panel II of Table 2 confirms that there are no significant or meaningful effects on mortality as a

result of the repeal. Trends in Figure 3 confirm this pattern of mortality results.



4.3 Heterogeneity in the Effects of the Supreme Court Repeal

        Given consistent evidence across all sets of models and outcomes that the state Supreme

Court’s overturning of the shelter-in-place order, on average, had no major effect on mobility

outside the home or on COVID-related health measures, we next assess whether this average

policy response is masking heterogeneity across important margins that vary spatially. We

present these results in Table 3, based on the difference-in-differences setup (equations 1 and 2)

applied to county-by-day data. Controls are drawn from states in the donor pool, which received

positive weights and were part of the construction of the counterfactual under the synthetic

control approach.




26
  When Wisconsin implemented its statewide shelter-in-place order, it had 12 (per 100,000 population) confirmed
cases compared to the national average at the time of 27 cases (per 100,000).

                                                       24
        Panel I presents the baseline estimates, based on equation (1). They suggest some

negative effects on stay-at-home behaviors at the intensive margin, though the effects are small

and not statistically significant. 27 We note that because we draw inferences based on the

demanding permutation-grounded rank tests, achieving statistical significance at conventional

levels is not possible given the limited number of states that drive the analyses (WI + control

states). For instance, percent of time spent at home declines in Wisconsin by 0.94 percentage

points (or 1 percent relative to the mean stay-at-home full-time behavior); given that the effect in

Wisconsin was fourteenth largest when compared with the 17 placebo effects, the implied p-

value is .777 (or 14/18).

        Most of the counties that extended their SIPO, in response to the Supreme Court’s

decision, did so only temporarily for a few days, as a stop-gap measure designed to give

residents and businesses a chance to prepare for the re-opening. Five counties, however,

extended their localized order for longer, until the original expiration date of the statewide SIPO

or until further notice by the county health department; for these counties. For these counties,

their local SIPO was still in effect for residents as of the end or our sample period. Appendix

Figure 5 shows the growth in cases across these sets of counties, prior to the repeal, and do not

show any systematic difference between counties that extended their local orders and those that

undertook no response.

        In Panel II, we assess whether Wisconsinites residing in the 58 counties, that accepted the

Supreme Court’s cancellation of the SIPO, responded any differently from those residing in the

other 14 counties, which had countered the ruling by extending their local orders. Judging from

the patterns and effect magnitudes, there is some suggestive evidence that time spent at home


27
  Estimates from models that alternately control for state-linear trends are presented in Appendix Table 5. The
results are largely unaffected.

                                                        25
declined more for the bound counties relative to the counties that had extended their local orders

and tried to mitigate the impact of the ruling. Median percent of time spent at home decreased

by 1.5 percentage points in the non-extending counties, compared with a 0.3 percentage point

decline among residents in counties that extended the local SIPO.

       In Panel III of Table 3, we specifically consider if there are differential responses across

these five counties versus the remaining 67 counties that lost SIPO coverage right away or within

a few days of the Supreme Court ruling. Judging only for the effect magnitudes, time spent at

home falls somewhat more among the 67 counties that lifted their SIPO circa the Supreme Court

repeal than for the five counties that are still covered by local orders; the effects however are still

small overall and not precisely estimated. And, we find no evidence that COVID-19 case growth

grew more substantially in those Wisconsin counties where the Supreme Court decision was

fully binding.

       As an alternative approach for addressing the fact that certain Wisconsin counties were

more fully bound by the Supreme Court decision that others, we create a “Bound Wisconsin”

jurisdiction comprised of the 58 counties of Wisconsin for which the court order applied during

the sample period. Then we use the donor pool of SIPO states to match our bound treatment

state. As the results in Figure 4 show, while there are some small declines in staying-at-home in

Wisconsin relative to its counterfactual, these estimates do not achieve statistical significance.

We continue to find no substantial increases or acceleration in the trend of COVID-19 cases




                                                  26
(Figure 5) or deaths in Wisconsin (Figure 6) following the repeal. 28, 29 As discussed above, the

absence of a subsequent effect of the repeal for “bound Wisconsin counties” is not because there

was no initial effect of the statewide SIPO. Appendix Figure 6 confirms that staying-at-home

full-time increased significantly after the initial statewide order among these 58 counties, which

were bound later by the Supreme Court ruling. Moreover, COVID-19 case growth among these

58 counties had significantly and substantially flattened in response to the original statewide

order.

         Next, we assess whether the essentially null effects we find in relation to the repeal in

Wisconsin are conflating differential effects across urban and non-urban areas. On the one hand,

opportunities for mobility outside the home and options for economic and non-economic

activity, which may drive such mobility, are larger in urban areas. This may lead to a decline in

social distancing in urbanized counties upon the revocation of a SIPO. However, a higher

perceived risk of infections in urban areas may also moderate this response. Furthermore, if

urbanicity is correlated with political preference, this may further lead to differential responses,

an issue we return to below. Similar considerations warrant an exploration in differences in the

effects across population density. Panels IV and V present these results, comparing policy

responses across urbanized vs. non-urbanized counties, and across densely vs. sparsely populated


28
   In Appendix Table 6A and 6B, we replicate our main analyses using only within-Wisconsin variation, driven by
the county-level counters to the lifting of the state order. While this variation appears to be orthogonal to pre-repeal
growth rates across extending and non-extending counties (which we expect given that they were mostly imposed as
a stop-gap measure rather than in response to health trends; see Appendix Figure 5), we interpret these results with
some caution. The within-Wisconsin analyses serve two purposes. First, this can yield greater identifying variation
and statistical power, improving the precision of the estimates. Second, given findings across the board from the
cross-state analyses of no substantial impact on social distancing or health outcomes, we want to confirm that these
effects are not masking important intra-state effects and that a within-state analysis also leads to similar results.
While we find evidence that SIPO expiration increased mobility outside the home, from the lifting of a county-level
SIPO, with the effects more precisely estimated in these analyses, the effect magnitudes are fairly small (Appendix
Table 6A). The decrease in stay-at-home behaviors does not translate into any large or discernible increase in
confirmed COVID-19 infections or deaths (Appendix Table 6B).
29
   Appendix Tables 7 and 8 show point estimates and permutation-based p-values for our synthetic control estimates
for “Bound Wisconsin,” confirming the pattern of results described in Figures 4 through 6.

                                                          27
counties in Wisconsin. These estimates indicate a somewhat larger reduction in percent of time

spent at home in non-urbanized counties relative to urban counties (1.6 percentage points vs. 0.7

percent point, daily). However, the patterns for median hours spent at home are not consistent.

         The U.S. response to the COVID-19 outbreak, to some extent, has been divided along

partisan lines (Simonov et al. 2020). In Panel VI, we therefore assess if there are differential

responses in stay-at-home behaviors based on ideology, as measured by the share of Trump

voters in the county. Here we find some evidence that counties, in which the majority of voters

voted for Trump, experienced somewhat larger declines in stay-at-home behaviors (time spent at

home) relative to counties in which the share of votes for Trump was below 50 percent. This is

consistent with research indicating that individuals residing in counties with a higher share of

Trump voters are less likely to engage effort in searching for information on the coronavirus and

follow social distancing guidelines (Barrios and Hochberg 2020).

     Despite dome evidence of heterogeneous effects on social distancing by urbanicity and

population density, the results shown in columns (6) and (7) provide no consistent or meaningful

differences in the effects on COVID-19 cases or mortality across political margins. 30



                                                    5. Conclusion

         Isolating the causal effect of SIPO repeal on COVID-19-related health is quite difficult

due to policymakers’ explicit linking of COVID-19 case growth to SIPO lifting. The sudden and

largely unanticipated removal of Wisconsin’s SIPO by the Wisconsin Legislature v. Palm




30
  In Appendix Table 9A and 9B, we revisit heterogeneity in the policy response with the within-state difference-in-
differences models. Given some indication of the dynamics in the policy response (Appendix Table 6A and 6B) and
variation in the length of time that the county extensions remained in effect, these models separate out effects across
margins that vary at the county level and across timing windows. Our results are, in the main, consistent with our
heterogeneity analysis that incorporates the donor pool in the analysis.

                                                          28
decision created a unique opportunity to examine removal of a SIPO that was not explicitly

contingent on pre-existing trends in COVID-19 caseloads. The laboratory provided by Wisconsin

is perhaps the best opportunity to-date to credibly study the effects of lifting a SIPO.

        We find that the removal of the SIPO had only modest effects on measures of social

distancing behavior, causing individuals to venture outside of their homes more often. Other

measures of distancing were unaffected. These increases in mobility were somewhat larger in

more densely populated areas, and in locations that disproportionately supported President

Trump in the 2016 presidential election. These findings were not due to some counties enacting

their own SIPOs after the statewide order was struck down.

        This is evidence that the effect of lifting a SIPO is not necessarily symmetric to that of

first enacting the order. 31 For example, mobility outside of one’s home is a function of many

factors, including risk perceptions and knowledge of risk mitigation behavior can change over

time. SIPOs may have been enacted during a time where people perceived little risk and knew

little about proper protective behavior (such as wearing masks), binding in a powerful way to

curb socially driven infection. Then, SIPOs might be lifted at later times after perceptions and

behavior have had a chance to adjust, meaning that individuals might engage in more social

distancing behavior even without the presence of the policy. Thus, in the case of Wisconsin, it is

possible that the policy may have been far less binding at the time it was struck down. There are

of course other factors that could be at play, such as outside options for economic and non-

economic activity worsening due to the outbreak.

        We also do not find any discernible or substantial increase in COVID-19 cases or

acceleration in the growth of cases due to the Wisconsin Legislature v. Palm decision during the


31
  The case for asymmetry is strengthened by our estimation of decreases in COVID-19 case growth from the
enactment of Wisconsin’s statewide SIPO.

                                                      29
fortnight following its issuance. This is due at least in part to the lack of large change in social

distancing behavior, and may also be explained by individuals successfully engaging in

avoidance behaviors on other margins (such as maintaining 6 foot distances from other when out

in public or wearing masks). These findings cast doubt on the assertion that reopening states by

lifting SIPOs will necessarily cause substantial erosion in the containment of the virus. Lifting

SIPOs only means that individuals regain the right to engage in certain public behaviors. This

does not mean that individuals will exercise that right, and does not mean that if they do, that

they will not do so responsibly.

       There are a few important limitations of our study worthy of note. First, we note that

future researchers will be limited in examining longer-run impacts of the Wisconsin Supreme

Court decision. As more states repeal their orders (the District of Columbia, Illinois, North

Carolina, and Ohio have lifted their orders during the week of May 22-29), the donor pool of

SIPO states will shrink and the quality of the pre-treatment match for Wisconsin will diminish.

Thus, it is fair to say that the short-run effects of the Wisconsin Supreme Court decision will be

easier to isolate than its longer-run effects. However, we emphasize that prior studies of the case

effects of SIPOs have found that such divergence in trends begins 5 to 7 days following

enactment, so we are fairly confident that our research design would have identified the

beginnings of such a trend divergence. Second, the Wisconsin experience may not generalize to

all states, limiting our study’s external validity. Still, we believe that the gains from greater

internal validity will be very valuable for future policymakers assessing the potential asymmetric

effects of SIPO lifting and adoption.




                                                  30
                                           6. References

Abadie, A., Diamond, A. and Hainmueller, J. (2010). “Synthetic Control Methods for
        Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control
        Program.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 105 (490): 493–505.
Abouk, R, and Heydari, B. (2020). “The Immediate Effect of COVID-19 Policies on Social
        Distancing Behavior in the United States.” Retrieved from SSRN:
        https://ssrn.com/abstract=3571421
Andersen, M., Maclean, J.C., Pesko, M.F., and Simon, K.I. (2020). “Effect of a Federal Paid
        Sick Leave Mandate on Working and Staying at Home: Evidence from Cellular Device
        Data.” NBER Working Paper No. 27138.
Baek, C., McCrory, P.B., Messer, T., and Mui, P. (2020). “Unemployment Effects of Stay-at-
        Home Orders: Evidence from High Frequency Claims Data” IRLE Working Paper #101-
        20.
Barrios, J.M. and Hochberg, Y. (2020). “Risk Perception Through the Lens of Politics in the
        Time of the COVID-19 Pandemic.” NBER Working Paper No. 27008.
Beck, M. (2020, May 13). “Wisconsin Supreme Court strikes down Governor’s stay-at-home
        order.” USA Today.
Beck, M., Schneider, D., BeMiller, H., Brophy, N., and Marley, P. (2020, May 14). “‘OPEN
        IMMEDIATELY!’: Wisconsinites Head Out to Bars After State Stay-At-Home Orders
        Lifted.” USA Today.
Botosaru, I., & Ferman, B. (2019). “On the Role of Covariates in the Synthetic Control Method.”
        The Econometrics Journal 22(2): 117-130.
Cameron, A.C., Gelbach, J.B., and Miller, D. (2008). “Bootstrap-Based Improvements for
        Inference with Clustered Errors.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90: 414–427.
Cameron, A.C. and D. Miller. (2015). “A Practitioner’s Guide to Cluster-Robust Inference.”
        Journal of Human Resources, 50(2): 317-372
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020). “CDC Activities and Initiatives Supporting
        the COVID-19 Response and the President’s Plan for Opening America Up Again.”
        Retrieved from: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/downloads/php/CDC-
        Activities-Initiatives-for-COVID-19-Response.pdf
Colliver, V. (2020, May26). “Santa Clara Health Officer Suggests California is Reopening Too
        Soon.” Politico.
Cotti, C.D., Engelhardt, B., Foster, J., Nesson, E.J., and Niekamp, P.S. (2020). “The Relationship
        between In-Person Voting, Consolidated Polling Locations, and Absentee Voting on
        Covid-19: Evidence from the Wisconsin Primary.” NBER Working Paper No. 27187.
Couch, K.A., Fairlie, R.W. and Xu, H. (2020). “The Impacts of COVID-19 on Minority
        Unemployment: First Evidence from 2020 CPS Microdata.” IZA Discussion Paper No.
        13264.
Courtemanche, C., Garuccio, J., Le, A., Pinkston, J. and Yelowitz, A., (2020a). “Strong Social
        Distancing Measures In The United States Reduced The COVID-19 Growth Rate: Study
        Evaluates The Impact Of Social Distancing Measures on The Growth Rate of Confirmed
        COVID-19 Cases Across the United States.” Health Affairs, pp.10-1377.
Courtemanche, C.J., Garuccio, J., Le, A., Pinkston, J.C. and Yelowitz, A., (2020b). “Did Social-
        Distancing Measures in Kentucky Help to Flatten the COVID-19 Curve?” Working
        Paper.

                                               31
Cunningham, S. and Shah, M., (2018). “Decriminalizing Indoor Prostitution: Implications for
        Sexual Violence and Public Health.” The Review of Economic Studies, 85(3), pp.1683-
        1715.
Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K. and Sabia, J.J., (2020a0. “When Do Shelter-In-Place
        Orders Fight COVID-19 Best? Policy Heterogeneity Across States And Adoption Time.”
        NBER Working Paper No. 27091.
Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K. Sabia, J.J., and Safford, S. (2020b). “Were Urban
        Cowboys Enough to Control COVID-19? Local Shelter-In-Place Orders and Coronavirus
        Case Growth.” NBER Working Paper No. 27229.
Deliso, M. (2020, May 14). “Governor Reacts to State Supreme Court Blocking Stay-At-Home
        Order.” ABC News.
Doyle, O., (2020). “COVID-19: Exacerbating Educational Inequalities?” Working Paper.
Fadel, L., (2020, May 9). Public Health Experts Say Many States Are Opening Too Soon To Do
        So Safely. National Public Radio.
Ferman, B., Pinto, C. and Possebom, V. (2017). “Cherry Picking with Synthetic Controls.”
Friedson, A.I., McNichols, D., Sabia, J.J. and Dave, D., (2020). “Did California’s Shelter-In-
        Place Order Work? Early Coronavirus-Related Public Health Effects.” NBER Working
        Paper No. 26992.
Galea, S., Merchant, R.M. and Lurie, N. (2020). “The Mental Health Consequences of COVID-
        19 And Physical Distancing: The Need for Prevention And Early Intervention.” JAMA
        Internal Medicine.
Goodman-Bacon, A., and Marcus, J. (2020). “Using Difference-in-Differences to Identify Causal
        Effects of COVID-19 Policies.” Working Paper.
Gupta, S., Nguyen, T.D., Rojas, F.L., Raman, S., Lee, B., Bento, A., Simon, K.I. and Wing, C.
        (2020). “Tracking Public and Private Responses to the COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence
        from State and Local Government Actions” NBER Working Paper No. 27027.
Hagemann, H. (2020, May 13). “Wisconsin Supreme Court Overturns The State’s Stay-At-Home
        Orders.” NPR.
Hansen, B., Miller, K. and Weber, C., (2020). “Early Evidence on Recreational Marijuana
        Legalization and Traffic Fatalities.” Economic inquiry, 58(2), pp.547-568.
Hsing, A., Zhang, J.S., Peng, K., Lin, W.K., Wu, Y.H., Hsing, J.C., LaDuke, P., Heaney, C., Lu,
        Y. and Lounsbury, D.W. (2020). “A Rapid Assessment of Psychological Distress and
        Well-Being: Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic and Shelter-in-Place.” Retrieved from:
        SSRN 3578809.
Holtz, D., Zhao, M., Benzell, S.G., Cao, C.Y., Rahimian, M.A., Yang, J., Allen, J., Collis, A.,
        Moehring, A., Sowrirajan, T., Ghosh, D., Zhang, Y., Dhillon, P., Nicolaides, C., Eckles,
        D., and Aral, S. (2020). “Interdependence and the Cost of Uncoordinated Responses to
        COVID-19” Working Paper.
Jarvie, J. (2020, May 23), “Georgia Reopened First, What The Data Show Is a Matter of Fierce
        Debate.” Los Angeles Times.
Johnson, S. (2020, May 5). “As State Supreme Court Hears Arguments, Wisconsin’s Stay-At-
        Home Order Hangs in Balance.” Wisconsin Public Radio.
Jimenez, O. and LeBlanc, P. (2020, May 14). “Wisconsin Supreme Court Strikes Down State’s
        Stay-At-Home Orders” CNN.




                                              32
Kaul, A., Klößner, S., Gregor, P. and Schieler, M. (2015). “Synthetic Control Methods: Never
        Use All Pre-Intervention Outcomes Together with Covariates.” Working Paper, Saarland
        University, Saarbrucken, Saarland, Germany
Lasry, A., Kidder, D., Hast, M., Poovey, J., Sunshine, G., Zviedrite, N., Ahmed, F. and Ethier,
        K.A., (2020). “Timing of Community Mitigation And Changes in Reported COVID-19
        And Community Mobility―Four US metropolitan Areas.” Morbidity and Mortality
        Weekly Report, 69(15): 451-457.
Lazzerini, M., Barbi, E., Apicella, A., Marchetti, F., Cardinale, F. and Trobia, G. (2020).
        “Delayed Access or Provision of Care in Italy Resulting From Fear of COVID-19.” The
        Lancet Child & Adolescent Health, 4(5), pp.e10-e11.
Millhiser, I. (2020, May 5). “A Republican Lawsuit Could Force Wisconsin to Reopen
        Immediately.” Vox.
Newsday Staff. (2020, May 22). “Cuomo: Long Island and Mid-Hudson Regions On Track to
        Begin Reopening Soon” Newsday. Retrieved from:
        https://www.newsday.com/news/health/coronavirus/coronavirus-long-island-new-york-
        1.44850649
New York Forward. (2020). “Metrics to Guide Reopening New York” Retrieved from:
        https://forward.ny.gov/metrics-guide-reopening-new-york
Office of the Governor, State of Wisconsin. (2020). Safer At Home FAQs. Retrieved from:
        https://content.govdelivery.com/attachments/WIGOV/2020/05/11/file_attachments/14479
        56/2020-05-11%20Safer%20at%20Home%20FAQ%20FINAL.pdf
O’Kane, C. (2020, May 15). Wisconsin bars packed with patrons almost immediately after court
        strikes down stay-at-home order. CBS News.
Oregon Health Authority. (2020). “Building a Safe and Strong Oregon | Reopening Criteria”
        Retrieved from: https://govstatus.egov.com/OR-OHA-Reopening-Framework
Richmond, T. (2020, May 18). “Evers Gives Up On Virus Restrictions Amidst GOP
        Opposition.” AP Wire Service.
Ruthhart, B. (2020, May 14). “Wisconsin Now Without COVID-19 Restrictions After State
        Supreme Court Strikes Down Gov. Tony Evers’ Stay-At-Home Order.” Chicago Tribune.
Santioli, J.M., Lindley, M.C., DeSilva, M.B., Kharbanda, E.O., Daley, M.F., Galloway, L., Gee,
        J, Glover, M., Herring, B., Kang, Y., Lucas, P., Noblit, C., Tropper, J., Vogt, T., and
        Weintraub, E. (2020) “Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Routine Pediatric Vaccine
        Ordering and Administration.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69(19):591-593.
Schmidt, M. (2020, May 16). “Some Wisconsin Counties Rescind Local Stay-At-Home Orders,
        Dane County Order to Stay in Place.” Wisconsin State Journal.
Simonov, A., Sacher, S., Dubé, J.P. and Biswas, S. (2020). “The Persuasive Effect of Fox News:
        Non-Compliance with Social Distancing During the Covid-19 Pandemic.” NBER
        Working Paper No. 27237.
State of Wisconsin, Department of Health Services. (2020, March 24). “Emergency Order #12:
        Safer at Home Order.” Retrieved from:
        https://evers.wi.gov/Documents/COVID19/EMO12-SaferAtHome.pdf
State of Wisconsin, Department of Health Services. (2020, April 16). “Emergency Order #28:
        Safer at Home Order.” Retrieved from:
        https://evers.wi.gov/Documents/COVID19/EMO28-SaferAtHome.pdf
Usero, A. (2020, May 27) “Reopening Too soon: Lessons From the Deadly Second Wave of the
        1918 Flu Pandemic.” Washington Post.

                                              33
Vainshtein, A. (2020, May 1). “Save the Economy or Save Lives: Bay Area Residents Debate
       Morality of Shelter In Place.” San Francisco Chronicle.
Vetterkind, R. (2020, May 14). “Wisconsin Supreme Court Strikes Down Stay-At-Home Order;
       Dane County Institutes Local Order.” Wisconsin State Journal.
Wisconsin Department of Health Services. (2020). “Outbreaks in Wisconsin: COVID-19
       (Coronavirus Disease 2019): Wisconsin Data.” Retrieved from:
       https://www.dhs.wisconsin.gov/outbreaks/index.htm
Wisconsin Legislature v. Palm, 2020AP765-OA (Wisconsin Supreme Court 2020).
WisContext Staff. (2020, May 15). “What the COVID-19 Pandemic Looks Like in Wisconsin:
       Maps and Charts.” Wiscontext.
Whitehouse. (2020). “Guidelines for Opening up America Again” Retrieved from:
       https://www.whitehouse.gov/openingamerica/




                                           34
                     Figure 1. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Wisconsin Supreme Court Abolition of SIPO on Social Distancing
                    Panel (a): Percent at Home Full-Time                                                                        Panel (b): Median Hours at Home




Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of MI (.262), LA (.223), ME (.131), NH (.128), HI (.046), NM                 Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of MI (.484), NM (.245), ME (.154), & OH (.049)
(.033), OH (.033), IL (.028), PA (.021), VA (.02), DE (.018), & OR (.015)

                                                                       Panel (c): Median Percent of Time at Home




                                                  Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of ME (.195), LA (.169), OH (.149), NM (.071), NH (.067), VA (.052), MI
                                                  (.045), PA (.038), DE (.035), IL (.032), OR (.032), WA (.03), HI (.027), NY (.017), CA (.016), & DC (.015)
   Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The matching was based on urbanicity and three days of pre-SIPO expiration social distancing measures.
                                                                                                35
                             Figure 1. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Wisconsin Supreme Court Abolition of SIPO on Social Distancing

                                     Panel (d): Part-Time Work                                                                                   Panel (e): Full-Time Work




Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of ME (.28), NM (.214), CA (.107), PA (.043), NH (.042), NY (.039), OR (.028),    Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NH (.485), NM (.22), IL (.184), & MEE (.097)
WA (.037), MI (.036), DC (.034), VA (.027), NJ (.024), OH (.024), IL (.023), & DE (.021




         Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The matching was based on urbanicity and three days of pre-SIPO expiration social distancing measures.




                                                                                                             36
                    Figure 2. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Wisconsin Supreme Court Abolition of SIPO on COVID-19 Cases

      Panel (a): Matching on Urbanicity & 3 Days of Pre-Treatment Cases                             Panel (b): Matching on Testing Rate & 3 Days of Pre-Treatment Cases




    Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NC (.681), VA (.127), OR (.092), NM (.041), and CA (.015).
                                                                                                         Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NC (.788), VA (.106), NM (.032), and CA (.015).




Panel (b): Matching on Pre-Treatment Social Distancing & 3 Days of Cases                                  Panel (d): Matching on Each Day of Pre-Treatment Cases




                                                                                                    Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NC (.824), VA (.069), NM (.04), and CA (.015).
     Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NC (.416), OR (.279), VA (.177), and NM (.028).
       Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods.
                                                                                               37
                    Figure 3. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Wisconsin Supreme Court Abolition of SIPO on COVID-19 Deaths

      Panel (a): Matching on Urbanicity & 3 Days of Pre-Treatment Deaths                                    Panel (b): Matching on Testing Rate & 3 Days of Pre-Treatment Deaths




    Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of HI (.344), ME (.326), NM (.128), NC (.029), OR (.02), VA         Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of OR (.63), ME (.105), VA (.079), HI (.037), NC (.019), CA
          (.019), OH (.017), & WA (.015)                                                                        (.018), & DE (.015)

                                                                                                                    Panel (d): Matching on Each Day of Pre-Treatment Deaths
Panel (c): Matching on Pre-Treatment Social Distancing & 3 Days of Deaths




                                                                                                       Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of HI (.567), NM (.113), OR (.085), ME (.03), VA (.029), CA (.027),
     Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of HI (.63), NM (.125), ME (.033), OR (.031), WA (.022),          NC (.025), WA (.02), OH (.018), DE (.017)
      CA (.022), VA (.018), NC (.017), DE (.015), & OH (.015).
      Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods.
                                                                                                  38
  Figure 4. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Wisconsin Supreme Court Abolition of SIPO on Social Distancing for Bound Wisconsin
                      Panel (a): Percent at Home Full-Time                                                                        Panel (b): Median Hours at Home




  Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of ME (.423), LA (.33), MI (.034), HI (.02), NM (.028), OH                   Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of ME (.419), MI (.331), NM (.191), & OH (.05).
  (.027), NH (.02), VA (.018), IL (.017), & PA (.015).
                                                                            Panel (c): Percent of Time at Home




                                                          Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of ME (.412), OH (.336), & LA (.245).

Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The matching was based on urbanicity and three days of pre-SIPO expiration social distancing measures.
                                                                                               39
          Figure 4. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Wisconsin Supreme Court Abolition of SIPO on Social Distancing for Bound Wisconsin

                                      Panel (d): Part-Time Work                                                                          Panel (e): Full-Time Work




Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of ME (.452), LA (.209), NM (.10), HI (.066), NH (.027), MI (.017), OH (.017),   Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NH (.805) & ME (.195).
VA (.017), & OR (.015)


     Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The matching was based on urbanicity and three days of pre-SIPO expiration social distancing measures.




                                                                                                          40
      Figure 5. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Wisconsin Supreme Court Abolition of SIPO on COVID-19 Cases for Bound Wisconsin

      Panel (a): Matching on Urbanicity & 3 Days of Pre-Treatment Cases                   Panel (b): Matching on Testing Rate & 3 Days of Pre-Treatment Cases




         Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NC (.568), ME (.287), & OR (.141)                  Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of OR (.733), VA (.13), NM (.087), & NC (.036).



Panel (b): Matching on Pre-Treatment Social Distancing & 3 Days of Cases                        Panel (d): Matching on Each Day of Pre-Treatment Cases




                                                                                     Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NC (.695) & OR (.297).
     Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NC (.748), OR (.184) & HI (.065).

      Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods.
                                                                                41
                   Figure 6. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Wisconsin Supreme Court Abolition of SIPO on COVID-19 Deaths

      Panel (a): Matching on Urbanicity & 3 Days of Pre-Treatment Deaths             Panel (b): Matching on Testing Rate & 3 Days of Pre-Treatment Deaths




         Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of HI (.783) & NM (.157)                          Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of HI (.476), OR (.371), & NH (.12).


Panel (c): Matching on Pre-Treatment Social Distancing & 3 Days of Deaths                  Panel (d): Matching on Each Day of Pre-Treatment Deaths




     Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of HI (.794), NH (.141) & NM (.015)         Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of HI (.79), NH (.127), & NM (05).
       Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods.
                                                                            42
                 Table 1. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Wisconsin Supreme Court Abolition of SIPO on Social Distancing
                                              (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)        (5)         (6)           (7)           (8)
                                                                                 Panel I: % Percent at Home Full-Time
SIPO                                        0.298              0.590              0.320         0.590         0.528         -0.429        -0.699       -0.762
P-Value                                    [0.556]            [0.444]            [0.500]       [0.556]       [0.556]       [0.500]        [0.583]      [0.778]

                                                                                     Panel II: Median Hours at Home
SIPO                                       -0.135              -0.248             -0.142         -0.042         -0.395      -0.060        -0.504       -0.490
P-Value                                    [0.444]            [0.333]            [0.389]         [0.667]       [0.222]     [0.611]        [0.333]      [0.389]
                                                                                   Panel III: Percent of Time at Home
SIPO                                       -0.776              -0.791             -0.869         -0.866          -0.681     -0.709        -1.376       -1.225
P-Value                                    [0.278]            [0.278]            [0.389]         [0.389]        [0.389]    [0.278]        [0.333]      [0.444]
                                                                                        Panel IV: Part-Time Work
SIPO                                       -0.126*             -0.113             -0.109         -0.175        -0.155      -0.092*         0.016        0.037
P-Value                                    [0.056]            [0.389]            [0.556]        [0.167]       [0.333]      [0.056]        [0.167]      [0.111]
                                                                                      Panel V: % Full-Time Work
SIPO                                        0.037              0.030              0.034         0.002        0.027          0.114         -0.022        0.022
P-Value                                    [0.222]            [0.389]            [0.278]       [0.333]      [0.444]        [0.278]        [0.833]      [0.778]

Donor Pool                          Full Poola               Full Pool          Full Pool          Full Pool   Full Pool   Full Pool   Limited Poolb   Full Pool
Observables for constructing weights:
Days Pre-Treat Social Distance           3                       3                  3                  3          3           3             10            10
Urbanicity                             Yes                      No                 Yes                No         No          No             No            No
Population Density                     No                       Yes                Yes                No         No          No             No            No
Testing Rates                          No                       No                 No                 Yes        No          No             No            No
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases               No                       No                 No                 No         Yes         No             No            No
Other Reopening Policies               No                       No                 No                 No         No          Yes            No            No
          * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level




                                                                                           43
Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The matching was based off ten days of pre-SIPO expiration social distancing measures. The
matching was based off pre-treatment social distancing and observables listed under each column. The permutation-based p-values are included in brackets
below each point estimate.
a
  Donor states included CA, DC, DE, HI, IL, LA, ME, MI, NH, NC, NJ, NM, NY, OH, OR, PA, VA, and WA.
b
  For this specification, the donor pool is restricted to those states that had a SIPO over the entire sample period under study and had no reopening of restaurants
or bars.




                                                                                 44
                 Table 2. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Wisconsin Supreme Court Abolition of SIPO on COVID-19 Cases & Deaths
                                             (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)                 (7)                  (8)

                                                                                          Panel I: COVID-19 Cases per 100,000
SIPO                                       1.260              -0.257             1.992            -0.734       6.504         -0.199                          0.752               -1.611
P-Value                                   [0.941]            [1.000]            [0.882]           [1.000]     [0.588]       [1.000]                         [0.923]              [0.882]

                                                                                       Panel II: COVID-19 Deaths per 100,000
SIPO                                      -0.216              -0.055             -0.127          0.005       -0.119         -0.168                          -0.198               -0.183
P-Value                                   [0.158]            [0.526]            [0.368]         [0.842]     [0.579]        [0.368]                          [0.400]              [0.474]

Donor Pool                        Full Poola                Full Pool          Full Pool          Full Pool          Full Pool          Full Pool       Limited Poolb            Full Pool
Observables for constructing weights:
Days Pre-Treat Cases/Deaths            3                        3                  3                  3                  3                  3                  10                   10
Urbanicity                            Yes                      No                 Yes                No                 No                 No                  No                   No
Population Density                    No                       Yes                Yes                No                 No                 No                  No                   No
Testing Rates                         No                       No                 No                 Yes                No                 No                  No                   No
Pre-Treat Social Distance             No                       No                 No                 No                 Yes                No                  No                   No
Other Reopening Policies              No                       No                 No                 No                 No                 Yes                 No                   No
          * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

          Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The matching was based off pre-treatment cases or deaths and observables listed under each
          column. The permutation-based p-values are included in brackets below each point estimate.
          a
            Donor states included CA, DC, DE, HI, IL, LA, ME, MI, NH, NC, NJ, NM, NY, OH, OR, PA, VA, and WA.
          b
            For this specification, the donor pool is restricted to those states that had a SIPO over the entire sample period under study and had no reopening of restaurants
          or bars.




                                                                                           45
                                           Table 3. Exploring Heterogeneity in Effect of SIPO Expiration

                                                                    (1)        (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)         (7)
                                                                    %        Median    Median      % Part      % Full
                                                                 Staying     % Time    Hours at     Time        Time         Log(Cases) Log(Deaths)
                                                                 at Home     Home       Home       Workers     Workers

                                                                                                  Panel I: Overall
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling                                      0.308       -0.935    -0.203       -0.005      0.059         -0.026      -0.005
Permutation-based [p-value]                                       [.944]      [.777]    [.856]      [1.000]      [.800]        [.764]      [.947]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}               {17/18}     {14/18}     {6/7}     {17/17}       {4/5}        {13/17}     {18/19}

                                                                                          Panel II: Mitigating Local Order
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * WI County Fully Bound              0.293       -1.536    -0.271        0.008       0.043        -0.016      -0.110
Permutation-based [p-value]                                       [.944]      [.888]    [0.428]       [.824]     [.800]        [.824]      [.632]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}               {17/18}     {16/18}     {3/7}      {14/17}       {4/5}       {14/17}     {12/19}
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * WI County Mitigating Order         0.325       -0.323    -0.133        -0.019      0.075        -0.036      0.065
Permutation-based [p-value]                                       [.940]      [.587]    [1.000]      [1.000]     [.600]        [.875]      [.555]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}               {16/17}     {10/17}     {7/7}      {16/16}       {3/5}       {14/16}     {10/18}

                                                                                           Panel III: Current Local Order
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * WI County w/o Current Order        0.257       -1.348    -0.265        0.020       0.042        -0.006      0.018
Permutation-based [p-value]                                      [0.944]     [1.000]     [.261]       [.412]     [.800]       [1.000]      [.788]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}               {17/18}     {18/18}     {2/7}       {7/17}       {4/5}       {16/16}     {15/19}
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * WI County with Current Order       0.443        0.153    -0.040        -0.073      0.103        -0.079      -0.049
Permutation-based [p-value]                                      [1.000]      [.705]    [1.000]       [.938]     [.600]        [.412]      [.944]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}               {17/17}     {12/17}     {7/7}      {15/16}       {3/5}        {7/15}     {17/18}

                                                                                            Panel IV: County Urbanicity
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * ≥ 50% Urbanicity                   0.213       -0.762    -0.236       -0.009     0.060          -0.039       0.008
Permutation-based [p-value]                                       [.944]      [.833]    [.856]       [.940]     [.800]         [.705]      [.947]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}               {17/18}     {15/18}     {6/7}      {16/17}     {4/5}         {12/17}     {18/19}
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling* < 50% Urbanicity                    0.659       -1.571    -0.081       0.007      0.054          0.024       -0.111
Permutation-based [p-value]                                       [.713]      [.428]    [.570]       [.922]     [.600]         [.786]      [.286]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}               {10/14}      {6/14}     {4/7}      {12/13}     {3/5}         {11/14}      {4/14}
                                                                        46
                                                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)             (5)               (6)             (7)
                                                                                    %            Median         Median         % Part          % Full
                                                                                 Staying         % Time         Hours at        Time            Time         Log(Cases) Log(Deaths)
                                                                                 at Home         Home            Home          Workers         Workers

                                                                                                                 Panel V: County Population Density
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * ≥ 75 people per sq. mi                              0.173          -0.743         -0.241      -0.013      0.060                   -0.029            0.011
Permutation-based [p-value]                                                        [.944]         [.777]         [.570]      [.940]      [.800]                  [.764]           [.842]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                                {17/18}        {14/18}          {4/7}     {16/17}      {4/5}                  {13/17}          {16/19}
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling* <75 people per sq. mi                                0.765          -1.585         -0.074      0.022       0.054                   -0.017           -0.125
Permutation-based [p-value]                                                        [.666]         [.600]         [.856]     [1.000]     [1.000]                  [.856]           [.266]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                                {10/15}         {9/15}          {6/7}     {14/14}      {5/5}                  {12/14}           {4/15}

                                                                                                                Panel VI: County % Voted for Trump
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * ≥50% Voted for Trump                                0.111          -1.511         -0.342     0.039       0.056                    -0.007           0.043
Permutation-based [p-value]                                                       [1.000]        [0.500]         [.286]     [.800]     [1.000]                   [.938]            [.75]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                                {16/16}         {8/16}          {2/7}    {12/16}      {5/5}                   {15/16}          {12/16}
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling* <50% Voted for Trump                                 0.515          -0.330         -0.057     -0.052      0.062                    -0.046           -0.047
Permutation-based [p-value]                                                        [.875]        [0.875]        [1.000]     [.666]      [.800]                   [.688]           [.688]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                                {14/16}        {14/16}          {7/7}    {10/15}      {4/5}                   {11/16}          {11/16}

Mean of Dependent Variable                                                        38.972         93.002          12.235          5.244           3.289           5.198           2.603
N                                                                                 17776          19624            8052           18216           5126            18885           15471
          * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

          Notes: Regressions include Wisconsin and each donor state that included positive weights greater than 0.01. The weights are generated by multiplying share of
          state population by the synthetic weights. All estimates include: an indicator for whether retail store and restaurant or bar reopened, an indicator for whether
          personal or pet care services reopened, an indicator for whether entertainment and physical activity facilities reopened, log testing, county and day fixed effects.
          P-values, generated using permutation test, are reported inside brackets.




                                                                                           47
                              Appendix Figure 1: Trends in Social Distancing

Panel (a): Percent at Home Full-Time                                           Panel (b): Median Hours at Home




     Panel (c): Part-Time Work                                                    Panel (d): Full-Time Work




                                                   48
Appendix Figure 2: Trends in COVID-19 Cases and Deaths by State

                   Panel (a): COVID-19 Cases




                    Panel (b): COVID-19 Deaths




                              49
                                                         Appendix Figure 3. Placebo Tests for Social Distancing
                    Panel (a): Percent at Home Full-Time                                                                      Panel (b): Median Hours at Home




Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of MI (.262), LA (.223), ME (.131), NH (.128), HI (.046), NM              Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of MI (.484), NM (.245), ME (.154), & OH (.049)
(.033), OH (.033), IL (.028), PA (.021), VA (.02), DE (.018), & OR (.015)


                                                                          Panel (c): Percent of Time at Home




                                                     Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of MI (.484), NM (.245), ME (.154), & OH (.049)

Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The matching was based on urbanicity and three days of pre-SIPO expiration social distancing measures.
                                                                                           50
                                                              Appendix Figure 3. Placebo Tests for Social Distancing



                                      Panel (d): Part-Time Work                                                                                Panel (e): Full-Time Work




Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of ME (.28), NM (.214), CA (.107), PA (.043), NH (.042), NY (.039), OR (.028), WA
(.037), MI (.036), DC (.034), VA (.027), NJ (.024), OH (.024), IL (.023), & DE (.021                                Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NH (.485), NM (.22), IL (.184), & MEE (.097)




        Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The matching was based on urbanicity and three days of pre-SIPO expiration social distancing measures.




                                                                                                  51
                                        Appendix Figure 4. Synthetic Control Estimates for Initial enactment of the SIPO in WI
                   Panel (a): Synthetic WI v. Actual WI % Staying Home                                                  Panel (b): Placebo Tests for % Staying at Home




   Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NV (.316), IA (.30), TX (.134), MO (.114), UT (.07), & PA (.066)   Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NV (.316), IA (.30), TX (.134), MO (.114), UT (.07), & PA (.066)

              Panel (c): Synthetic WI v. Actual WI Cases per 100,000                                                     Panel (d): Placebo Tests for Cases per 100,000




Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NC (.824), VA (.069), NM (.04) & CA (.015).                           Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NC (.824), VA (.069), NM (.04) & CA (.015).

  Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The matching was based on ten days of pre-SIPO expiration outcome measures.
                                                                                               52
Appendix Figure 5. Pre- WI Supreme Court Ruling Trends in COVID-19 Cases by WI County Type




                                           53
                           Appendix Figure 6. Synthetic Control Estimates for Initial Enactment of the SIPO in WI Among “Bound Wisconsin”
                  Panel (a): Synthetic WI v. Actual WI % Staying Home                                       Panel (b): Placebo Tests for % Staying at Home




       Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of MD (.401), ND (.262), MS (.183), & DC (.152)        Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of MD (.401), ND (.262), MS (.183), & DC (.152)


              Panel (c): Synthetic WI v. Actual WI Cases per 100,000                                           Panel (d): Placebo Tests for Cases per 100,000




Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NV (.427), MO (.251), ND (.162), & TN (.114)               Note: Synthetic WI is comprised of NV (.427), MO (.251), ND (.162), & TN (.114)




        Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The matching was based on ten days of pre-SIPO expiration outcome measures.
                                                                                         54
              Appendix Table 1. Covariate Match for Synthetic Controls for Social Distancing
                                Wisconsin        Rest of the U.S.     Donor States      Synthetic Wisconsin

                                                      Panel I: % at Home Full Time
Urbanicity                        70.150              74.179            79.365                  70.148
Population Density               107.345             430.364            888.276                155.810
Testing                          2233.741            3242.280          3374.661                2251.400
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases         161.943             345.869            468.065                162.827
Reopening Policies                1.000                0.714             0.589                  0.759

                                                    Panel II: Median Hours at Home
Urbanicity                        70.150              74.179           79.365                   70.135
Population Density               107.345             430.364           888.276                 143.063
Testing                          2233.741           3242.280          3374.661                 2901.498
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases         161.943             345.869           468.065                 162.442
Reopening Policies                1.000               0.714             0.589                   0.881

                                                   Panel III: Percent of Time at Home
Urbanicity                        70.150             74.179               79.365                70.150
Population Density                107.345           430.364              888.276               292.324
Testing                          2233.741          3242.280             3374.661               2295.346
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases          161.943           345.869              468.065               164.371
Reopening Policies                 1.000             0.714                0.589                 0.661

                                                       Panel IV: Part-Time Work
Urbanicity                        70.150              74.179            79.365                  70.150
Population Density               107.345             430.364            888.276                328.337
Testing                          2233.741            3242.280          3374.661                2557.004
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases         161.943             345.869            468.065                162.974
Reopening Policies                1.000               0.714              0.589                  0.796

                                                       Panel V: % Full-Time Work
Urbanicity                        70.150              74.179            79.365                  67.616
Population Density               107.345             430.364            888.276                134.182
Testing                          2233.741            3242.280          3374.661                2236.493
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases         161.943             345.869            468.065                162.757
Reopening Policies                1.000               0.714              0.589                  0.626




                                                   55
                               Appendix Table 2A. List of Donor States that Received Positive Weights in Table 1 Panel I.
                                      (1)           (2)             (3)               (4)          (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)
                                  MI (.262),    ME (.326),                        ME (.327),
                                  LA (.223),    NH (.172),                        NH (.174),
                                 ME (.131),     LA (.151),                         LA (.15),                  IL (.448),
                                 NH (.128),     MI (.069),                        MI (.068),                  LA (.309),
                                                                MI (.296),
                                  HI (.046),    HI (.057),                        HI (.057),   ME (.369),     MI (.066),                   IL (.527),
                                                                NM (.208),                                                  NM (.764),
                                 NM (.033),     NM (.037),                        NM (.036),   OH (.213),     ME (.041),                   LA (.249),
                                                                LA (.185),                                                   IL (.19),
                                 OH (.033),     OH (.036),                        OH (.036),   NM (.201),     HI (.024),                   NM (.194),
                                                                NH (.149),                                                  ME (.046)
                                  IL (.028),    IL (.032),                        IL (.031),    HI (.154)     NM (.023),                   MI (.029)
                                                                 ME (.09)
                                  PA (.021),    PA (.022),                        PA (.022),                  PA (.017),
                                  VA (.02),     VA (.021),                        VA (.021),                  OH (.016)
                                  DE (.018),    DE (.019),                        DE (.018),
                                  OR (.015)     OR (.016)                         OR (.016)
Donor Pool                        Full Pool      Full Pool       Full Pool        Full Pool    Full Pool       Full Pool    Limited Pool   Full Pool
Observables for constructing weights:
Days Pre-Treat Social Distance         3             3              3                3             3               3            10            10
Urbanicity                            Yes           No             Yes              No            No              No            No            No
Population Density                    No            Yes            Yes              No            No              No            No            No
Testing Rates                         No            No             No               Yes           No              No            No            No
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases              No            No             No               No            Yes             No            No            No
Reopening Policies                    No            No             No               No            No              Yes           No            No




                                                                             56
                                Appendix Table 2B. List of Donor States that Received Positive Weights in Table 1 Panel II.
                                        (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)
                                                    MI (.377),
                                                    NM (.363),
                                                                                                  NM (.388),
                                                    OH (.045),
                                                                                                  HI (.189),
                                                    NH (.034),     MI (.485),      MI (.488),
                                    MI (.484),                                                    ME (.186),     MI (.537),
                                                    ME (.03),      NM (.248),      ME (.332),                                 IL (.471),     NM (.464),
                                    NM (.245),                                                    OR (.113),     ME (.28),
                                                    LA (.029),     ME (.15),       NM (.043),                                 NM (.468),     IL (.411),
                                    ME (.154),                                                    VA (.023),     NM (.132),
                                                     DE (.02),     OH (.032),       DC (.04),                                 ME (.061)      OH (.122)
                                    OH (.049)                                                     CA (.021),     LA (.018)
                                                     PA (.02),     LA (.022)       LA (.016)
                                                                                                  NH (.016),
                                                    VA (.02),
                                                                                                  OH (.016)
                                                    IL (.018),
                                                    OR (.016)
Donor Pool                           Full Pool       Full Pool      Full Pool       Full Pool      Full Pool      Full Pool   Limited Pool   Full Pool
Observables for constructing weights:
Days Pre-Treat Social Distance          3               3               3              3               3              3           10            10
Urbanicity                             Yes             No              Yes            No              No             No           No            No
Population Density                     No              Yes             Yes            No              No             No           No            No
Testing Rates                          No              No              No             Yes             No             No           No            No
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases               No              No              No             No              Yes            No           No            No
Reopening Policies                     No              No              No             No              No             Yes          No            No




                                                                              57
                               Appendix Table 2C. List of Donor States that Received Positive Weights in Table 1 Panel III.

                                       (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)           (8)
                                   ME (.195),                                    OH (.206),
                                                  ME (.199),
                                    LA (.169),                                   LA (.198),
                                                  LA (.175),
                                    OH (.149),                                   ME (.121),
                                                  OH (.135),
                                   NM (.071),                                    NM (.064),
                                                  NM (.079),      NM (534),
                                    NH (.067),                                   NH (.053),
                                                  NH (.052),      ME (.215),                                   NM (.32),
                                    VA (.052),                                   VA (.046),
                                                  VA (.048),      OH (.035),                                   ME (.318),                    NM (.34),
                                    MI (.045),                                   MI (.043),     NM (.385),
                                                  MI (.044),      VA (.026),                                   IL (.123),     NM (.441),     IL (.283),
                                    PA (.038),                                   IL (.035),     ME (.351),
                                                  IL (.037),      MI (.022),                                   PA (.059),     IL (.314),     ME (.19),
                                    DE (.035),                                   PA (.034),     HI (.146),
                                                  PA (.035),       IL (.02),                                   LA (.058),     ME (.242)      OH (.126),
                                    IL (.032),                                   HI (.032),     VA (.047)
                                                  HI (.034),      PA (.02),                                     MI (.04),                     NC (.06)
                                    OR (.032),                                   DE (.031),
                                                  OR (.034),      DE (.019),                                   NJ (.025)
                                    WA (.03),                                     OR (.03),
                                                  WA (.033),      HI (.017)
                                    HI (.027),                                   WA (.029),
                                                  DE (.031),
                                    NY (.017),                                   DC (.025),
                                                  CA (.023),
                                    CA (.016),                                   CA (.021),
                                                   NY (.02)
                                    DC (.015)                                    NY (.018)
Donor Pool                          Full Pool       Full Pool      Full Pool      Full Pool      Full Pool      Full Pool     Limited Pool   Full Pool
Observables for constructing weights:
Days Pre-Treat Social Distance          3              3              3              3              3              3              10            10
Urbanicity                            Yes             No             Yes            No             No             No              No            No
Population Density                     No             Yes            Yes            No             No             No              No            No
Testing Rates                          No             No             No             Yes            No             No              No            No
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases               No             No             No             No             Yes            No              No            No
Reopening Policies                     No             No             No             No             No             Yes             No            No




                                                                            58
                          Appendix Table 2D. List of Donor States that Received Positive Weights in Table 1 Panels IV and V.

                                      (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)           (5)            (6)               (7)           (8)

                                                                               Panel I: % Part-Time Work
                                  ME (.28),
                                  NM (.214),     WA (.334),
                                                                                ME (.507),
                                  CA (.107),     ME (.271),     WA (.337),
                                                                                NM (.132),
                                  PA (.043),     NM (.137),     ME (.271),
                                                                                WA (.126),
                                  NH (.042),     CA (.042),     NM (.13),                                   NM (.299),                        MI (.442),
                                                                                NH (.021),                                     MI (.399),
                                  NY (.039),     NH (.025),     OR (.034),                   ME (.314),     ME (.287),                        NM (.22),
                                                                                OR (.021),                                     NM (.322),
                                  OR (.038),     OR (.024),     NH (.031),                   CA (.213),     PA (.273),                        VA (.159),
                                                                                 DC (.02),                                     IL (.116),
                                  WA (.037),     IL (.023),     CA (.03),                    OR (.195),     MI (.038),                        OR (.057),
                                                                                 IL (.02),                                     ME (.07),
                                  MI (.036),     MI (.021),     PA (.028),                   VA (.178),     NJ (.035),                        HI (.042),
                                                                                MI (.019),                                     PA (.069),
                                  DC (.034),     NY (.018),     MI (.027),                   NM (.038)      IL (.032),                        CA (.038),
                                                                                NY (.018),                                     DE (.021)
                                  VA (.027),     DC (.017),     NY (.025),                                   HI (.018)                        ME (.033)
                                                                                NJ (.017),
                                  NJ (.024),     NJ (.017),     VA (.018),
                                                                                PA (.017),
                                  OH (.024),     PA (.017),      IL (.017)
                                                                                VA (.017)
                                  IL (.023),     VA (.017)
                                  DE (.021)

                                                                               Panel II: % Full-Time Work
                                                                                                                                NM (.409),    NH (.34),
                                  NH (.485),                    NH (.479),                   NH (.461),                         DE (.242),    ME (.228),
                                                 NH (.476),                     ME (.411),                   NH (.48),
                                  NM (.22),                     NM (.226),                   OR (.286),                         CA (.173),    OH (.19),
                                                 ME (.365),                     NH (.305),                   ME (.365),
                                  IL (.184),                     IL (.19),                   ME (.179),                         IL (.128),    VA (.174),
                                                  IL (.153)                     VA (.246)                    IL (.149)
                                  ME (.097)                     ME (.093)                    HI (.024)                          ME (.031),    CA (.04),
                                                                                                                                WA (.017)     LA (.027)
Donor Pool                         Full Pool      Full Pool      Full Pool       Full Pool    Full Pool      Full Pool         Limited Pool   Full Pool
Observables for constructing weights:
Days Pre-Treat Social Distance          3             3              3               3             3             3                 10            10
Urbanicity                            Yes            No             Yes             No            No            No                 No            No
Population Density                    No             Yes            Yes             No            No            No                 No            No
Testing Rates                         No             No             No              Yes           No            No                 No            No
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases              No             No             No              No            Yes           No                 No            No
Reopening Policies                    No             No             No              No            No            Yes                No            No
                                                                          59
              Appendix Table 3: Covariate Match for Synthetic Controls for COVID-19 Cases & Deaths
                               Wisconsin         Rest of the U.S.       Donor States       Synthetic Wisconsin

                                                  Panel I: COVID-19 Cases per 100,000
Urbanicity                      70.150               74.179              79.365                   70.134
Population Density             107.345              430.364             888.276                   229.045
Testing                        2233.741             3242.280           3374.661                  2216.473
Pre-Treat Social Distance        37.5                 37.1                40.4                     37.5
Reopening Policies              1.000                0.714               0.589                     0.498

                                                 Panel II: COVID-19 Deaths per 100,000
Urbanicity                      70.150               74.179              79.365                   70.167
Population Density             107.345              430.364             888.276                   110.253
Testing                        2233.741            3242.280            3374.661                  2230.186
Pre-Treat Social Distance        37.5                 37.1                40.4                     38.4
Reopening Policies              1.000                0.714               0.589                     0.315




                                                      60
                                 Appendix Table 4. List of Donor States that Received Positive Weights in Table 2
                                      (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)          (7)           (8)

                                                               Panel I: COVID-19 Cases per 100,000
                                  NC (.681),                                            NC (.681),
                                                                           NC (.788),                   NC (.793),   NC (.793),     NC (.824),
                                  VA (.127),    NC (.779),                              VA (.127),
                                                              NC (.687),   VA (.106),                    CA (.09),    CA (.09),     VA (.069),
                                  OR (.092),    VA (.091),                              OR (.092),
                                                              OR (.308)    NM (.032),                   NM (.034),   NM (.034),     NM (.04),
                                  NM (.041),    NM (.075)                               NM (.041),
                                                                           CA (.015)                    ME (.019)    ME (.019)      CA (.015).
                                  CA (.015)                                              CA (.015)

                                                              Panel II: COVID-19 Deaths per 100,000
                                                                                          HI (.63),                                 HI (.567),
                                  HI (.344),
                                                                                         NM (.125),                                 NM (.113),
                                  ME (.326),                                OR (.63),                   HI (.678),   HI (.678),
                                                OR (.625),                               ME (.033),                                 OR (.085),
                                  NM (.128),                               ME (.105),                   NM (.175),   NM (.175),
                                                NM (.116),                               OR (.031),                                 ME (.03),
                                  NC (.029),                  HI (.436),   VA (.079),                   ME (.048),   ME (.048),
                                                HI (.073),                               WA (.025),                                 VA (.029),
                                  OR (.029),                  OR (.404),    HI (.037),                  IL (.024),   IL (.024),
                                                ME (.045),                               CA (.022),                                 CA (.027),
                                   CA (.02),                  NH (.119)    NC (.019),                   PA (.021),   PA (.021),
                                                WA (.025),                               VA (.018),                                 NC (.025),
                                  VA (.019),                               CA (.018),                   MI (.019),   MI (.019),
                                                CA (.015)                                NC (.017),                                 WA (.02),
                                  OH (.017),                                DE (.015)                   LA (.017)    LA (.017)
                                                                                         DE (.015),                                 OH (.018),
                                  WA (.015)
                                                                                         OH (.0150                                  DE (.017)

Donor Pool                         Full Pool     Full Pool     Full Pool     Full Pool     Full Pool     Full Pool   Limited Pool   Full Pool
Observables for constructing weights:
Days Pre-Treat Cases/Deaths            3            3             3             3              3             3           10            10
Urbanicity                            Yes          No            Yes           No             No            No           No            No
Population Density                    No           Yes           Yes           No             No            No           No            No
Testing Rates                         No           No            No            Yes            No            No           No            No
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases              No           No            No            No             Yes           No           No            No
Reopening Policies                    No           No            No            No             No            Yes          No            No




                                                                        61
                                     Appendix Table 5. Sensitivity to the Inclusion of State-Specific Linear Time Trend

                                                                       (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)             (5)        (6)         (7)
                                                                       %         Median %     Median      % Part          % Full
                                                                    Staying       Time        Hours at     Time            Time     Log(Cases) Log(Deaths)
                                                                    at Home       Home         Home       Workers         Workers

                                                                                                         Panel I: Overall
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling                                         0.747         1.159       0.216        -0.079       0.274        -0.003      -0.007
Permutation-based [p-value]                                          [.666]       [.444]       [.570]       [.764]      [.400]        [.882]      [.842]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                  {12/18}       {8/18}       {4/7}       {13/17}       {2/5}       {15/17}     {16/19}

                                                                                                Panel II: Mitigating Local Order
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * WI County Fully Bound                 0.731         0.557       0.148       -0.065       0.258         0.007      -0.112
Permutation-based [p-value]                                          [.666]       [.111]       [.428]      [.764]       [.200]        [.587]     [.263]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                  {12/18}       {2/18}       {3/7}      {13/17}       {1/5}        {10/17}     {5/19}
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * WI County Mitigating Order            0.763         1.771       0.286       -0.093       0.291         -0.012      0.063
Permutation-based [p-value]                                          [.705]       [.882]       [.713]      [.813]       [.400]        [.813]     [.112]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                  {12/17}      {15/17}       {5/7}      {13/16}       {2/5}        {13/16}     {2/18}

                                                                                                 Panel III: Current Local Order
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * WI County w/o Current Order           0.615         1.177       0.169        -0.025      0.256        0.042        0.202
Permutation-based [p-value]                                          [.666]       [.333]       [.570]       [.647]      [.400]       [.470]      [.158]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                  {12/18}       {6/18}       {4/7}       {11/17}      {2/5}        {8/17}      {3/19}
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * WI County with Current Order          0.784         1.153       0.230        -0.094      0.279        -0.015      -0.085
Permutation-based [p-value]                                          [.824]       [.412]       [.428]       [.813]      [.400]       [.250]      [.112]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                  {14/17}       {7/17}       {3/7}       {13/16}      {2/5}        {4/16}      {2/18}




                                                                            62
                                                                                     (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)        (7)
                                                                                     %           Median %    Median     % Part      % Full
                                                                                  Staying         Time       Hours at    Time        Time      Log(Cases) Log(Deaths)
                                                                                  at Home         Home        Home      Workers     Workers

                                                                                                                 Panel IV: County Urbanicity
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * ≥ 50% Urbanicity                                    0.651            1.332     0.183       -0.082     0.276        -0.016      0.005
Permutation-based [p-value]                                                        [.722]          [.166]     [.428]      [.824]     [.400]       [.470]     [.947]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                                {13/18}          {3/18}     {3/7}      {14/17}     {2/5}        {8/17}    {18/19}
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling* < 50% Urbanicity                                     1.098            0.523     0.338       -0.066     0.269        0.048      -0.114
Permutation-based [p-value]                                                        [.713]          [.929]     [.286]      [.922]     [.600]       [.356]     [.500]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                                {10/14}         {13/14}     {2/7}      {12/13}     {3/5}        {5/14}     {7/14}

                                                                                                             Panel V: County Population Density
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * ≥ 75 people per sq. mi                               0.612           1.351     0.178      -0.087      0.276       -0.005       0.008
Permutation-based [p-value]                                                        [.722]          [.222]     [.713]     [.764]      [.400]      [.764]      [.788]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                                {13/18}          {4/18}     {5/7}     {13/17}      {2/5}      {13/17}     {15/19}
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling* <75 people per sq. mi                                 1.203           0.509     0.345      -0.051      0.270       0.007       -0.127
Permutation-based [p-value]                                                        [.532]          [.800]     [.428]     [.929]      [.600]     [1.000]      [.266]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                                 {8/15}         {12/15}     {3/7}     {13/14}      {3/5}      {14/14}      {4/15}

                                                                                                             Panel VI: County % Voted for Trump
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling * ≥50% Voted for Trump                                0.550            0.582     0.077       -0.034     0.271        0.017      0.039
Permutation-based [p-value]                                                       [1.000]         [0.875]    [1.000]      [.866]     [.400]       [.437]    [.500]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                                {16/16}         {14/16}     {7/7}      {13/16}     {2/5}        {7/16}    {8/16}
WI Supreme Court SIPO Ruling* <50% Voted for Trump                                 0.954            1.763     0.362       -0.126     0.277        -0.022    -0.050
Permutation-based [p-value]                                                        [.625]         [0.188]     [.428]      [.532]     [.400]       [.563]    [.186]
Placebo Test {Wisconsin Rank / # Donor States + 1}                                {10/16}          {3/16}     {3/7}       {8/15}     {2/5}        {9/16}    {3/16}

Mean of Dependent Variable                                                         38.972         93.002     12.235      5.244       3.289        5.198      2.603
N                                                                                  17776          19624       8052       18216       5126         18885      15471
           * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

                                                                                            63
Notes: Regressions include Wisconsin and each donor state that included positive weights greater than 0.1. The weights are generated by multiplying share of
state population by the synthetic weights. All estimates include: an indicator for whether retail store and restaurant or bar reopened, an indicator for whether
personal or pet care services reopened, an indicator for whether entertainment and physical activity facilities reopened, log testing, state-specific linear time
trends, county and day fixed effects. P-values, generated using permutation test, are reported inside brackets.




                                                                                 64
                    Appendix Table 6A. Wisconsin County-Level Estimates of the Association Between SIPO
                                          Expiration and Social Distancing, Cases

                                                (1)                 (2)                    (3)                  (4)                 (5)
                                            % Staying at       Median % Time          Median Hours          % Part Time         % Full Time
                                              Home                 Home                 at Home              Workers             Workers

                                                                    Panel I: Difference-in-Difference Estimate
SIPO Expiration                                -0.263*             -1.333***         -0.226***         0.100**                      -0.042
                                               (0.133)              (0.347)           (0.080)           (0.038)                    (0.025)
                                                                             Panel II: Lagged Effect
0-3 Days After                                   0.010              -0.696**           -0.081          0.060                        -0.055
                                                (0.143)              (0.330)          (0.077)         (0.054)                      (0.039)
4+ Days After                                  -0.509**            -1.909***        -0.358***        0.136***                       -0.030
                                                (0.200)              (0.344)          (0.091)         (0.042)                      (0.026)

N                                                1584                 1584                  1584                 1584                1584
    * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
     Notes: Regressions include only Wisconsin. All estimates include: county and day fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the
     county-level, is reported inside parenthesis.




                                                                       65
                Appendix Table 6B. Wisconsin County-Level Estimates of the Association Between SIPO
                                      Expiration and Social Distancing, Cases

                                                                               (1)                                  (2)
                                                                            Log(Cases)                          Log(Deaths)

                                                                            Panel I: Difference-in-Difference Estimate
SIPO Expiration                                                                0.025                         0.044
                                                                              (0.055)                       (0.068)

                                                                                        Panel II: Lagged Effect
0-4 Days After                                                                 0.022                                0.055
                                                                              (0.040)                              (0.057)
5-9 Days After                                                                 0.027                                0.052
                                                                              (0.066)                              (0.086)
10+ Days After                                                                 0.032                               -0.006
                                                                              (0.087)                              (0.079)

N                                                                               1667                                 875
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
Notes: Regressions include only Wisconsin. All estimates include: county and day fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the county-
level, is reported inside parenthesis.




                                                                   66
     Appendix Table 7. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Wisconsin Supreme Court Abolition of SIPO on Social Distancing for “Bound Wisconsin”
                                             (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)              (6)                (7)             (8)
                                                                              Panel I: % Percent at Home Full-Time
SIPO                                       0.190             0.257            0.267          -0.156        0.405                     -0.011             -1.550          -0.826
P-Value                                    [.556]            [.389]           [.500]         [.333]        [.611]                    [.111]             [.917]          [.889]

                                                                                           Panel II: Median Hours at Home
SIPO                                       -0.184            -0.334            -0.191          -0.079         -0.124                 -0.379             -0.631          -0.610
P-Value                                    [.444]            [.333]            [.444]           [.722]        [.667]                 [.222]             [.333]          [.389]
                                                                                         Panel III: Percent of Time at Home
SIPO                                       -0.671            -0.647            -0.710          -0.642          -0.687       -0.544                      -1.425          -1.138
P-Value                                    [.556]            [.556]            [.500]          [.667]           [.611]      [.556]                      [.583]          [.667]
                                                                                               Panel IV: Part-Time Work
SIPO                                       -0.265            -0.137            -0.142           -0.149          -0.225               -0.011             0.025           0.008
P-Value                                    [.278]            [.278]            [.111]            [.222]         [.222]               [.111]             [.417]          [.111]
                                                                                              Panel V: % Full-Time Work
SIPO                                       0.120             0.120             0.119            0.121          0.120                 0.001              0.003           -0.005
P-Value                                    [.222]            [.222]            [.278]           [.222]         [.222]                [.333]             [.833]          [.778]

Donor Pool                          Full Poola             Full Pool         Full Pool         Full Pool          Full Pool         Full Pool       Limited Poolb      Full Pool
Observables for constructing weights:
Days Pre-Treat Social Distance           3                     3                 3                  3                 3                 3                 10              10
Urbanicity                             Yes                    No                Yes                No                No                No                 No              No
Population Density                     No                     Yes               Yes                No                No                No                 No              No
Testing Rates                          No                     No                No                 Yes               No                No                 No              No
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases               No                     No                No                 No                Yes               No                 No              No
Reopening Policies                     No                     No                No                 No                No                Yes                No              No
          * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
          Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The matching was based off pre-treatment social distancing and observables listed under each
          column. The permutation-based p-values are included in brackets below each point estimate.
          a
            Donor states included CA, DC, DE, HI, IL, LA, ME, MI, NH, NC, NJ, NM, NY, OH, OR, PA, VA, and WA.

                                                                                        67
b
 For this specification, the donor pool is restricted to those states that had a SIPO over the entire sample period under study and had no reopening of restaurants
or bars.




                                                                                 68
           Appendix Table 8. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effect of Wisconsin Supreme Court Abolition of SIPO on COVID-19 Cases & Deaths
                                                                  for “Bound Wisconsin”
                                             (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)                 (7)                  (8)

                                                                                        Panel I: COVID-19 Cases per 100,000
SIPO                                       -6.192             -6.099             -5.878          3.212      -8.564         -5.757                            1.468                -7.371
P-Value                                    [.706]             [.647]             [.706]          [.941]      [.529]        [.706]                           [1.000]               [.706]

                                                                                       Panel II: COVID-19 Deaths per 100,000
SIPO                                       0.003              0.010              0.070           0.080       0.001          0.014                           -1.301                -0.031
P-Value                                    [.833]             [.833]             [.667]          [.667]      [.833]        [1.000]                          [1.000]               [.889]

Donor Pool                        Full Poola                Full Pool          Full Pool          Full Pool          Full Pool          Full Pool       Limited Poolb            Full Pool
Observables for constructing weights:
Days Pre-Treat Cases/Deaths            3                        3                  3                  3                  3                  3                  10                   10
Urbanicity                            Yes                      No                 Yes                No                 No                 No                  No                   No
Population Density                    No                       Yes                Yes                No                 No                 No                  No                   No
Social Distancing                     No                       No                 No                 Yes                No                 No                  No                   No
Pre-Treat COVID-19 Cases              No                       No                 No                 No                 Yes                No                  No                   No
Reopening Policies                    No                       No                 No                 No                 No                 Yes                 No                   No
          * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

          Notes: Estimate is generated using synthetic control methods. The matching was based off pre-treatment cases or deaths and observables listed under each
          column. The permutation-based p-values are included in brackets below each point estimate.
          a
            Donor states included CA, DC, DE, HI, IL, LA, ME, MI, NH, NC, NJ, NM, NY, OH, OR, PA, VA, and WA.
          b
            For this specification, the donor pool is restricted to those states that had a SIPO over the entire sample period under study and had no reopening of restaurants
          or bars.




                                                                                           69
        Appendix Table 9A. Wisconsin County-Level Estimates of the Association Between SIPO Expiration
                                             and Social Distancing
                                                      (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)                (5)
                                                  % Staying at       Median %        Median Hours        % Part Time        % Full Time
                                                     Home            Time Home         at Home             Workers            Workers
                                                                Panel I: Heterogeneous Treatment Effect by Urbanicity
0-3 Days After* ≥ 80% Urbanicity                      -0.002           0.035         -0.143**          -0.001          -0.001*
                                                     (0.002)          (0.193)         (0.062)         (0.001)          (0.000)
4+ Days After * ≥ 80% Urbanicity                      -0.003        -1.016***       -0.246***           0.001           -0.001
                                                     (0.005)          (0.319)         (0.064)         (0.001)          (0.001)
0-3 Days After* <80% Urbanicity                        0.000        -1.044***        -0.095**         0.001*            -0.001
                                                     (0.002)          (0.260)         (0.041)         (0.001)          (0.000)
4+ Days After * <80% Urbanicity                        0.001           0.476          -0.118*          -0.001         -0.001**
                                                     (0.003)          (0.410)         (0.064)         (0.001)          (0.000)
                                                          Panel II: Heterogeneous Treatment Effect by Population Density
0-3 Days After* ≥ 250 people per sq. mi              -0.001            -0.005      -0.171***           0.000        -0.001**
                                                    (0.002)           (0.183)        (0.051)         (0.001)         (0.000)
4+ Days After * ≥ 250 people per sq. mi               0.002            -0.626      -0.217***          -0.001          -0.001
                                                    (0.004)           (0.391)        (0.053)         (0.001)         (0.001)
0-3 Days After*< 250 people per sq. mi                0.000         -1.242***         -0.063           0.001          -0.001
                                                    (0.002)           (0.266)        (0.041)         (0.001)         (0.000)
4+ Days After * < 250 people per sq. mi              -0.001            0.517         -0.123*          -0.001        -0.001**
                                                    (0.003)           (0.422)        (0.070)         (0.001)         (0.000)
                                                  Panel III: Heterogeneous Treatment Effect by Share of 2016 Trump Votes
0-3 Days After* ≥ 50% Vote for Trump                  -0.001        -0.738***      -0.156***           0.001          -0.000
                                                     (0.002)          (0.272)        (0.035)         (0.001)         (0.000)
4+ Days After * ≥ 50% Vote for Trump                   0.002            0.291       -0.133**          -0.001        -0.001**
                                                     (0.003)          (0.450)        (0.059)         (0.001)         (0.000)
0-3 Days After* < 50% Vote for Trump                   0.001           -0.550         0.042           -0.000          -0.001
                                                     (0.003)          (0.331)        (0.056)         (0.001)         (0.001)
4+ Days After * < 50% Vote for Trump                  -0.006           -0.574         -0.163          -0.001         -0.002*
                                                     (0.004)          (0.569)        (0.114)         (0.001)         (0.001)

N                                                      1152             1152              1152               1152               1152
    * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
    Notes: Regressions include only Wisconsin. All estimates include: county and day fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the
    county-level, is reported inside parenthesis.




                                                                   70
        Appendix Table 9B. Wisconsin County-Level Estimates of the Association Between SIPO Expiration
                                               and Cases, Deaths
                                                       (1)                                     (2)
                                                    Log(Cases)                             Log(Deaths)
                                                    Panel I: Heterogeneous Treatment Effect by Urbanicity
0-4 Days After* ≥ 80% Urbanicity                       -0.030                                  0.074
                                                      (0.039)                                 (0.104)
5-9 Days After* ≥ 80% Urbanicity                       -0.057                                  0.112
                                                      (0.072)                                 (0.171)
10+ Days After * ≥ 80% Urbanicity                      -0.098                                  0.049
                                                      (0.086)                                 (0.159)
0-4 Days After* < 80% Urbanicity                       0.048                                   0.041
                                                      (0.042)                                 (0.075)
5-9 Days After* < 80% Urbanicity                       0.066                                   0.014
                                                      (0.068)                                 (0.097)
10+ Days After* < 80% Urbanicity                       0.078                                   -0.034
                                                      (0.092)                                 (0.094)
                                              Panel II: Heterogeneous Treatment Effect by Population Density
0-4 Days After* ≥ 250 people per sq. mi                 -0.021                              0.122
                                                       (0.040)                             (0.101)
5-9 Days After* ≥ 250 people per sq. mi                 -0.031                              0.163
                                                       (0.070)                             (0.152)
10+ Days After* ≥ 250 people per sq. mi                 -0.063                              0.097
                                                       (0.086)                             (0.151)
0-4 Days After* < 250 people per sq. mi                 0.055                               -0.024
                                                       (0.045)                             (0.039)
5-9 Days After* < 250 people per sq. mi                 0.070                              -0.077*
                                                       (0.072)                             (0.044)
10+ Days After* < 250 people per sq. mi                 0.085                               -0.105
                                                       (0.096)                             (0.070)
                                          Panel III: Heterogeneous Treatment Effect by Share of 2016 Trump Votes
0-4 Days After* ≥ 50% Vote for Trump                    0.023                                0.094
                                                       (0.045)                              (0.080)
5-9 Days After* ≥ 50% Vote for Trump                    0.035                                0.086
                                                       (0.071)                              (0.107)
10+ Days After* ≥ 50% Vote for Trump                    0.049                                0.013
                                                       (0.091)                              (0.093)
0-4 Days After* < 50% Vote for Trump                    0.020                                -0.024
                                                       (0.047)                              (0.037)
5-9 Days After* < 50% Vote for Trump                    0.007                                -0.063
                                                       (0.081)                              (0.085)
10+ Days After* < 50% Vote for Trump                    -0.035                               -0.124
                                                       (0.111)                              (0.115)

N                                                      1667                                    875

                                                       71
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
Notes: Regressions include only Wisconsin. All estimates include: county and day fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the
county-level, is reported inside parenthesis.




                                                               72
