                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         WORKING REMOTELY AND THE SUPPLY-SIDE IMPACT OF COVID-19

                                     Dimitris Papanikolaou
                                    Lawrence D.W. Schmidt

                                      Working Paper 27330
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w27330


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We thank Carola Frydman for helpful comments and discussions. We are grateful to Nathaniel
Barlow and Jorge Colmenares-Miralles for excellent research assistance and Evan Soltas,
SafeGraph, and the Risk Management Institute (RMI) of the National University of Singapore for
sharing their data. Please see https://sites.google.com/site/lawrencedwschmidt/covid19 for
additional information and data related to the analysis conducted in this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Dimitris Papanikolaou and Lawrence D.W. Schmidt. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Working Remotely and the Supply-side Impact of Covid-19
Dimitris Papanikolaou and Lawrence D.W. Schmidt
NBER Working Paper No. 27330
June 2020
JEL No. E23,G10,J00

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze the supply-side disruptions associated with Covid-19 across firms and workers. To
do so, we exploit differences in the ability of workers across industries to work remotely using
data from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS). We find that sectors in which a higher
fraction of the workforce is not able to work remotely experienced significantly greater declines
in employment, significantly more reductions in expected revenue growth, worse stock market
performance, and higher expected likelihood of default. In terms of individual employment
outcomes, lower-paid workers, especially female workers with young children, were significantly
more affected by these disruptions. Last, we combine these ex-ante heterogeneous industry
exposures with daily financial market data to create a stock return portfolio that most closely
replicate the supply-side disruptions resulting from the pandemic.


Dimitris Papanikolaou
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Drive, Office 4319
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
d-papanikolaou@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Lawrence D.W. Schmidt
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
100 Main Street
Cambridge, MA
ldws@mit.edu
   The Covid-19 pandemic of 2020 has led to severe disruptions to the supply-side of the
world economy as entire sectors shut down. In the first quarter of 2020, US gross domestic
output fell by 4.8 percent in annualized terms, a decline not seen since the Great Recession.
This drop underestimates the full economic impact of the pandemic since the severity of the
crisis became fully apparent to the public and private sector only in the last few weeks of
March. Moreover, the effect has been highly asymmetric: restaurants, entertainment, and
travel services suffered significantly more than food or technology services. Naturally, these
declines reflect not only the supply side disruptions due to the effect of the lockdown but
also demand-side factors, including the collapse of global consumer demand and expectations
of future government policy. This confluence of adverse forces obscures the direct effects of
the supply-side disruptions of the pandemic.
   Our goal is to isolate the supply side effects from other forces. Our starting point is
that industries in which a higher fraction of the labor force can work remotely are likely to
experience less severe disruptions in their business operations. We build on existing work
and construct a metric of industry exposure to the lockdowns using information on the
share of the workforce than can work from home (Dingel and Neiman, 2020; Alon, Doepke,
Olmstead-Rumsey, and Tertilt, 2020). Specifically, we follow Alon et al. (2020) and exploit
data from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) in 2017 and 2018, in which workers disclose
the extent to which they are able to and have historically had experience working remotely.
As noted by Alon et al. (2020), occupations vary immensely by whether people report they
are able to telecommute—ranging from 3% for transportation and material moving to 78%
for computer programmers. We then aggregate these survey responses to build measures of
exposure across industries and groups of workers.
   In brief, our assumption is that the extent to which firms are able to effectively continue
their business operations during the pandemic depends on whether workers can perform
their tasks remotely. As such, our measure of supply side disruption for a given industry,
termed “Covid-19 work exposure”, is equal to one minus the fraction of workers that have
telecommuted – more specifically, the fraction that have ever worked full days from home
– in each industry. Importantly, there is considerable dispersion in our exposure measure
across industries. For example, software publishers (NAICS 5112) have an exposure of just
0.38, since much of the production work can be done remotely; by contrast, meat production
(NAICS 3116) or general merchandise stores (NAICS 4523) have an exposure close to one,
since most of the employees cannot perform their work remotely.
   In addition, government restrictions also play a role in firms’ ability to continue operations.
Specifically, local governments typically deem certain industries as ‘critical’, namely those


                                               1
that provide ‘essential infrastructure’. Thus, we also manually classify some industries as
‘essential’. Since the definition of essential industries varies greatly across states, we aim
to be conservative, classifying as essential industries related to the production and sale of
food and beverages; utilities; pharmacies; transportation; waste collection and disposal; and
some healthcare and financial services. Data on foot-traffic from SafeGraph validate our
construction: establishments in industries deemed critical experience significantly smaller
declines in traffic than establishments in non-critical industries, which stands in stark contrast
to nearly identical trends in foot traffic in January-February 2020.
   Armed with a measure of industry exposure to these supply-side disruptions, we can
isolate these effects from other economic forces that would otherwise affect these sets of firms
symmetrically. Our summary finding is that these supply-side disruptions are economically
large.
   Our first set of results concerns employment outcomes. We find that sectors with a larger
fraction of workers who cannot work remotely—higher Covid-19 work exposure—experienced
significantly larger declines in employment than sectors where more of the workforce can
perform tasks remotely. The differences are economically sizable: a one-standard-deviation
increase in our Covid-19 work exposure measure is associated with an approximately 8 percent
larger decline in employment; the differences among sectors is starker when we restrict the
sample to non-critical industries (13 percent). We also find some evidence for heterogeneous
effects across workers. Specifically, a given increase in our Covid-19 work exposure measure is
associated with a somewhat greater increase in the probability of non-employment for women
and lower-earning workers. Among all affected groups, we find that the employment status
of female workers with young children and without a college degree is most sensitive: in the
cross-section of workers, a one-standard-deviation increase in our Covid-19 work exposure
measure is associated with a 15 percent probability of non-employment for these workers,
which is more than three times the magnitude of the baseline coefficient.
   Our second set of results focuses on firm outcomes. Given the delays in the availability of
real data on firm outcomes, we focus on a set of forward-looking variables that capture future
expectations. That is, we focus on the revisions in analyst forecasts of expected revenue
growth; the stock market performance of publicly traded firms; and the expected probability
of default. We find that firms in sectors that are more likely to experience work disruptions
also fare significantly worse during the 2020 pandemic: a one-standard-deviation increase
in our Covid-19 exposure metric is associated with a 8 percent decline in analysts’ revenue
forecasts for Q2; a 0.22 percentage point increase in the probability of default over the next 6
months; and a 7 percent decline in stock market performance to date. These magnitudes


                                                2
account for a significant share of cross-industry differences in outcomes during this period.
Last, while financial analysts expect the worst effects to be short-lived, our work exposure
variable is still a significant predictor of differences in expected revenue growth over the
next two years—though magnitudes are significantly muted. Similar patterns emerge in the
differences in projected declines in revenue across non-critical versus critical industries, where
we find that analysts project firms in non-critical industries’ annual revenues to decline by
13, 10, and 8 percent for 2020, 2021, and 2022, respectively. These same differences are 3.2,
2.5, and 2.3 percent for firms in critical industries.
    In the last part of the paper, we use some of these forward-looking variables to construct
a real-time indicator of supply-side disruptions. In particular, we use daily data on stock
returns to construct a portfolio that is maximally exposed to the Covid-19 work disruption
using the methodology of Fama and MacBeth (1973). The resulting ‘Covid-19’ factor has
a long-short portfolio interpretation. It overweights industries whose workers cannot work
remotely and underweights industries whose workers can perform their tasks from home. As
of May 15, 2020, this portfolio had lost roughly 50 percent of its value since the beginning
of the year—compared to 10 percent for the broad market index. Naturally, reversing this
investment strategy would deliver a portfolio that could significantly hedge future Covid-19
related uncertainty.
    In sum, our work contributes to the voluminous economics literature that has emerged in
response to the pandemic. The key differentiator of our work is its focus on isolating the
supply side disruptions associated with Covid-19. By contrast, existing work has focused
on the overall response of the economy during this period.1 How firms respond during the
pandemic is a function of both the underlying supply-side disruptions (our focus) but also
firms’ exposures to a decline in consumer demand as a result of expected income losses and
increase in uncertainty. Our goal is to isolate the former rather the latter channel. In this
respect, our work is closer to Bonadio, Huo, Levchenko, and Pandalai-Nayar (2020) who
focus on the role of global supply chains; or Hassan, Hollander, van Lent, and Tahoun (2020)
who identify differences in firms’ exposure based on the transcript of analyst calls.
    Last, our paper is related to recent work by Dingel and Neiman (2020), Alon et al. (2020)
and Mongey, Pilossoph, and Weinberg (2020). Dingel and Neiman (2020) construct measures
   1
     Recent work examines the response of employment (Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Weber, 2020b; Cajner,
Crane, Decker, Grigsby, Hamins-Puertolas, Hurst, Kurz, and Yildirmaz, 2020; Campello, Kankanhalli, and
Muthukrishnan, 2020; Borjas and Cassidy, 2020; Fairlie, Couch, and Xu, 2020); firm revenue (Barrero, Bloom,
and Davis, 2020; Landier and Thesmar, 2020); firm closures (Bartik, Bertrand, Cullen, Glaeser, Luca, and
Stanton, 2020); stock market performance (Ding, Levine, Lin, and Xie, 2020); or consumer spending Baker,
Farrokhnia, Meyer, Pagel, and Yannelis (2020); Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Weber (2020a) during this
period.


                                                    3
of the feasibility of workers to work from home, but they do so using task descriptions in the
ONET survey. Like us, Alon et al. (2020) construct a measure based on workers’ answers
to the American Time Use Survey (ATUS). Though the details of the construction differ,
the main idea is similar. Dingel and Neiman (2020) and Alon et al. (2020) mainly focus on
demographic differences among workers who can and cannot work remotely; by contrast, we
are interested in how the ability to work from home is related to outcomes. In this respect,
our work is closest to Mongey et al. (2020), who explore how the Dingel and Neiman (2020)
measure and a measure of occupations requiring high physical proximity relate to differential
outcomes across workers. Though the first part of our analysis also explores worker-level
outcomes, our primary focus is on firms. In this regard, we view our work as complementary.


1         Measuring Exposures of Production to Covid
We begin with a brief description of our construction of exposure measures from the data.


1.1        Workers’ ability to work remotely
Following the rapid increase in cases throughout the US, many employers as well as state and
local governments quickly imposed restrictions requiring that workers stay at home, leading
to what is essentially the largest global experiment in telecommuting in human history. Our
starting point is the simple premise that supply-side disruptions are likely to be more severe
in occupations/industries for which workers have had little to no ability to or experience with
telework in the past. Accordingly, our measure of industry exposure to work disruptions due
to Covid-19 builds on Alon et al. (2020), who use data from the Leave and Job Flexibilities
module of the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) in 2017 and 2018 (n = 10, 040), which
asks several questions about workers’ ability and past experiences with working from home.
Our preferred measure utilizes responses to two different questions, though the module also
includes several additional questions about reasons for and frequency of remote work. We
obtain the ATUS microdata from IPUMS.2
        Crucially, the survey draws a distinction between workers who are able or unable to
telecommute, as opposed to actually regularly telecommuting, as the former is the relevant
metric during a pandemic.3 The output of this procedure is an occupation/industry-level
    2
    Sandra L. Hofferth, Sarah M. Flood, Matthew Sobek and Daniel Backman. American Time Use Survey
Data Extract Builder: Version 2.8 [dataset]. College Park, MD: University of Maryland and Minneapolis,
MN: IPUMS, 2020. https://doi.org/10.18128/D060.V2.8
  3
    For example, the Census’ American Community Survey asks whether workers worked from home last
week, which captures regular telecommuting behavior. According to the Census Bureau, around 4.3% of


                                                  4
metric of the fraction of workers in each occupation that should in principle be able to work
from home. The first major question asks for a yes/no reply to the prompt: “As part of your
(main) job, can you work at home?” Using the survey’s person weights, approximately 78%
of households answer yes to this question. Alon et al. (2020) construct a measure of telework
experience by identifying the share of workers in a given occupation that, according to their
answers to this question, are able to telecommute, and provide several facts about the share
of workers in various demographic groups which are employed in occupations which can be
performed from home.
    Our preferred measure also makes use of responses to one additional question, “Are there
days when you work only at home?”, which is only asked to those who say that they are
able to work from home. Around 51% of households who are able to work from home also
indicate that they have worked days entirely from home. In our view, answering this question
in the affirmative provides a sharper classification of workers who will more likely be able to
perform the majority of their job responsibilities from home, as opposed to only a subset
of tasks (e.g., answering emails/phone calls) remotely. For example, 64% of computer and
information systems managers (occupation 110) say that they can work from home, and 47%
of them have worked days entirely from home. These same proportions are 59% and just
13%, respectively, for medical and health services managers (occupation 350), a group that,
in our view, is a part of a population which is more likely to be unable to work full-time from
home as effectively.4
    In brief, we classify a surveyed worker as ‘able to work from home’ if they answer ‘yes’ to
both questions above. We then compute measures of industry and occupation exposure by
aggregating these survey responses across employees according to the industry and occupation
codes which appear in the ATUS. In brief, our measure of industry exposure is

          Covid-19 Work ExposureI = 1 − % of workers able to work from homeI ,                           (1)

which is computed as a weighted average of individual-level responses aggregated so as to be
nationally representative using the BLS’ person weights. If fewer than 5 survey respondents
workers worked from home according to this measure in 2010 (Mateyka, Rapino, and Landivar, 2012).
   4
     As further evidence of a sharper distinction, among households who provide non-missing replies to the
question “What is the main reason why you work at home?”, 60% of households who have worked days
only from home are about twice as likely to list “job requires working at home”, “reduce commuting time or
expense”, or “personal preference”, which is significantly higher than the 31% frequency for other workers (t
statistic on difference = 12.1). By way of contrast, in the group of workers who say that they have worked
from home but have never worked days only from home, the most common answer to this question is “finish
or catch up on work”, which is selected 36% of the time, a significantly higher than the 14% of the time for
those who have worked days from home (t=7.3).



                                                     5
are directly employed in a given Census industry, we instead extrapolate using a weighted
average of occupation-based measures.5 Given that an individual’s occupation likely provides
a more accurate description of the types of tasks that a worker performs on a daily basis,
we elect to use the occupation-based measure in person-level regressions below—though we
obtain similar results if we use the industry-based measure. In general, we also find similar
results if we use the more inclusive Alon et al. (2020) measure instead.
       As most of our outcomes by industry use NAICS-based classifications, we crosswalk
between the ATUS industry codes and NAICS industries.6 We aggregate most outcomes,
when available, to the 4-digit NAICS level given that the industry codes available in the
IPUMS ATUS extract roughly correspond with this level of aggregation.
       We find that most industries are highly exposed; the mean value of the measure is
approximately 85%. Yet, there is considerable dispersion across NAICS industries—the
cross-sectional standard deviation of our measure across 4-digit NAICS industries is approxi-
mately 17%. Clearly, some industries are more exposed than others. For example, General
Merchandise Stores (NAICS 4523) and Meat Production (NAICS 3116) have an exposure
measure of close to 1, since almost none of the workers in that industry report that they can
work from home. By contrast, Software Publishers (NAICS 5112) is an industry in which the
vast majority of workers report they can work from home, and accordingly has an exposure
of just 0.38.
       In addition, we perform some manual adjustments to the ATUS work exposure measure.
For certain industries, we set their work from home exposure to 1, giving them “full exposure.”
These are largely industries that have been almost completely shut down and thus, even if
some of their workers have the flexibility to be able to work from home in normal times,
they cannot continue business as usual during lockdowns in a pandemic. These industries
include: 4811 Scheduled Air Transportation, 5121 Motion Picture and Video Industries, 5151
Radio and Television Broadcasting, 5615 Travel Arrangement and Reservation Services, 7111
Performing Arts Companies, 7112 Spectator Sports, 7113 Promoters of Performing Arts,
Sports, and Similar Events, 7114 Agents and Managers for Artists, Athletes, Entertainers,
and Other Public Figures, 7131 Amusement Parks and Arcades.
   5
     Specifically, we use data from the (considerably larger) 2016 American Community Survey to estimate
the share of employees for each occupation by industry. We choose 2016 so that the occupation and industry
codes coincide with those used in ATUS. American Community data are also taken from IPUMS: Steven
Ruggles, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas and Matthew Sobek. IPUMS
USA: Version 10.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2020. https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V10.0
   6
     We make use of the crosswalks created by Evan Soltas, available here, which we update to use
the 2017 NAICS code system: https://dataverse.harvard.edu/dataset.xhtml?persistentId=doi:
10.7910/DVN/O7JLIC



                                                    6
1.2       Critical Industries
While policy responses to the Covid-19 crisis have imposed severe restrictions on interactions
between individuals, governments have found it necessary to make some exceptions, thus
creating a need to classify industries as essential or non-essential. The Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) provided guidelines to states about what kinds
businesses should remain open. Keeping track of essential industries can enhance our analysis
of work from home exposure because if a business is allowed to stay open, then it may be
irrelevant if their workers can telecommute. We start with Pennsylvania’s guidelines largely
because they provide a list, based on the CISA guidance, of essential industries at the 4 digit
NAICS (2017) level.7 These industries primarily correspond to the production and sale of
food and beverages; utilities; pharmacies; transportation; waste collection and disposal; and
some healthcare and financial services.
       While CISA’s essential industry classification is a good place to start, we alter it for
two basic reasons. First the classification of essential industries seems too coarse in certain
cases. For instance, the NAICS code 4831 is “Deep Sea, Coastal, and Great Lakes Water
Transportation” and is listed as essential by Pennsylvania. While some of the firms in
this industry are shipping companies, the largest firms in this industry are cruise ships,
which clearly have not been permitted to maintain business as usual. Second, the CISA
list was somewhat inclusive in what types of industries were classified as providing critical
infrastructure. We therefore removed from the critical list industries that faced severe
restrictions to operating at a scale close to or even higher than pre-pandemic baselines. For
example, restaurants, restaurant suppliers, and airlines have been permitted to remain open,
however their patronage has declined dramatically due to quarantines and heavy restrictions
on domestic and international passenger travel. While some restaurants remained open
for curbside and/or takeout service, it is apparent that they were not classified as critical.
Accordingly, we have also classified industries that are auxiliary to such industries (such as
firms in NAICS code 4244 , Grocery and Related Product Merchant Wholesalers, which
largely deliver food supplies to restaurants) as non-critical.
       Given that we exclude the list of critical industries from the bulk of our empirical analysis,
our choices of narrowing down the critical industry list can be viewed as conservative.8
   7
     The       CISA       guidance      is     available      at     https://www.cisa.gov/publication/
guidance-essential-critical-infrastructure-workforce,                    and      the       full      Penn-
sylvania       list   is     available     here:          https://www.scribd.com/document/452553026/
UPDATED-5-45pm-March-21-2020-Industry-Operation-Guidance
   8
      As there are 311 industries represented by NAICS-4 codes, we will not to attempt to explain our
justification by industry, but hope to provide some clarification on our thought process, which is primarily
disciplined by the CISA guidance. In the case of manufacturing, for example, the CISA guidelines state that


                                                     7
Appendix Table A.1 provides the list of critical industries.


1.3     Validations using Foot Traffic Data
We validate our critical/non-critical industry classification and remote work exposure measures
using weekly foot traffic data from SafeGraph.9 SafeGraph collects anonymized information
on location activity from a large panel of mobile devices. For more than 5 million points of
interest (POIs), we can observe aggregated daily activity of users in the panel. As activity
exhibits strong within-week seasonal patterns, we aggregate the data to the weekly level.
Given our focus on workers’ ability to telecommute, we focus on visits to POIs that last for 4
hours or more, which we will refer to as “worker foot traffic”.10 For each 4-digit industry,
we compare activity in week t with a baseline level of average activity: the mean of weekly
activity over the period beginning with the week of January 6-12 and ending with the week
of February 10-16. In the baseline period, the median 4-digit NAICS industry receives 18,705
worker visits per week, and the distribution of activity is highly right skewed, with the 90th,
95th and 99th percentiles having 560 thousand, 1.03 million, and 5.60 million hits respectively.
    If our critical industry classification is accurate, we would expect to see a significantly
smaller decline in foot traffic in critical industries than in non-critical ones —starting from
the middle of March 2020 when Covid-19 awareness and state-mandated lockdowns went into
effect. To test this hypothesis, we then aggregate foot traffic across all POIs to the 4-digit
the following workers should be deemed critical: ”Workers necessary for the manufacturing of metals (including
steel and aluminum), industrial minerals, semiconductors, materials and products needed for medical supply
chains and for supply chains associated with transportation, aerospace, energy, communications, information
technology, food and agriculture, chemical manufacturing, nuclear facilities, wood products, commodities used
as fuel for power generation facilities, the operation of dams, water and wastewater treatment, processing
and reprocessing of solid waste, emergency services, and the defense industrial base... ” (p. 17)
   As steel and aluminum are mentioned explicitly and directly correspond to NAICS-4 codes 3312 (”Steel
Product Manufacturing from Purchased Steel”) and 3313 (”Alumina and Aluminum Production and Process-
ing”), we have included those as critical. We also deemed Soap, Cleaning Compound, and Toilet Preparation
Manufacturing (3256), Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing (3254), Plastics Product Manufacturing
(3261), Agriculture, Construction, and Mining Machinery Manufacturing (3331), and Medical Equipment
and Supplies Manufacturing (3391) as critical, as these clearly fall under the jurisdiction of the quoted CISA
guideline. However, as most other manufacturing NAICS-4 codes represent industries that manufacture both
products that would fit into the above categories as well as those that would not, we have largely chosen to
designate the remainder of the manufacturing industries as non-critical.
   9
     We are grateful to SafeGraph for making the data freely available to our research team and the
broader community for Covid-19 related work. Further information about the data are available here:
https://docs.safegraph.com/docs/weekly-patterns. See also, e.g., Mongey et al. (2020) and Farboodi,
Jarosch, and Shimer (2020) for additional applications of SafeGraph data to the study of Covid-19.
  10
     Specifically, SafeGraph makes available data on number of visits by “bucketed dwell time”, which captures
the length of time that a device is at each POI. Consistent with the recommendations of SafeGraph researchers,
we scale total weekly activity by a moving average the total number of devices in the panel over the prior
week for each point of interest prior to aggregating.



                                                      8
NAICS level so as to match our critical industry classification. Specifically, we estimate
                                                                      
            Total Worker Foot Traffic in week t in Industry I
log                                                                        = at +δt Critical IndustryI +εI,t .
          Pre-period Average Worker Foot Traffic of Industry I
                                                                                                           (2)
When estimating (2), we weigh observations by total industry employment, and, to minimize
the effect of outliers, we winsorize these industry indices at the 1st and 99th percentiles.11
      Figure 2 plots the results. Panel A reports average levels of our activity indices for
critical and non-critical indices, respectively, along with 95% confidence intervals. Both
sets of industries followed essentially identical trends in January and early February, then
experienced a significant decline in foot traffic which dramatically accelerated in the middle
of March of 2020. Though the Covid-19 pandemic affected almost all establishments, we can
see that the decline is smaller for industries classified as critical. Panel B compares differences
in traffic between the two industries by plotting the estimated coefficient βt in equation (2)
above. It shows that this decline was significantly smaller, by around 20%, for industries that
we identified as providing critical infrastructure. We interpret these results as supporting our
industry classification into ‘critical’ and ‘non-critical’ industries.
      Our foot traffic data also permit a simple validation of our remote exposure measure.
Our hypothesis is that, even in critical industries, workers would prefer to work from home
to minimize their exposures to the disease to the extent that such activities are feasible.
Whereas workers in non-critical industries are essentially prevented from going to their
workplaces during, the decision to telework is more discretionary in nature for workers in
critical industries. Accordingly, we would expect to see larger declines in worker foot traffic
(ie increased telecommuting) in critical industries for which workers are more easily able to
telework. To test this premise, we estimate the following specification for critical (panel C)
and non-critical (panel D) industries,
                                                                      
            Total Worker Foot Traffic in week t in Industry I
log                                                                        = ct +γt Covid ExposureI +εI,t .
          Pre-period Average Worker Foot Traffic of Industry I
                                                                                                           (3)
where our prediction is that γt > 0 since workers in critical, high exposure industries will be
more likely to go to work relative to their counterparts who can telecommute more easily.
Panel C provides strong evidence in support of this hypothesis: a 1% increase in the fraction
of workers who cannot work remotely is associated with between 1-1.5% higher foot traffic
   11
      Some industries have very sparse coverage in the pre-period, so drop the approximately 5% industries with
fewer than 30 average worker hits per week, though our results are insensitive to increasing this threshold or
eliminating it entirely. Total NAICS4 employment is taken from the Census’ 2017 Statistics of United States
Businesses tables: https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2017/econ/susb/2017-susb-annual.html


                                                      9
throughout the month of April. In contrast, exposure is not correlated with changes in foot
traffic in non-critical industries, which is consistent with the non-critical distinction requiring
all workers to work remotely regardless of feasibility constraints.


1.4       Descriptive Facts
Figure 1 plots the distribution of the measure across NAICS4 industries. We report results
separately for critical and non-critical industries. We note that most industries have relatively
high values of Covid-19 work exposure; the average is equal to approximately 0.85 for critical
and 0.87 for non-critical industries. More importantly, however, we see there is considerable
dispersion in our measure—the cross-sectional standard deviation is approximately 17.4%.
The bulk of our paper explores the extent to which these cross-sectional differences are
predictive of differential economic outcomes during the pandemic.
       Table 1 illustrates how our industry Covid-19 work exposure measure is related to firm
characteristics; due to data availability, we restrict attention to publicly-listed firms. Panel A
shows results for all industries, while Panel B restricts to the non-critical industry sub-sample.
Two patterns stand out. First, we see that firms in the high-exposure category tend to be
larger. For instance, focusing on the sub-sample of non-critical industries, the median firm
in the top quartile of the Covid-19 work exposure measure has 4.9 thousand employees; by
comparison, the median firm in the bottom quartile has 1.5 thousand employees. Second,
there is some evidence that firms in the least exposed industries have more intangibles than
firms in the most exposed industries: these firms have higher market valuations (median
Tobin’s Q of 2.3 for the most exposed vs 1.3 for the least exposed); have lower ratios of
physical capital (PPE) to book assets (0.16 vs 0.58); and spend significantly more on R&D
and SG&A than firms in the most exposed industries.12 This is consistent with the view that
firms with more intangibles have more jobs that can be done remotely than firms that rely
more on physical assets. Last, firms in the most exposed industries are more profitable in
terms of bottom-line accounting measures (return-on-assets) but this difference is driven by
higher spending on intangibles and/or fixed costs by firms in the least exposed industries.
  12
     Corrado, Hulten, and Sichel (2009) and Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou (2013) argue that higher SG&A
expenditures are associated with higher investment in intangibles. That said, Eisfeldt and Papanikolaou
(2013) focus on within-industry differences, whereas these results reflect between-industry patterns. As such,
these differences in SG&A could also reflect differences in operating leverage (importance of fixed costs) or
differences in accounting practices.




                                                     10
2        Covid-19 Work Exposure and Economic Performance
So far, we have constructed a measure of exposure to Covid-19 work disruptions using data
from the 2017 and 2018 ATUS. Here, we explore the extent to which this Covid-19 work
exposure measure is able to predict differences in economic performance across industries
and individual workers. Our outcome variables include data on employment outcomes at the
industry and worker level, as well as forward-looking variables that are indicative of future
economic performance—stock returns; analyst forecasts; and default probabilities.
       Each of these variables has distinct advantages and disadvantages. Data from financial
markets and financial analysts are forward-looking, but are only available for public firms—
which may be less exposed to supply-side disruptions than smaller private firms. Employment
data are more representative of the universe of firms, but are available with a lag and may
not accurately reflect outcomes for firm owners.


2.1       Employment
We begin by exploring the extent to which our measure of production disruption due to
the pandemic can predict differences in employment declines across industries. We use two
sources for data on employment.
       First, we focus on aggregated employment data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS).
Each month, the BLS aggregates data from large surveys of firms’ establishments in order to
construct estimates of total employment by industry. We make use of data from Table B-1A
of the April employment report, which provides estimates of seasonally-adjusted employment
at the 3-digit NAICS level for the vast majority of non-agricultural industries in the US
economy.13 While BLS reports monthly data for more detailed NAICS industries, measures
for April 2020 are suppressed for a large number of the more disaggregated categories. As
such, we conduct our analysis at the 3-digit level. For purposes of this analysis, we define a
NAICS3 industry as critical if more than 50% of its pre-pandemic employment is associated
with our list of 4-digit NAICS critical industries.
       We estimate the following specification

                  Employment GrowthI = a + β Covid-19 Work ExposureI + εI .                (4)

Here, the unit of observation is a 3-digit NAICS industry and the outcome variable is
employment growth. We examine both monthly but also annual changes—that is, between
  13
       Data were accessed here: https://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/ceseeb1a.htm


                                                 11
either March 2020 or April 2019 and April 2020. Since the size of these industries varies
greatly, depending on the specification, we also present results in which we weight industries
using total employment as of the baseline period used in each growth rate. Last, we report
results either using the full sample, or by excluding the list of critical industries in Table A.1.
    Table 2 and Figure 3 present our results. Examining columns (1) through (8) of the table,
we see an economically and statistically significant correlation between our exposure measure
and industry-wide declines in employment that is robust across different specifications. In
particular, a one-standard deviation increase in our Covid-19 work exposure measure is
associated with a 6.2 to 23.0 percent greater decline in employment. The magnitudes are
comparable when we focus on monthly or annual growth rates and are larger when we exclude
critical industries and weigh industries by their total employment. These magnitudes are
quite significant and comparable to either the average decline in employment during this
period (14 percent) or the cross-sectional standard deviation (16 percent). In panel B, we
also report the differences in average employment growth rates between industries which
we classify as critical vs non-critical. On an employment-weighted basis, monthly declines
in employment are more than 3 times larger in non-critical industries (-22.8%) relative to
critical ones (6.0%).
    Figure 4, Panel A, provides a more aggregated summary of the relationship between
our exposure measure and BLS employment year-on-year employment growth. Specifically,
we aggregate across non-critical industries by major 2-digit NAICS sector. Even at this
level of aggregation, one can observe a strong relationship between exposure and changes in
employment. Unsurprisingly, the three hardest-hit sectors are retail, hotels, and entertainment,
which are also the three most highly exposed sectors according to our measure.
    The recent availability of CPS data allows us to explore outcomes at the level of individual
workers. The advantage of doing so is twofold. First, by observing the characteristics of
individual workers we can control for some variables that may be correlated with our Covid-19
work exposure. For instance, workers that can work remotely tend to be in white collar
occupations (see e.g., Dingel and Neiman, 2020). By including controls for workers’ level of
education, or past earnings, we can ensure that we are comparing otherwise similar workers.
Further, analyzing outcomes for individual workers, and how these outcomes vary with
observables, reveals a fuller picture of the effects of the Covid-19 on the supply side.
    We use the April version of the Current Population Survey (CPS) which contains employ-
ment information for individual workers.14 We restrict the sample to adults of working age
  14
     There are some possible selection issues. IPUMS notes that: “Interviews for April were conducted
exclusively by phone. The two Census Bureau call centers that usually assist with the collection of CPS data
remained closed. Response rates continued to be low in April, over 10 percentage points below the average


                                                    12
(25 to 60 years) that are present in the March 2020 survey and who report that they were
“at work last week” as of March 2020. Our sample contains 23,984 workers. In April of 2020,
19,664 out of these workers report they are at work; 2,144 report they are out of a job; while
1,257 report they have a job but were not at work last week. We include the first and last
groups in our definition of employment for our regressions below.
    We impose one other substantial restriction of the sample. As of the start of the year, the
BLS changed its coding of occupations relative to prior years, and a crosswalk between the
older vintage of occupation codes from ATUS and the newer codes in the 2020 CPS has not
yet been developed. In part due to this technical reason and also given that several researchers
have already documented a disproportionate increase in unemployment for lower income
workers, we restrict attention to the subsample of workers who appear in the March/April
2020 core CPS and March 2019 Annual Social and Economic (ASEC) CPS surveys. This
enables us to construct controls for an individual’s prior income and, motivated by evidence
on potentially concentrated adverse effects for small businesses, firm size. For each worker,
we assign an exposure measure based on her March 2019 occupation which is equal to one
minus the fraction of ATUS respondents (weighted using the ATUS sampling weights) who
had worked a full day from home.15
    We estimate the following specification

                  NotEmployedi = a + β Covid-19 Work Exposurei + c Zi + εi .                            (5)

Our main outcome variable is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the worker
was not ‘at work last week’ in the April 2020 CPS survey—which therefore includes both
unemployed and furloughed workers. For ease of interpretation, we multiply the dependent
variable by 100 to express probabilities in percentage points in tables and figures.
    Since the CPS contains information on workers’ occupation, we use the occupation-level
measure of our Covid Work exposure rather than the industry aggregate—though, using
industry aggregates produces largely comparable results. Depending on the specification, the
vector of worker-level controls and interaction terms Zi includes gender dummies; college
education; whether the worker has children younger than 14 years old; education (a college
graduate dummy); worker age; worker earnings as of 2019 (quartile dummies); and firm size
(see below). Response rates continued to be particularly low among rotation groups one and five who would
have normally received a visit from the enumerator. Month-in-sample one and five response rates were similar
to those same groups in March. Additionally, those households that entered the survey for the first time in
March had a similarly low response rate for their second interview in April.”
   15
      Note that we also assigned an alternative measure based on each worker’s March 2020 industry and
obtain similar results.


                                                    13
dummies. We cluster the standard errors by occupation and industry (using Census codes).
Table 3 shows results.
    Examining Table 3, several facts stand out. First, as we see in the first three rows
of the table, workers in occupations that are less able to work remotely (higher Covid-19
work exposure) are more likely to stop working. These effects are not absorbed by worker
characteristics—as we see in columns (2) and (3)—suggesting that our Covid-19 work exposure
measure is not simply capturing differences in the composition of the work force. Further, the
point estimates are somewhat larger for non-critical industries relative to critical industries.
Focusing on column (3)—which includes controls for worker gender, age, education, prior
earnings, and firm size—a one-standard deviation increase in our covid-19 work exposure
measure is associated with a 4.5 percentage point increase in the probability of a worker
in a non-critical industry being without employment in April 2020, compared to a 1.0
percentage point increase for a worker in a critical industry, that is however statistically not
significantly different from zero. Moreover, relative to workers in non-critical industries with
similar characteristics, employees in critical industries are 8 percentage points less likely to
remain employed. Hence, in the remainder of the paper, we restrict attention to non-critical
industries.
    One potential concern with these results is that they could simply reflect differential
employment trends in white-collar versus blue-collar occupations. Column (4) of Table 3
performs a placebo exercise, in which we repeat the analysis for the February CPS sample—
well before the effects of the pandemic became apparent. Examining the results we note that
none of the coefficients of interest are statistically different from zero.
    We next allow the coefficient β on the Covid-19 work exposure measure in equation (5) to
vary with worker characteristics Zi . In all specifications with interactions, we always include
dummies for all levels of the categorical variable of interest as controls. Doing so reveals
how the employment status of different workers varies in response to the same level of work
disruption due to Covid-19.16
    Figure 5 summarizes our findings. In Panel A of the figure, we see an economically and
statistically significant difference in how the employment status of workers of different income
levels is related to our Covid-19 exposure measure. A one-standard deviation increase in our
work exposure measure is associated with a 9.2 percentage point increase in the likelihood of
non-employment for workers at the bottom quartile of the earnings distribution—compared
to just a 1.6 percentage point increase for workers in the top quartile. The fact that we
  16
     In additional specifications, we verify that many of these patterns persist even if we include occupation
and/or industry fixed effects, implying that we can detect similar differences even within occupations/industries.
These results are suppressed for brevity and are available upon request.


                                                       14
see such a differential response of employment status to the feasibility of remote work for
employees with different earnings levels has several interpretations. One possibility is that
firms try to retain their most able—and highest paid—employees and reduce employment for
workers of lower skill levels first.
       Another possibility is that these responses reflect differences in age or the gender pay
gap. Panel B of the Figure shows that there is some evidence that the employment status
of younger workers responds more by approximately a factor of two than older workers to
Covid-19 work disruptions, but the coefficients are imprecisely estimated so the difference is
not statistically different from zero. Panels C and D condition on gender as well as college
attainment and whether or not the household has at least one child under the age of 14. In
both cases, we see that estimated sensitivities for women are larger relative to men, though
these differences are not always statistically significant. Workers without college degrees have
higher estimated coefficients. In panel D, we observe that whereas men with young children
and work in non-critical industries exhibit have smaller coefficients than their men without
young children, the opposite appears to be the case for women with young children. The
7.7 percentage point difference in coefficients between men and women with young children
is highly significant (t=3.4).17 Panel E shows that these gender differences do not merely
reflect the gender pay gap. More importantly though, Panel E reveals that the employment
status of female workers is more sensitive to work disruptions than the status of male workers,
for all income levels. Panel F shows that the workers most adversely affected by the work
disruptions due to Covid-19 are female workers with young children and without a college
degree. For this group, a one standard deviation increase in our Covid-19 work exposure
measure is associated with about a 15 percentage point increase in non-employment—which
is three times higher than the average response among all workers.
       In sum, we find that our Covid-19 work exposure measure is an economically significant
predictor of employment. Workers in occupations that cannot work remotely are significantly
more likely to have lost their employment status in April 2020. This correlation is evident
both in cross-industry comparisons and in individual worker regressions.


2.2        Revisions in Revenue Forecasts
We next examine the ability of our measure to predict revisions in analyst forecasts regarding
the economic performance of these industries. Specifically, we use consensus forecasts of
firms’ revenues over various horizons from Capital IQ as of various points in time. We begin
  17
       This gap remains sizable at 5.5 percentage points when we absorb occupation fixed effects.



                                                      15
by comparing the change in revenue forecasts for the same accounting period (e.g., 2020Q2)
across two points in time, February 14 and May 15, 2020. Later, we illustrate how these
forecasts evolved on a weekly basis. We focus on forecasts horizons up to three years ahead,
that is, Q2 through Q4 of 2020, and full year forecasts for 2020–22. We use the Capital IQ
‘consensus forecast’; to minimize measurement error, we require that each firm has at least 3
individual forecasts. Due to this restriction as well as the fact that underlying forecasts are
less sparsely populated at longer horizons, we lose some industries for longer run forecasts,
especially 2022. For each firm f in the sample, we compute the percent change in revenue
forecast from February to May 2020,

                    Revenue forecast for Period τ , as of May 2020f
                                                                       − 1.                  (6)
                   Revenue forecast forPeriod τ , as of February 2020f

For purposes of these regressions, we winsorize firm-level measures at the 1st and 99th
percentiles, then aggregate the non-missing firm-level revenue forecasts to the 4-digit NAICS
level, weighted by the corresponding level of the firms’ February 2020 forecasts for the same
period,
                            P
                                f ∈I Revenue forecast for Period τ , as of May 2020f
  Forecast   RevisionτI   =P                                                          − 1.   (7)
                             f ∈I Revenue forecast forPeriod τ , as of February 2020f


   We re-estimate equation (10), but we now replace the dependent variable with the revision
in analyst forecasts in (7)

                 Forecast RevisionτI = aτ + βτ Covid-19 Work Exposurei + ετi .               (8)

Our dependent variable is the revision in analysts’ revenue forecasts for period τ between
February and May 2020, aggregated to industry i. To conserve space, we focus our preferred
specification in which we restrict the sample to non-critical industries and weigh observations
by the number of Compustat employees in each industry; using equal weights or weighting
by the number of firms leads to quantitatively similar results. Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity (White, 1980).
   Columns (2) to (7) of Table 4 present our findings. Column (2) shows the effect of the
exposure measure on revenue forecasts revisions for Q2 2020. A one-standard deviation
increase in the exposure measure is associated with a 7.7 percent decline in analysts’ revenue
forecasts. Importantly, the effect is quite persistent, though the magnitudes do decline with
the forecast horizon τ , as we can see from comparing the magnitudes across columns. Figure 7


                                                16
plots the estimated coefficients as a function of the forecast horizon τ . We see that financial
analysts expect the direct economic cost of the pandemic to subside significantly over the
course of 2020: a one-standard deviation increase in the exposure measure is associated with
a 3 percent decline in revenue for Q3, while the estimate for Q4 2020 is equal to -1.4 percent.
The overall estimate for 2020 is equal to 2.6 percent. Extending our analysis to 2021 and 2022,
we note that our estimates are significantly weaker at 2 and 1.5 percent, respectively—though
still statistically significant—suggesting that analysts expect the costs of these supply side
disruptions to persist for several years. Figures 4 and 6 provide scatter plots for non-critical
industries aggregated by major sector and across all 4-digit industries, respectively.
       In Panel B, we also report (Compustat 2019 employment-weighted) averages of these
revenue forecasts for critical versus non-critical industries. We note that projected declines
are roughly three times larger for firms in non-critical industries relative to their counterparts
critical ones. In both cases, the largest expected declines in revenue are expected for 2020Q2
(-26% and -8% for non-critical and critical, respectively), though revenue forecasts suggest
that non-critical industries are expected to experience substantial long-run declines in output.
In particular, non-critical industries are projected to experience revenue declines of 10 percent
and 8 percent in 2021 and 2022, respectively.18


2.3       Default Probabilities
So far, we have seen that our Covid-19 work exposure measure predicts declines in both
employment declines as well as expected revenue across industries. We next examine another
forward-looking measure, expected probabilities of default.
       We obtain estimates of default probabilities from the Risk Management Institute (RMI)
of the National University of Singapore. RMI generates forward-looking default probabilities
for issuers on a daily basis for maturities of 1, 3, 6, 12, and 24 months ahead using the
reduced form forward intensity model of Duan, Sun, and Wang (2012). These measures have
been shown to work well in forecasting applications and are available for a very wide array of
firms (over 70,000 publicly listed firms worldwide).19 We next compute the first difference
of the default probability over our the May–Feb 2020 period and aggregate these default
probabilities at the industry level (4-digit NAICS) by averaging across firms (weighted by
  18
      See, e.g., Landier and Thesmar (2020) and Barrero et al. (2020) for related evidence on projected
aggregate declines.
   19
      For example, Gallagher, Schmidt, Timmermann, and Wermers (2020) use these probability estimates to
study changes in portfolio risk of international portfolios of securities owned by US money market funds, and
illustrate that the default probabilities closely track CDS spreads. For additional details on the database, see
https://rmicri.org/en/.



                                                      17
employment).
       We estimate the following specification,

                  Default ProbabilityτI = aτ + βτ Covid-19 Work ExposureI + ετi .                       (9)

The outcome variable is the industry-level probability of default over the next τ months. As
before, we restrict the sample to non-critical industries and weigh observations by the number
of employees in each industry.
       Table 5 and Figure 8 present the results. Examining Table 5, we see that differences in our
Covid-19 work exposure measure are associated with increased probabilities of default. This
correlation is both statistically and economically significant and is monotonically increasing
in the forecast horizon τ . For instance, a one-standard deviation increase in our measure is
associated with a 0.22 percentage point increase in the probability of default over the next 6
months and a 0.44 percentage point increase over the next 2 years. Given that the average
probability of default over these horizons is 0.26 percent and 1.38 percent, respectively, these
magnitudes are quite substantial. Consistent with earlier evidence, we also observe that these
increases in default risk is considerably higher for non-critical industries relative to critical
industries.


2.4       Stock Market Performance
So far, we have seen that differences in our Covid-19 work exposure measure are correlated
with differences in analyst forecasts of revenue growth and default probabilities. Though
forward looking, both of these measures are somewhat subjective and may not necessarily
reflect the ‘average’ beliefs in the economy. Our next outcome variable partly addresses this
concern, as it focuses on differences in stock market valuations across industries.
       We use data on stock returns from the Compustat Daily update database to holding
period returns over various horizons. We restrict attention to common stocks of firms that
have headquarters in the United States; are traded on NYSE, AMEX, or NASDAQ; and
eliminate financial and real estate firms (NAICS codes 52 and 53).20 Almost all of the
industries performed negatively during this period—the cross-sectional average decline is
equal to approximately 26 percent. Yet, there is considerable cross-industry dispersion—
  20
     We also exclude firms in the education sectors (6111–6114), because the remote exposures of employees
of the listed firms employed in these sectors are likely to be quite different from those employed in the
non-profit/government enterprises which comprise the vast majority of employment in these sectors. Likewise,
we exclude fast food restaurants (NAICS 722513) from the sample, as their exposures are likely to be quite
different from other firms in the restaurant industry.



                                                    18
the cross-sectional standard deviation is approximately equal to 18 percent. A select few
industries experienced price appreciation: firms in the grocery store industry (NAICS 4451)
saw a 21 percent increase in stock market values; firms in electronic shopping (NAICS 4541)
appreciated by approximately 13 percent. Others such as airlines (NAICS 4811) experienced
stock market declines of more than 65 percent.
   Figure 9 illustrates our main results graphically via a scatter plot of our exposure measure
versus the stock market performance of these industries. Essential industries are marked in
red, while the trend line is estimated in the sample of non-essential industries. We note some
significant outliers that do not fit the line. For example, NAICS code 5414 corresponds to
interior designers; these workers can work remotely in normal times, but likely face significant
impairments to implementing these designs in the current environment.
   We relate differences in our work exposure measure to differences in cumulative stock
market performance using the following specification,

                   Stock Returnsi = a + β Covid-19 Work Exposurei + εi                     (10)

The dependent variable corresponds to cumulative stock returns from February 14th through
May 15, 2020. As before, we restrict the sample to non-critical industries. To ensure that our
results are not driven by small industries with high idiosyncratic volatility, we estimate (10)
using weighted least squares—where we weigh observations by the total number of employees
(across firms in our Compustat sample) in each industry. Weighting by the number of firms
in each industry leads to quantitatively similar findings. Standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity (White, 1980).
   Column (1) of Table 4 present our estimates. Examining the table, we see that our
industry exposure measure is economically and statistically significant in accounting for
differences in the economic performance across industries. The magnitudes are considerable:
a one-standard deviation increase in the lockdown measure is associated with a 6.8 percent
decline in stock prices during this period. Given that the cross-sectional standard deviation
in industries’ stock market performance during this period is approximately 16.6 percent, our
measure captures a significant share of the overall dispersion. Figures 4 and 9 provide scatter
plots for non-critical industries aggregated by major sector and across all 4-digit industries,
respectively. In Panel B, we also note that stock market declines are considerably larger
(26%) in non-critical industries relative to critical ones (8%).
   In sum, we find that a measure of disruption exposure constructed with pre-2019 data
is a statistically significant predictor of cross-industry heterogeneity in returns during the


                                               19
Covid-19 pandemic. That said, however, these estimates are somewhat at odds with the
impact on stock returns we discuss above. Specifically, as we compare Columns (1) through
(8) of Table 4, we see that a one-standard deviation increase is associated with 6.7 percent
decline in stock prices, whereas the expected decline in revenues over 2020 and beyond is
much smaller and short-lived. In reconciling these differences, a few possibilities emerge.
First, firms profits may be substantially more affected than revenues; second, the differential
stock return performance could also driven by differential increases in systematic risk during
this period. After all, the January to May period of 2020 is a period of increased uncertainty
(see e.g., Baker, Bloom, Davis, and Terry, 2020).


3     Real-time estimates of the supply-side disruption
In our analysis so far, we have developed a measure of industry exposure to production
disruptions due to Covid and shown that heterogeneity in risk exposures is associated with
cross-industry differences in economic performance during the pandemic period. Our analysis
was essentially cross-sectional in nature as we focused on cumulative outcomes during the
entirety of the pandemic period. However, our measure can also be used to construct a
real-time indicator of news associated with these production disruptions. To do so, we exploit
the high-frequency information in data from the financial markets.
    In particular, we re-estimate equation (10) for the subsample of non-critical industries,
while allowing the slope coefficient to vary over time,

                   Stock Returnsi,t = a + βt Covid-19 Work Exposurei + εi,t .                        (11)

    The realized time-series of the slope estimates βt have a portfolio return interpretation.
That is, they are a noisy (to the extent that our firm-level exposures are mis-measured)
estimate of the ‘Covid-19 return factor’, that is, the source of common variation in returns
that is related to the production disruptions as a result of the pandemic. (see, e.g. Fama
and MacBeth, 1973; Cochrane, 2009, for more details). Intuitively, this factor is a long-short
portfolio of industries based on their disruption exposure: it loads positively on industries in
which a lower fraction of workers report that they can telecommute, while loading negatively
on industries in which a higher fraction of workers report that they can work remotely.
Specifically, the return on the Covid-19 factor can be expressed as

                                                                      N               n
                   X                                               1 X empi,0        X
           β̂t =       wi (Ri,t −   R̄temp ),   where   R̄temp   ≡            Ri,t ≡     ei Ri,t ,   (12)
                   i
                                                                   N i=1 emp0        i=1


                                                         20
where ei is the employment share of industry i. The portfolio weight industry i receives in
the Covid-19 portfolio can be written as
                              h      PN        i
                          ei Xi − l=1 el Xl
                                                                        
                                                      ei Xi − X̄ emp
                 wi = P                        i2 = PN                      ,                (13)
                                                                        emp 2
                              h                              
                        N
                            e   X   −
                                      PN
                                          e X        j=1 e j   X j − X̄
                        j=1 j     j    k=1 k k


where Xi is our (predetermined) measure of exposure for firm i, so the portfolio holds long
positions in stocks with exposure above the employment-weighted average exposure and short
positions otherwise.
   Figure 11 summarizes how these portfolio weights vary across different broad sectors
(2-digit NAICS codes). The portfolio overweights industries whose workers can perform their
tasks from home, and underweight sectors where workers cannot work remotely. Consistent
with the discussion so far, we see that firms in retail trade, and accomodation and food
services receive large positive weights; by contrast firms in professional services and information
technologies receive negative weights. Appendix Table A.2 contains the full list of weights on
NAICS 4-digit industries.
   Figure 10 plots these factor realizations in blue, along with returns on the market portfolio
in red. First, we note that the correlation between our factor and the market portfolio in
the three months before the pandemic period is significantly negative (approximately -0.4),
which suggests that the industries most exposed to the covid pandemic are industries with
low systematic risk during normal times. However, given the dominance of covid-related
news during this period, the correlation with the market during the pandemic period is
positive, though modest (it ranges from 0.1 to 0.3 depending on how the factor is constructed).
Further, we see in Figure 10 that extreme daily realizations of our factor are associated with
significant news about the pandemic.
   In brief, we see that realizations of our ‘Covid-19 factor’ largely tracks the unfolding of
news related to the pandemic. As of May 15 2020, this long-short portfolio had lost roughly
50 percent of its value since the beginning of the year—compared to 10 percent for the broad
market index. This pattern supports the view that Covid-19 is primarily a reallocation shock
as not all sectors were symmetrically affected—which also echoes the views in Barrero et al.
(2020). These results speak to how investors could construct an investment strategy that
could significantly hedge future covid-19 related uncertainty. They could do so by taking a
short position in our Covid-19 factor, which would involve taking the opposite position to
the one described in Appendix Table A.2 .
   Last, we also examine the real-time response of our two other forward-looking variables—


                                                21
revisions in analyst forecasts and estimated default probabilities. Figures 12 and 13 summarize
our findings. Similar to our stock return evidence above, we see an increased divergence
in revenue forecasts and expected default probabilities across high- and low-Covid 19 work
exposure industries by the end of March and beginning of April 2020. Comparing the two
figures, we see that default probabilities appear to respond a bit earlier than analyst revenue
forecasts, and they seem to recover somewhat from their peaks by the end of April. That
said, these differences could simply be due to the fact that analyst forecasts are released with
some delay.


4    Conclusion
We characterize the supply-side disruptions associated with Covid-19 exploiting differences in
the ability of workers across industries to work remotely. Our results uncover economically
sizeable differences in economic outcomes for both workers and firms depending on the
ability to work remotely. Sectors in which a higher fraction of the workforce is not able to
work remotely experienced significantly greater declines in employment; significantly more
reductions in expected revenue growth; worse stock market performance; and higher expected
likelihood of default. Lower-paid workers, especially female workers with young children,
were significantly more affected by these disruptions.


References
Alon, T. M., M. Doepke, J. Olmstead-Rumsey, and M. Tertilt (2020, April). The impact of
  covid-19 on gender equality. Working Paper 26947, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, S. J. Davis, and S. J. Terry (2020, April). Covid-induced economic
  uncertainty. Working Paper 26983, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Baker, S. R., R. A. Farrokhnia, S. Meyer, M. Pagel, and C. Yannelis (2020, May). Income,
  liquidity, and the consumption response to the 2020 economic stimulus payments. Working
  Paper 27097, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Barrero, J. M., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2020, May). Covid-19 is also a reallocation shock.
  Working Paper 27137, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bartik, A. W., M. Bertrand, Z. B. Cullen, E. L. Glaeser, M. Luca, and C. T. Stanton (2020,
  April). How are small businesses adjusting to covid-19? early evidence from a survey.
 Working Paper 26989, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                              22
Bonadio, B., Z. Huo, A. A. Levchenko, and N. Pandalai-Nayar (2020, May). Global supply
  chains in the pandemic. Working Paper 27224, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Borjas, G. J. and H. Cassidy (2020, May). The adverse effect of the covid-19 labor market
  shock on immigrant employment. Working Paper 27243, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Cajner, T., L. D. Crane, R. A. Decker, J. Grigsby, A. Hamins-Puertolas, E. Hurst, C. Kurz,
  and A. Yildirmaz (2020, May). The u.s. labor market during the beginning of the pandemic
  recession. Working Paper 27159, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Campello, M., G. Kankanhalli, and P. Muthukrishnan (2020, May). Corporate hiring under
  covid-19: Labor market concentration, downskilling, and income inequality. Working Paper
  27208, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Cochrane, J. (2009). Asset Pricing: Revised Edition. Princeton University Press.

Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2020a, May). The cost of the covid-19 crisis:
  Lockdowns, macroeconomic expectations, and consumer spending. Working Paper 27141,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2020b, April). Labor markets during the
  covid-19 crisis: A preliminary view. Working Paper 27017, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.

Corrado, C., C. Hulten, and D. Sichel (2009). Intangible capital and u.s. economic growth.
 Review of Income and Wealth 55 (3), 661–685.

Ding, W., R. Levine, C. Lin, and W. Xie (2020, April). Corporate immunity to the covid-19
  pandemic. Working Paper 27055, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Dingel, J. I. and B. Neiman (2020, April). How many jobs can be done at home? Working
  Paper 26948, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Duan, J.-C., J. Sun, and T. Wang (2012). Multiperiod corporate default predictiona forward
 intensity approach. Journal of Econometrics 170 (1), 191 – 209.

Eisfeldt, A. L. and D. Papanikolaou (2013). Organization capital and the cross-section of
  expected returns. The Journal of Finance 68 (4), 1365–1406.

Fairlie, R. W., K. Couch, and H. Xu (2020, May). The impacts of covid-19 on minority
  unemployment: First evidence from april 2020 cps microdata. Working Paper 27246,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                           23
Fama, E. F. and J. D. MacBeth (1973). Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests.
  Journal of Political Economy 81 (3), 607–636.

Farboodi, M., G. Jarosch, and R. Shimer (2020). Internal and external effects of social
  distancing in a pandemic. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Gallagher, E. A., L. D. Schmidt, A. Timmermann, and R. Wermers (2020). Investor
 information acquisition and money market fund risk rebalancing during the 2011–2012
 eurozone crisis. The Review of Financial Studies 33 (4), 1445–1483.

Hassan, T. A., S. Hollander, L. van Lent, and A. Tahoun (2020, April). Firm-level exposure
  to epidemic diseases: Covid-19, sars, and h1n1. Working Paper 26971, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Landier, A. and D. Thesmar (2020, May). Earnings expectations in the covid crisis. Working
  Paper 27160, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mateyka, P. J., M. A. Rapino, and L. C. Landivar (2012, October). Home-based workers in
 the united states: 2010. Working paper, United States Census Bureau.

Mongey, S., L. Pilossoph, and A. Weinberg (2020). Which workers bear the burden of social
 distancing policies? Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

White, H. (1980). A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct
 test for heteroskedasticity. Econometrica 48 (4), 817–838.




                                           24
Figures and Tables

         Figure 1: Distribution of Covid-19 Work Exposure Measure across Industries


                             Non−Critical Industries                           Critical Industries


                    4




                    3
          Density




                    2




                    1




                    0
                        .2   .4        .6        .8     1      .2         .4          .6             .8   1

                                                 Covid−19 Work Exposure



The figure plots the distribution of the Covid-19 work exposure measure across critical (right
panel) and non-critical (left panel) industries.




                                                         25
                                                              Figure 2: Changes in Worker Foot Traffic: Critical and Non-Critical Industries

                                                                                            A. Weekly Worker Foot Traffic for                                                                                                                                                       B. Differences in Weekly Worker Foot Traffic
                                                                                            Critical and Non-Critical Industries                                                                                                                                                              (Critical vs Non-Critical)
                                                                           20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           50




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Difference in average scaled worker foot traffic (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Estimate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    95% CI
       Average scaled worker foot traffic (%)




                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           40




                                                       −20                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20
                                                       −40



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                       −60

                                                                                                                    Non−Critical
                                                                                                                    Critical                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                       −80
                                                                                            Jan06
                                                                                                    Jan13
                                                                                                             Jan20
                                                                                                                       Jan27
                                                                                                                                Feb03
                                                                                                                                         Feb10
                                                                                                                                                     Feb17
                                                                                                                                                               Feb24
                                                                                                                                                                        Mar02
                                                                                                                                                                                Mar09
                                                                                                                                                                                         Mar16
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Mar23
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Mar30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Apr06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Apr13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Apr20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Apr27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            May04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    May11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            May18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jan20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jan27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Feb03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Feb10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Feb17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Feb24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mar02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mar09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mar16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Mar23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Mar30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Apr06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Apr13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Apr20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Apr27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        May04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                May11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        May18
                                                                                                                                                                                Date                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Date


                                                                      C. Slope on COVID-19 Work Exposure:                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D. Slope on COVID-19 Work Exposure:
                                                                            Critical Industry Subsample                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Non-Critical Industry Subsample
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Estimate
                                                                                        250
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        95% CI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Slope on Covid−19 remote exposure (%)




                                                                                                                         Estimate
                                                                                                                         95% CI
                                                Slope on Covid−19 remote exposure (%)




                                                                                        200                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 100




                                                                                        150

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0


                                                                                        100



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −100
                                                                                            50




                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           −200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jan27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb17
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Feb24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar09
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mar30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Apr06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Apr13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Apr20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Apr27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    May04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    May11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    May18
                                                                                                    Jan06
                                                                                                            Jan13
                                                                                                                     Jan20
                                                                                                                             Jan27
                                                                                                                                     Feb03
                                                                                                                                             Feb10
                                                                                                                                                       Feb17
                                                                                                                                                                Feb24
                                                                                                                                                                        Mar02
                                                                                                                                                                                Mar09
                                                                                                                                                                                        Mar16
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mar23
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Mar30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Apr06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Apr13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Apr20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Apr27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    May04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            May11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    May18




                                                                                                                                                                                Date                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Date



The figure documents the differential decline in average worker foot traffic between critical
and non-critical industries—given our classificationin Appendix Table A.1. Panel A plots the              
                                                         Total Worker Foot Traffic in week t in Industry I
average change in weekly worker foot traffic—log Pre-period      Average Worker Foot Traffic of Industry I
                                                                                                             .
Panel B plots the estimated βt coefficients from equation (2) in the main document, which
capture the differences in weekly foot traffic (relative to pre-period averages) between critical
and non-critical industries. Panels C and D report δt coefficients from cross-sectional
regressions of industry-level changes in worker foot traffic on our Covid-19 Work Exposure
(equation (3)) measure for critical and non-critical industries, respectively. All regressions are
weighted by total NAICS4 employment, and pre-period averages are computed from January
6-February 16 of 2020. Dates on the horizontal axis correspond with the end of each calendar
week.
                                                26
                                                                Figure 3: Employment Growth and Covid-19 work exposure


                                                       0                               524                519           521                  492
                                                                                              517                   334
                                                                                                                    522                                      445486


       Change in employment (%), April−−March 2020
                                                                   518                              511                                         322 622 533 452
                                                                                                                                                              562
                                                                                                                325   211                                  623
                                                                                                                            515                   444        447
                                                                                               425                   531    423                335311
                                                                                                                                              454443    484
                                                                                                                                                          493
                                                                                                                             424
                                                                                                                            324             333 321 237332
                                                                                                                     813
                                                                                                                                                 446 326
                                                                                                                                                       488
                                                                                                                                                      331       483
                                                                                                    213
                                                                                                                                                     236
                                                                                                                           339                   327 238
                                                                                                                                            621 624
                                                                                                                                          337            811
                                                                                                                                            561           441
                                                                                                                                          313
                                                                                                                                        323314
                                                     −20                                                                                                   532

                                                                                                                              336
                                                                                                                                                 712
                                                                                                                                               481


                                                                                                                                                           453
                                                                                                                                                         451
                                                                                                                                                             485

                                                     −40                                                                              315              721
                                                                                                                                               711
                                                                                                                                             442
                                                                                                                                                               722
                                                                                                                                512


                                                                                                                                                       812


                                                                                                                                                             448
                                                     −60                                                                                                      713

                                                           .2              .4            .6                                .8                                   1
                                                                                   COVID−19 Work Exposure



                                                      20
       Change in employment (%), Apr’19−−Apr’20




                                                                                                          519
                                                                                                                                             492
                                                                                                                     211
                                                                   518                 524                          334                                         562
                                                       0                                          511               522
                                                                                                                        521                       444 622 533  445486
                                                                                                                                                              452
                                                                                              517               325 531                         322          623
                                                                                                                                                            493
                                                                                                                                423               311          447
                                                                                                425                             515            335       237
                                                                                                                                                          484
                                                                                                                                 424               321326
                                                                                                                                                 443
                                                                                                                     813        324           454446
                                                                                                                                            333          488332
                                                                                                                                                         236      483
                                                                                                                                               621 624   238
                                                                                                                                                     327331
                                                                                                                           339                               811
                                                                                                                                             337              441
                                                                                                                                               561
                                                     −20                                                                                323                    532
                                                                                                    213                                   313
                                                                                                                                           314
                                                                                                                              336             712
                                                                                                                                            481



                                                                                                                                                           453
                                                                                                                                                         451 485
                                                     −40                                                                                               721
                                                                                                                                      315
                                                                                                                                512            711
                                                                                                                                             442               722

                                                                                                                                                       812

                                                                                                                                                              713
                                                     −60                                                                                                     448

                                                           .2              .4            .6                                .8                                   1
                                                                                   COVID−19 Work Exposure



Figure plots the correlation between employment growth and Covid-19 work exposure at
the 3-digit NAICS level. Top panel plots month-to-month changes (April vs March 2020)
while the bottom plots year-on-year changes (April 2020 to April 2019). The points in red
correspond to the critical industries listed in Appendix Table A.1.


                                                                                             27
 Figure 4: Real activity of non-critical industries and Covid-19 work exposure by major sector

                                                A. BLS employment growth (yoy %)                                                                                          B. Stock returns (%)
                                                                        Mining                                                                             −10
                                                                                                                                                                 IT
                                                0
   Change in employment (%), Apr’19−−Apr’20




                                                                          Wholesale
                                                         IT                Real Estate                                                                     −20
                                                                                          Construction
                                                                              Manufacturing                                                                Bus Services             Manufacturing
                                                                                         Health
                                                                                       Transportation
                                                                                 Support Services                                                                                               Support Services
                                              −20                                                                                                                                       Wholesale




                                                                                                                            Stock returns
                                                                             Other Services                                                                −30
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Health
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Hotels
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Other  Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Construction
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Retail
                                                                                                     Retail                                                −40                          Mining Education
                                              −40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Entertainment
                                                                                                          Hotels                                           −50

                                                                                               Entertainment
                                              −60                                                                                                          −60                                                     Transportation
                                                    .6             .7             .8           .9                  1                                             .5        .6      .7            .8          .9            1
                                                                        Covid−19 Work Exposure                                                                                  Covid−19 Work Exposure



                                                    C. 2020 Q2 revenue revisions (%)                                                                             D. 2020 Q3 revenue revisions (%)
                                                0                                                                                                          Bus Services                                        Retail
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Construction
                                                                                                                                                           −10

                                                                                                    Construction                                                 IT
                                              Bus Services                                                                                                                          Manufacturing
                                                                                                                                                                                      Wholesale
                                                  IT
   2020 Qtr 2 revenue revisions




                                                                                                                            2020 Qtr 3 revenue revisions
                                              −20
                                                                              Wholesale Other Services
                                                                                     Support  Services                                                                                                Support
                                                                            Manufacturing                                                                                                               Other Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Services
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Health
                                                                                                       Retail                                              −20
                                                                                                      Health
                                              −40                                Mining


                                                                                                          Hotels                                           −30                                                    Hotels
                                              −60
                                                                                                          Transportation

                                                                                                                                                                                        Mining                    Entertainment

                                                                                                                                                           −40
                                              −80                                                         Entertainment                                                                                            Transportation
                                                    .5        .6           .7             .8         .9                1                                         .5        .6      .7            .8          .9            1
                                                                        Covid−19 Work Exposure                                                                                  Covid−19 Work Exposure



                                                    E. 2020 Q4 revenue revisions (%)                                                                                  F. 2022 revenue revisions (%)
                                                0                                                                                                          Bus Services
                                                                                                                                                            −5 IT
                                                                                                          Retail
                                                                                                                                                                                    Manufacturing           Construction
                                              Bus Services                                                                                                                            Wholesale                Retail
                                                                                                    Construction
                                                  IT                                                                                                                                                    Other Services
   2020 Qtr 4 revenue revisions




                                                                                                                                                           −10                                                  Hotels
                                                                            Manufacturing
                                                                              Wholesale       Health
                                                                                                                            2022 revenue revisions




                                              −10
                                                                                        Other Services
                                                                                     Support Services                                                                                                          Entertainment
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Support Services
                                                                                                                                                           −15
                                                                                                          Hotels
                                              −20                                                         Entertainment
                                                                                                                                                           −20

                                                                                                           Transportation                                                                                          Transportation

                                              −30                                                                                                          −25

                                                                                 Mining                                                                                                 Mining
                                                    .5        .6           .7             .8         .9                1                                         .5        .6      .7            .8          .9            1
                                                                        Covid−19 Work Exposure                                                                                  Covid−19 Work Exposure


Panel A plots employment growth rates from April 2020 vs 2019 from the BLS against
exposure (aggregated across 3-digit industries using BLS total employment weights). Panels
B-F plot stock returns (panel A) and revisions in revenue forecasts (panels B-E) for non-critical
industries from mid-February to mid-May versus the Covid-19 work exposure measure. For
purposes of generating the graph, we average across 4-digit non-critical industries, weighting
by Compustat employment.                      28
                                                          Figure 5: Employment and Covid-19 work exposure: Worker Heterogeneity

                                                                     A. Income                                                                                                                                                                         B. Age
                                        15                                                                                                                                                                           10
Coefficient on COVID−19 Work Exposure




                                                                                                                                                                             Coefficient on COVID−19 Work Exposure
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8

                                        10


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6



                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2
                                        0
                                             Below 25%            25% to 50%                50% to 75%             Above 75%                                                                                               Under 30               30−39                   40−49               50 and over
                                                                            Income group                                                                                                                                                                  Age group

                                                                           Estimate           95% CI                                                                                                                                                   Estimate          95% CI



                                                     C. Gender and Education                                                                                                                                         D. Gender, Education, and Family Status
                                        15                                                                                                                                                                           15
Coefficient on COVID−19 Work Exposure




                                                                                                                                                                             Coefficient on COVID−19 Work Exposure
                                        10                                                                                                                                                                           10




                                        5                                                                                                                                                                            5




                                        0                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                         Women                                              Men                                                                                                                       Women                                          Men

                                                                 College         No College              95% CI                                                                                                                       Has Kids Under 14           No Kids Under 14       95% CI



                                                          E. Income and Gender                                                                                                                                       F. Gender, Education, and Family Status

                                        15                                                                                                                                                                                      Women                                                  Men
                                                                                                                                                                        20                                                                                        20
Coefficient on COVID−19 Work Exposure




                                                                                                                                Coefficient on COVID−19 Work Exposure




                                                                                                                                                                        15                                                                                        15
                                        10


                                                                                                                                                                        10                                                                                        10




                                        5                                                                                                                                5                                                                                         5




                                                                                                                                                                         0                                                                                         0

                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      College             No College                       College                 No College
                                              Below 25%            25% to 50%               50% to 75%            Above 75%

                                                                    Women             Men          95% CI                                                                                                                       Has Kids Under 14         No Kids Under 14           95% CI




               Figures plot how the coefficients of a regression of non-employment status on our Covid-19
               work exposure measure vary with workers characteristics.


                                                                                                                               29
                                               Figure 6: Revenue forecast revisions and Covid-19 work exposure


                                                                                   2020 Q2 Revenue forecast revision (%)
                                                                                                                                                    4442
                                                                                                                                             4812
                                                                                                                                        4541          2379
                                                                                                                              3111 3114                      4539
                                           0                                5112                 5173                         3112
                                                                                                                                         6214              4451
                                                                                                                                                              4523
                                                                                                                               2211 3222        4461
                                                                                                                                              2213           6231
                                                                                                     4242                   3119            4441
                                                                                                                                             5611             3113
                                                                               5415                  5412 5413             3118            49216216
                                                                                                                                             5612 3324        3221
                                                                                    3254 4249                                      3344 3332          2362
                                                                                                                                                     6222
                                                                                                                                                        4842 3116
                                                                                                                                                           3261
                                                                                                                 5411                         3256      3366 3274
                                                                                                                                                      5616
        Revenue forecast revision (%)

                                                                                     3342                    3341            4239 5152       5617 4236
                                                                                                                                                  33232361    4532
                                                                                                                                                              4831
                                                                                                5174                             5614
                                                                                                                              4247                   6223     4413
                                                            5182                                               3345                     4412
                                                                                                                                      4431               8121
                                                                                                                                                      2371
                                                                                                                                                      4885
                                                                                                                                                      2383
                                                                                                                                                       3312   2212
                                                                                                                                                              3132
                                                                                                                                                              4869
                                                                                                                                                             3325
                                                                                                                                                              4861
                                                                                                                                                              4862
                                                                                                                                                        48415621
                                                                    5191             3343       5179       3121          8122     3259                2382
                                                                                                                                                    3359
                                                                                                                                                    3351      3273
                                                                                                                                                              3322
                                                                                                                                                              3272
                                                                                                                                                             8123
                                                                                                                                                              2123
                                                                                              5419      5416
                                                                                                     4246
                                                                                                     5417
                                                                                                       33644233
                                                                                                                  4234            3251                 3219 4832
                                                                                                                                                33134511    4237
                                                                                                                                                              4483
                                                                                                                                                              3321
                                                                                                    3255                5111
                                                                                                                       3333         4238 3334  3399 6221
                                                                                                                                              4231
                                                                                                                                          3371 5613    3311
                                                                                                                                                    3353     3329
                                                                                                                    5418                           3252       3211
                                                                                                                                                            5622
                                                                                                                             6215        3339 6211 33313279   5151
                                                    3365                                                                        3335                          2121
                                                                                                          33914251
                                                                                                                3336         6219        3231
                                                                                                                                       3352
                                                                                                                                          4421      3212
                                                                                                                                                 4482
                                                                                                                                                 4244     4522
                                                                                                                                                            4471
                                                                                                            2131                                          33693141
                                                                                                                                                         4481
                                                                                                                                              3362           3326
                                                                                                                             2111           3379           3262
                                                                                                                                                           4411
                                                                                                                                       6213 4422          7225
                                                                                                                                         31528129         7223
                                                                                                                                      4543
                                        −50                                                                                                   5619
                                                                                                                                               3363   3169 4853
                                                                                                                          3241                 3361
                                                                                                                                                        7139
                                                                                                                                                      6244

                                                                                                                                                   7211
                                                                                                                                                     2372
                                                                                                                                                                 5615

                                                                                                                                                                 5121
                                                                                                                                                         7132

                                                                                                                                                                 4811
                                                                                                                                                                 7131
                                                                                                                                                                 7113


                                        −100
                                                .2                          .4                         .6                        .8                          1
                                                                                             Covid−19 Work Exposure



                                                                           2020 calendar year revenue forecast revision (%)

                                         20


                                                                                                                                                      2379
        Revenue forecast revision (%)




                                                                                                                                        4541
                                                                                                                              3111 3114 6214       4442
                                          0                                5112    3254          51734242        5411               3222   44414461
                                                                                                                                            4812
                                                                                                                                      44314421
                                                                                                                                          4422  44824511
                                                                                                                                                      2373 4451
                                                                                                                                                         44814539
                                                                                                                                                          45224523
                                                                                                                                                              4483
                                                                                                                                                              3274
                                                                                                                            3119
                                                                                                                              3112
                                                                                                                           3118
                                                                                                                                            5612
                                                                                                                                             2213 6222  33666231
                                                                                                                                                              3113
                                                                                                                                                             3116
                                                                              5415       4249
                                                                                                             3341              22114543 4921  3256
                                                                                                                                               6216   2362
                                                                                                                                                     6223
                                                                                                                                                        4842
                                                                                                                                                      5616    3221
                                                                                                                                                             8123
                                                                                                                                                              4532
                                                                                                           5413                    3344 3332     33242371
                                                                                                                                            56113323       3261
                                                                                                                                                         8121 4413
                                                                                    3342             5412 3121    4234 5111 42395614
                                                                                                               3345              5152
                                                                                                                                  3259 3152  56174236  3312 3325
                                                                                                                                                      2382
                                                                                                                                                    3351      4869
                                                                                                                         8122           4412            48415621
                                                                                                                                                              3322
                                                                                                                                                              4831
                                                           5182    5191             3343        5174 5417 4233                  3335
                                                                                                                             6215        33713399 62214885   3329
                                                                                                                                                              3321
                                                                                                                                                              3132
                                                                                                                                                              3273
                                                                                                517932555416 4251            62193251               3359
                                                                                                                                                 4244
                                                                                                                                              4231 33533219   3272
                                                                                                                                                            4237
                                                                                                     42463391          3333         4238 3339         2383
                                                                                                                                                      3169
                                                                                                                                                         7132
                                                                                                                                                       3311   5151
                                                                                                                                                              4862
                                                                                                                                                              2212
                                                                                                                                                              4832
                                                                                                                                         3334   3313  2361 4411
                                                                                                       3364         5418                 3231 5613
                                                                                                                                      3352        3252       3262
                                                                                                                                                          33693279
                                                                                                                                                            5622
                                                                                                                                                              2123
                                                                                                                                                              3211
                                                3365                                          5419              3336                                        4471
                                                                                                                                                          33312121
                                                                                                                                              3362 3212 7225  3141
                                        −20                                                                                   4247       3379 3361         7223
                                                                                                                                                              4861
                                                                                                                                              3363
                                                                                                                                            56196211
                                                                                                                                                             3326
                                                                                                                                    6213
                                                                                                                                                         7139
                                                                                                                                                              4853
                                                                                                            2131          2111
                                                                                                                                           8129        6244
                                                                                                                                                      2372    7112
                                                                                                                                                              5121
                                                                                                                       3241
                                        −40                                                                                                        7211
                                                                                                                                                              5615




                                                                                                                                                                 4811
                                                                                                                                                                 7131
                                        −60
                                                                                                                                                                 7113

                                               .2                          .4                         .6                         .8                          1
                                                                                             Covid−19 Work Exposure



The top panel of this figure plots the revisions in revenue forecasts for Q2 2020 between
mid-February and mid-May 2020 versus the Covid-19 work exposure measure. The bottom
panel plots the corresponding revisions for the year 2020. The points in red correspond to
the critical industries listed in Appendix Table A.1.


                                                                                                        30
                 Figure 7: Revenue forecast revisions relative to February 2020 forecast as a function of Covid-19 work exposure

                                                                                         0




                      % Change in Revenue Forecast relative to January 2020 forecast
                                                                                       −1

                                                                                       −2

                                                                                       −3

                                                                                       −4

                                                                                       −5

                                                                                       −6

                                                                                       −7
31




                                                                                       −8

                                                                                       −9

                                                                                       −10

                                                                                       −11

                                                                                       −12
                                                                                             2020Q2 2020Q3 2020Q4   2021   2022


     The Figure plots the estimated coefficients from equation (8) in the main document. Specifically, we plot the relation between
     revisions in industry-level revenue forecasts (from mid-February to mid-May 2020) as a function of their Covid-19 work exposure in
     the sub-sample of non-critical industries. The plotted coefficients correspond to columns (2)-(4) and (6)-(7) of Panel B of Table 4.
     Coefficients are standardized to a unit standard deviation change in the Covid-19 work exposure measure. Shaded areas correspond
     to 95% confidence intervals.
                                                                                         Figure 8: Default Probabilities and Covid-19 work exposure

                                                                                                          3m                                                                                                                                                                                   6m
                                                    6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7139
Change in default probability (%), Feb−−May 2020




                                                                                                                                                                     Change in default probability (%), Feb−−May 2020
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6


                                                                                                                                                  7139
                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2111                        4512
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3222    4461                    4481
                                                                                                                        2111                                                                                                                                                                                             3231
                                                                                                                                                  4481                                                                                                                                                                                  5615
                                                    2                                                          3222       4461                                                                                                                                                                                                6233 4522
                                                                                                                                                         4512                                                                        2          5414
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2123
                                                                                                                                     3231                                                                                                                                                    5111                    4422       2379
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       56193323
                                                                                                                                               6233      5615
                                                                                                                                                         2123                                                                                                                                                                   488362314811
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2121
                                                             5414                        4249           5111                         4422   3323     4522                                                                                                                                                                 4482 4511
                                                                                                                                       5619      2379 2121
                                                                                                                                                4511                                                                                                                          5179
                                                                                                                                           4482  488362314811                                                                                                                            2131                             3313
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8121     4831
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5151
                                                                                                5179
                                                                                                        4233
                                                                                                         2131                              33138121      5151
                                                                                                                                                         4831                                                                                                            4249           4233       3333               8129      2373
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7132 3273
                                                         3365              54153254                     3364
                                                                                                          3341     3333
                                                                                                                 5418    4247
                                                                                                                            5614  31528129
                                                                                                                                         3399   6221
                                                                                                                                             4236   7132
                                                                                                                                                 2373
                                                                                                                                                 3169
                                                                                                                                                 2362    3273
                                                                                                                                                      3261
                                                                                                                                                        3262
                                                                                                                                                         5121
                                                                                                                                                      4237
                                                                                                                                                      7225
                                                                                                                                                         7224
                                                                                                                                                         8121
                                                                                                                                                       4471
                                                                                                                                                         7131                                                                             3365                  54153254                3364     5418    4247
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5614  31523256
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3399
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3361
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6221
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            6211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            42363169
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2362   3262
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4237
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3261
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7225
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7224
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7131
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        8121
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5121
                                                    0           5182     5112
                                                                          3364  3342
                                                                                3343          5174
                                                                                             5419  4246
                                                                                                   5412
                                                                                                  3255
                                                                                                   5417 5413
                                                                                                     5416    3336
                                                                                                            4241
                                                                                                               4234
                                                                                                              5411
                                                                                                            3345
                                                                                                          51733364
                                                                                                           4251    3241 5111
                                                                                                                        6219
                                                                                                                     8122
                                                                                                                    4239
                                                                                                                      4239    4543
                                                                                                                               4238
                                                                                                                             3251
                                                                                                                              3344
                                                                                                                           3335
                                                                                                                             3259
                                                                                                                            5152
                                                                                                                          2211      3379
                                                                                                                                 3222
                                                                                                                                 3352
                                                                                                                              4239 4412
                                                                                                                                    3371
                                                                                                                                     4421
                                                                                                                                    3372
                                                                                                                                    3339
                                                                                                                                  6116
                                                                                                                               6213      3363
                                                                                                                                         3361
                                                                                                                                         3362
                                                                                                                                       3399
                                                                                                                                         3256
                                                                                                                                         4231
                                                                                                                                       5612
                                                                                                                                    3332
                                                                                                                                       5611
                                                                                                                                    33345617 6211
                                                                                                                                             3219 4841
                                                                                                                                               3399
                                                                                                                                              3252
                                                                                                                                                 5616
                                                                                                                                              7211
                                                                                                                                            56136222
                                                                                                                                                 2372
                                                                                                                                               3359
                                                                                                                                               3212
                                                                                                                                            3324
                                                                                                                                             44614881
                                                                                                                                                 2382
                                                                                                                                                 4889
                                                                                                                                               3351
                                                                                                                                               33533366
                                                                                                                                                 2383
                                                                                                                                              4243      3329
                                                                                                                                                         3141
                                                                                                                                                  33113321
                                                                                                                                                    7139
                                                                                                                                                    3331
                                                                                                                                                 2361
                                                                                                                                                 2371   3325
                                                                                                                                                       4411
                                                                                                                                                     33697113
                                                                                                                                                         4532
                                                                                                                                                         3322
                                                                                                                                                      7223
                                                                                                                                                         3222
                                                                                                                                                         3272
                                                                                                                                                      3331
                                                                                                                                                         3219
                                                                                                                                                         3262
                                                                                                                                                         3221
                                                                                                                                                        3326
                                                                                                                                                         2212
                                                                                                                                                         3279
                                                                                                                                                         4832
                                                                                                                                                         3274
                                                                                                                                                      8111
                                                                                                                                                         4862
                                                                                                                                                         3132
                                                                                                                                                  62447111
                                                                                                                                                62233327 3329
                                                                                                                                                         4869
                                                                                                                                                         3211
                                                                                                                                                        8123
                                                                                                                                                         4483
                                                                                                                                                         7112
                                                                                                                                                         7114                                                                                                                      4246
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5416 3341
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5413 3336
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5411 3241 6219
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5111  4543
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4238 3379
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3222   3362
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3399 32192361
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2371
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3399
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3252
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4471
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3331
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   7139 3141
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3329
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3325
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4411
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3369
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3364 3342
                                                                                              5173 42423391
                                                                                                        3121             3112
                                                                                                                        6215
                                                                                                                       3119
                                                                                                                      3118
                                                                                                                         3111       6214
                                                                                                                                     4921
                                                                                                                                   4541 2213
                                                                                                                                      44416216    3312
                                                                                                                                                  4842
                                                                                                                                                   4859
                                                                                                                                                 4885
                                                                                                                                              3115       4853
                                                                                                                                                         4523
                                                                                                                                                         4245
                                                                                                                                                       5622
                                                                                                                                                        3116
                                                                                                                                                         4413
                                                                                                                                                       5621
                                                                                                                                                         3113                                                                                                                      5412   5173 4234              3352        7211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5613  3311
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 48417223
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3331
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3322
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3222
                                                                    5191
                                                                                                                               3114    4 8124244      4451
                                                                                                                                                       4523
                                                                                                                                                        4539
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0               5182     5112   3343 54195174
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5173 4242
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3255
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   54173391 3345
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3364
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4251
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3121         8122
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4239
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      423922114239
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3251
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3335
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3259
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5152
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        6215
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3119
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3118
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3111  6213
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3114 3371
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3372
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4421
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3339
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4412
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6116
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3334
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6214
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4541 4231
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5612
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3332
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       56113324
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5617
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3363
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2213
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4441
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6216  6222
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            44612372
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4881
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3359
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6223
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4889
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2382
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3351
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4243 3366
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2383
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              33534859
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4842
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                4885
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3115
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3219
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3326
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3221
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4862
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3279
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4853
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4832
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4532
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3262
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3321
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3274
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3132
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 62447111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3327
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3312   4245
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3329
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4869
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       8123
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4483
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4523
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5622
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       3116
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        4413
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5621
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        7114
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4451
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4523
                                                                                                                                                         4861                                                                                                                               4241                       48124244 4539
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5191                                                                           3272
                                                                                                                                  4431                                                                                                                                                                                                  4861




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4431
                                                   −2                                                                                                                                                                               −2
                                                        .2                  .4                     .6                      .8                        1                                                                                   .2                      .4                     .6                      .8                         1
                                                                                           Covid−19 Work Exposure                                                                                                                                                               Covid−19 Work Exposure


                                                                                                         12m                                                                                                                                                                                 24m
                                                   10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7139
Change in default probability (%), Feb−−May 2020




                                                                                                                                                                                 Change in default probability (%), Feb−−May 2020
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4512
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4522
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5414                                                                                    4811
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5                                                                         4461
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2111                  6233  5615
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5111                                   4883
                                                                                                                                                  7139                                                                                                                                                3222                            4481
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3231           4831
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2379 2123
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5619
                                                                                                                                                         4512
                                                    5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4422 4482
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3323         3273
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2131                            3313 2373 6231
                                                                                                                        2111
                                                                                                                         4461
                                                                                                                                     3231      45225615                                                                                                                                                                    8129         7132 5151
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7131
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7224
                                                                                                               3222                                                                                                                                                                           3364                    32223361       31694237
                                                             5414                                                                        6233 4481                                                                                                                                            4233            4247
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3333 56143152         3399  6221 72257113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4238 3379    3219
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 62115616
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  7211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4881 7223
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         33693141
                                                                                                        5111                               2379    4811                                                                                                         5415                       5416
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5412 5413    5418
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4234
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5411 3241       4543
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3352
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3372    42362371
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4889
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6223
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2361  4411
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3331
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        71393325
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3329
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             8121
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3326
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3219
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2121
                                                                                                                                  5619
                                                                                                                                44223323   4883    2123                                                                                                                                  4242  3341          5111
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6219
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4239  3371
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       6116 3399
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3339   5613
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3362
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4231
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3256 3252
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2362
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6222
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 44612372
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2382
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3399     3262
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3222
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3279
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3331
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4832
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3221
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4853
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3322
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2212
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3274
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5182
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5179
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5419
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5173 5417
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4246
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        32553391   3364
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 3345     8122  3335
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             6215  3344
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6213
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  3259
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5152     4421
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4921
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3334
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5617
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3332
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         6214   3324
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2213
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5611
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5612
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4441
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3312
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2383
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3351
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3353
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3359
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4243 3366
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4859
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6244
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5622
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3132
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4869
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3116
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7111
                                                                                                                                     4482 6231                                                                                       0                         3364 3254
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5112   3342           5174         4251
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3121
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5173        4239
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            3119
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           3118
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3111            6216  8121
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4842
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        3327
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4885    3211
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4245
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            8123
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             7112
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4413
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5621
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4483
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3329
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4523
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3113
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             3262
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          8111
                                                                                                                                                   4831                                                                                       3365                   3343                         3336   4239           4541
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3311  3329
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             5121
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4471
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4523
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4862
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3261
                                                                                                                                     3313 2373     2121                                                                                                  5191                                                     3251            311548414451
                                                                                         5179
                                                                                                    2131
                                                                                                                                 8129 8121    7132 5151
                                                                                                                                                   3273                                                                                                                                                                4412 4244
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3114            4511 71143321
                                                                                                   4233
                                                                                                   33645411 333362194247
                                                                                                                       5614  3152   3399   3169
                                                                                                                                          4511
                                                                                                                                          6221
                                                                                                                                       6211     4237
                                                                                                                                                   7224
                                                                                                                                                   7131
                                                                                                                                                7225
                                                                                                                                                  3262
                                                         3365              54153254             5416
                                                                                              4246   3341
                                                                                                   5413     5418
                                                                                                              3241          3222
                                                                                                                          4238
                                                                                                                         4543  33793361
                                                                                                                                   3362
                                                                                                                                  3399 4236
                                                                                                                                       32192362
                                                                                                                                           5616
                                                                                                                                              7139
                                                                                                                                           2371    8121
                                                                                                                                                   3141
                                                                                                                                                   7113
                                                                                                                                                  3325
                                                                                                                                                  3329
                                                                                                                                                 4411
                                                                                                                                               3369
                                                                                                                                              3331
                                                                                                                                                7223                                                                                                                                                                         3363
                                                                5182                     5174 5412   5173 4234     5111     3352
                                                                                                                         4239  3372
                                                                                                                               33713256
                                                                                                                                4421
                                                                                                                               3339     7211
                                                                                                                                           2361
                                                                                                                                        3252
                                                                                                                                      5613
                                                                                                                                         3399
                                                                                                                                           4881
                                                                                                                                          6222
                                                                                                                                          6223
                                                                                                                                       4461
                                                                                                                                         3212
                                                                                                                                           2372
                                                                                                                                           4889 3261
                                                                                                                                                   3222
                                                                                                                                                   5121
                                                                                                                                                   3322
                                                                                                                                                   3219
                                                                                                                                                3331
                                                                                                                                                  3326
                                                                                                                                                   3221
                                                                                                                                                   3279
                                                                                                                                                  3329
                                                                                                                                                 4471
                                                                                                                                                   2212
                                                                                                                                                   4853                                                                                                                                                                                    4539
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4532
                                                    0                     3364 3342
                                                                         5112   3343 54195173 4242
                                                                                              5417
                                                                                             3255 3391  3336
                                                                                                         3364 4239
                                                                                                       3345
                                                                                                      4251
                                                                                                   3121        8122
                                                                                                                 4239 3335
                                                                                                                     2211
                                                                                                                   6215
                                                                                                                  3119
                                                                                                                 3118
                                                                                                                    3111 3344
                                                                                                                        3259
                                                                                                                       5152
                                                                                                                    31123251 6116
                                                                                                                          6213
                                                                                                                          3114 3332
                                                                                                                              4412
                                                                                                                              4541 4231
                                                                                                                                4921
                                                                                                                                  5612
                                                                                                                                  5611
                                                                                                                               3334
                                                                                                                               62145617
                                                                                                                                   2213
                                                                                                                                 4441
                                                                                                                                    6216 3359
                                                                                                                                      3324 2382
                                                                                                                                         3351
                                                                                                                                        4243
                                                                                                                                        3115 3366
                                                                                                                                           2383
                                                                                                                                            3311
                                                                                                                                            3312
                                                                                                                                         33534859
                                                                                                                                              3327
                                                                                                                                            4842
                                                                                                                                            4841
                                                                                                                                           4885    4832
                                                                                                                                                   3274
                                                                                                                                                   3132
                                                                                                                                            62447111
                                                                                                                                                 5622
                                                                                                                                                   4869
                                                                                                                                                8111
                                                                                                                                                   4245
                                                                                                                                                   3262
                                                                                                                                                   3211
                                                                                                                                                   3329
                                                                                                                                                  8123
                                                                                                                                                   7112
                                                                                                                                                   4483
                                                                                                                                                   4862
                                                                                                                                                   4523
                                                                                                                                                  3116
                                                                                                                                                   4413
                                                                                                                                                 5621
                                                                                                                                                   3113
                                                                                                                                                   3321
                                                                                                                                                4451
                                                                                                                                                 4523
                                                                                                                                                   7114
                                                                                                                                                   4532                                                                                                                                                                     4812
                                                                    5191                                                              4244 4539
                                                                                                                                   3363
                                                                                                                                  4812
                                                                                                       4241
                                                                                    4249                                                           4861
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4241                                         4861
                                                                                                                                                   3272                                                                                                                        4249
                                                                                                                                  4431
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    −5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3272
                                                   −5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  4431
                                                        .2                  .4                     .6                      .8                        1                                                                                   .2                       .4                    .6                      .8                         1
                                                                                           Covid−19 Work Exposure                                                                                                                                                                Covid−19 Work Exposure




                                             Panels of this figure plot changes in 3, 6, 12, and 24 month default probabilities for Q2 2020
                                             between mid-February and mid-May 2020, respectively, versus the Covid-19 work exposure
                                             measure. The points in red correspond to the critical industries listed in Appendix Table A.1.




                                                                                                                                                                32
                                                           Figure 9: Stock Price change and Covid-19 work exposure


                                                                                                                                                                        7114
                                                                                                                                                                      4451
                                              20
                                                                                                                                        6219          4812
    Stock Price Performance, Feb−−May 2020
                                                                                                                                                   4541               4539


                                                                                                                                                3114
                                                                                            3254                                                             31154842 4523
                                                                                                                                         3111          6214             4413
                                               0                                5112              4249
                                                                                                                                                                       3262
                                                                                                                                                     4441 6211 4841 4483
                                                                         5191                3342                                    3119
                                                                                                                                       3112
                                                                                                                                      6215
                                                                                                                                      4239
                                                                  5182                                   5179           3345              5614          6216 4885 4859
                                                                                                                                            3344       3256           4471
                                                                                                              4242                              4431  5617 3212 4237    4532
                                                                                                                                                                        3221
                                                                                             3343            3255
                                                                                                          517354173391 3336                       4412 3361
                                                                                                                                    3118      3222 5611 4442  3353 32613116
                                                                                     5415                            3121                  5152
                                                                                                                                           3251 3352
                                                                                                                                           3259          4461
                                                                                                                                                       2213             3113
                                             −20                                                                      3341                          4921
                                                                                                                                                   3332    33246222 7225
                                                                                                                        4251            2211           33624243 3327
                                                                                                                                                      5612
                                                                                                                                                   3339
                                                                                                                                                                      5621
                                                                                                                                                                        3322
                                                                                                                                                                        4853
                                                                                                                                                                 3311  8123
                                                                                                                                                                       3329
                                                                                                       5419   5412         4234 3333
                                                                                                                                3241
                                                                                                                                 5111    3335      3334
                                                                                                                                                       4231
                                                                                                                                                       3363
                                                                                                                                                        3399 23833331
                                                                                                                                                           42366223
                                                                                                                                                                       3325
                                                                                                                                                                        5151
                                                                                                                                                                        4861
                                                                                                                                                                        3211
                                                    3365                                                         5416 42415411    8122       4238 3371
                                                                                                                                                                2382
                                                                                                                                                              3359
                                                                                                                                                                2362
                                                                                                                                                                  3366
                                                                                                                                                                5616
                                                                                                                                                                2361
                                                                                                                                                                       6231
                                                                                                                                                                      4411
                                                                                                                                                                    33694245
                                                                                                                                                                        3321
                                                                                                                                                                        7111
                                                                                                                                                          5613          4869
                                                                                                                                                                        4862
                                                                                                                                       4247                 3252 3219
                                                                                                                                                                 3312
                                                                                                                                                              3351
                                                                                                                                                              4511 8121
                                                                                                                    5413                            4421       62214481 3132
                                                                                                                                                                        3279
                                                                                                                                                                      5622
                                                                                                         5174       4233     5418                                  71392212
                                                                                                                                                                4881
                                                                                                                                                                        7112
                                                                                                                                                                        5121
                                                                                                                                                                        4832
                                                                                                                                                           3323      8111
                                                                                                                                                                        2123
                                             −40                                                                                   2111          6116     4244  2371    3274
                                                                                                                                                 3152        7211
                                                                                                                3364                               3379          62447223
                                                                                                              4246                                 3231   4482 4889     3141
                                                                                                                                              6213                      7113
                                                                                                                                                                        5615
                                                                                                                                             4543 3372       6233      3326
                                                                                                                                                                3169
                                                                                                                                                                   7132 3273
                                                                                                                                                    44223313 2373
                                                                                                                                                                2379    2121
                                                                                                                     2131                             5619              3272
                                                                                                                                                                        7131
                                                                                                                                                               2372
                                             −60                                                                                                        8129       45227224
                                                                                                                                                                       4512
                                                                                                                                                                       4811
                                                                                                                                                                       4831
                                                                                                                                                               4883
                                                           5414

                                             −80
                                                   .2                           .4                           .6                          .8                           1
                                                                                                    Covid−19 Work Exposure



The figure plots the share price performance of different industries between mid-February to
mid-May 2020 versus the Covid-19 work exposure measure. The points in red correspond to
the critical industries listed in Appendix Table A.1.




                                                                                                       33
                                                                               Figure 10: COVID-19 factor vs market


         1.2                                                                                                                                                                   Violent protests
                                                                CDC expects community                                                                                          complicate
                                                                spread of coronavirus,                                                                                         reopening plans
                                                                warns of severe disruptions                  Murray model predicts
         1.1                                                                                                 earlier peaks in US
                                                                                                                                                                Positive initial
                                                                                                                                                                test results for
                                                                                   WHO Declares                                                                 Moderna vaccine
           1                                                                       COVID-19                             Negotiations
                                                                                   a Pandemic                           stall over new
                                                                                                                        aid package      States prepare
                                                                                                                                         to ease lockdown
         0.9
                                                                                                  Fed announces
                                                                                                  unlimited                                                              Positive
                 First confirmed
                                                                                                  bond purchases                                                         vaccine
                 case outside China   Covid death toll
         0.8                          jumps in China
                                                              Cases                                                                                                      news,
                                                              spread outside                                                                    US jobless               lockdown
                                                              China                                                                             claims higher            loosen
                                                                                                                                                than expected
         0.7
                                                         States set up
                                                         curfew guidelines
34




         0.6
                                                              NYC Businesses
                                                              To keep half of
                                                              workforce at home
         0.5
                                                                                                                                                        Murray model predicts
                                                                                         Study finds death                                              higher death toll for US
                                                                                         rate in Wuhan lower
         0.4                                                                             than initial estimates




         0.3
           Jan                         Feb                                   Mar                                  Apr                              May                                  Jun              Jul
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2020
                                                                                              COVID19 Factor               Market Portfolio


     The figure shows the time-series of the estimated slope coefficients in equation (11) in blue. As noted by Fama and MacBeth (1973)
     the realizations of these slope coefficients have a portfolio interpretation, here labeled as the ‘Covid-19 return factor’. These implied
     portfolio returns are accumulated since beginning of the year. The red line represents cumulative returns to the market portfolio
     during this period. Events are dated as if they occurred at the beginning of the trading day on the date of their announcement.
          Figure 11: COVID-19 factor: portfolio composition (NAICS 2-digit Industry)



                                                               44−45: Retail Trade
                                           72: Accommodation and Food Services
   56: Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services
                                          48−49: Transportation and Warehousing
                                                                   23: Construction
                                           71: Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation
                                  81: Other Services (except Public Administration)
                                            62: Health Care and Social Assistance
                                                             31−33: Manufacturing
                                                              42: Wholesale Trade
                                                          61: Educational Services
                                 21: Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction
                                54: Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services
                                                                    51: Information


                                                                                       −100   −50   0     50
                                                                                Fama−Macbeth portfolio weight (%)



The figure the loadings of our ‘Covid-19 return factor’ on broad industry sectors (defined at
the 2-digit NAICS level). See Appendix Table A.2 for portfolio weights at a more detailed
industry classification.




                                                            35
                                          Figure 12: Revenue forecast revisions and Covid-19 work exposure over time


                                                                    A. 2020 calendar quarter forecast revisions (%)
                                      0
    Coefficient on Covid Exposure




                                    −20




                                    −40



                                                  2020Q2
                                                  2020Q3
                                    −60           2020Q4
                                          Feb21



                                                  Feb28



                                                           Mar06



                                                                   Mar13



                                                                              Mar20



                                                                                         Mar27



                                                                                                      Apr03



                                                                                                              Apr10



                                                                                                                      Apr17



                                                                                                                              Apr24



                                                                                                                                      May01



                                                                                                                                              May08



                                                                                                                                                      May15
                                                                                      Consensus forecast date



                                                                           B. Longer horizon forecast revisions (%)
                                      0
    Coefficient on Covid Exposure




                                    −10




                                    −20


                                                  2020
                                                  2021
                                                  2022
                                    −30
                                          Feb21



                                                  Feb28



                                                           Mar06



                                                                   Mar13



                                                                              Mar20



                                                                                         Mar27



                                                                                                      Apr03



                                                                                                              Apr10



                                                                                                                      Apr17



                                                                                                                              Apr24



                                                                                                                                      May01



                                                                                                                                              May08



                                                                                                                                                      May15




                                                                                      Consensus forecast date



Figure plots the Fama-McBeth slope coefficients of a regression of forecast revisions on the
(non-critical) industry’s Covid-19 work exposure at a weekly frequency. The top panel of
this figure plots the slope coefficient for revisions in revenue forecasts for Q2–Q4 2020. The
bottom panel plots the corresponding revisions for the years 2020 through 2020.


                                                                                                 36
                                                        Figure 13: Default Probabilities and Covid-19 work exposure over time




                                                    4
        Coefficient on Covid−19 work exposure (%)


                                                    3




                                                    2




                                                    1




                                                    0


                                                    01jan2020          01feb2020         01mar2020        01apr2020    01may2020

                                                                                   12M       3M      6M        2Y




Figure plots the Fama-McBeth slope coefficients of a regression of default probabilities on
the (non-critical) industry’s Covid-19 work exposure at a daily frequency. The dependent
variable is expressed in percentage points so that the slope coefficient can be interpreted as
the increase, in basis points, of the probability of default associated with a 1 percentage point
increase in exposure. Regressions are weighted by employment. Different colors correspond
to different forecast horizons.




                                                                                            37
             Table 1: Firm summary statistics by quartiles of Covid-19 work exposure

                                          A. All industries          B. Firms in non-critical industries
 Firm characteristic (median)       Covid work exposure bin:            Covid work exposure bin:
                                  Lowest   2     3    Highest        Lowest   2     3      Highest
                                    (1)      (2)    (3)       (4)      (5)     (6)    (7)       (8)
 Covid-19 work exposure            0.45     0.64   0.82       0.98    0.32    0.67   0.86       0.97
 Sales ($ M)                        41      471    1308       1479    414      769   1323       1360
 Employment (thousands)            0.18     1.14   2.67       4.79     1.5      1     4.3       4.87
 Market capitalization ($ M)        774     933    2059       1594    1914    1129   1599       1403
 Tobin’s Q                          2.7     1.76   1.44       1.37    2.28    1.52   1.56       1.34
 Book Debt to Book Assets (%)      40.2     52.7    57        61.1    53.3    52.9   55.5       62.3
 R&D / Sales(%)                    31.4      8.6    2.1       0.1     15.5     7.4    2.5       0.3
 SG&A / Sales                      60.9     32.5   19.7       15.5    49.4    23.5   20.6       16.3
 PPE to Assets                     12.2     25.2   52.9       62.1    16.4    32.5   36.1        58
 Gross Profitability to Assets     11.9     29.7   23.8       23.3    34.7    24.1   29.6       23.1
 Return on assets (ROA)             -19      7.8   10.6       11.2     6.1     9.3   10.8       11.4


Table reports median characteristics of firms in the Compustat database, grouped into
quartiles based on our industry-based measure of Covid-19 work exposure. The left panel (A)
summarizes these characteristics for all firms, including those in critical industries. The right
panel (B) repeats the analysis for the subsample of firms which we classify as non-critical.
The list of critical industries at the 4-digit NAICS level is in Appendix Table A.1. Gross
profitability is sales (Compustat: sale) minus costs of goods sold (Compustat: cogs); Tobin’s
Q is computed as the sum of the book value of assets (Compustat: at) plus the market value
of equity (Compustat: prcc f times csho) minus the book value of equity (Compustat: ceq)
minus deferred taxes (Compustat: txdb). PPE is Property Plant and Equipment (Compustat:
ppegt).




                                                   38
                  Table 2: Covid-19 Work Exposure and Employment Growth

                                 Weighted by Mar’20 employment           Equal weighted
   A. Month-on-month
   growth (%)                    All Industries   Non-Critical     All Industries   Non-Critical
                                       (1)            (2)                (3)            (4)
   Covid-19 Work Exposure           -61.9∗∗            -104.3∗∗∗      -34.7∗∗∗        -49.6∗∗∗
                                    (-2.39)             (-3.24)        (-3.30)         (-3.17)
   Number of observations              73                50              73              50
   R2                                0.151              0.325          0.079           0.139
                                 Weighted by Mar’19 employment           Equal weighted
   B. Year-on-year
   growth (%)                    All Industries   Non-Critical     All Industries   Non-Critical
                                       (5)            (6)                (7)            (8)
   Covid-19 Work Exposure           -64.2∗∗            -110.3∗∗∗      -36.0∗∗∗        -57.0∗∗∗
                                    (-2.37)             (-3.33)        (-3.28)         (-3.49)
   Number of observations              73                50              73              50
   R2                                0.149              0.333          0.076           0.166
                                     Month-on-month growth             Year-on-year growth
   C. Average, all
   industries                      Weighted        Unweighted        Weighted       Unweighted
                                     (9)              (10)            (11)             (12)
   Critical Industries              -6.02∗∗∗            -6.18∗∗∗      -4.91∗∗         -5.79∗∗∗
                                     (-2.95)             (-3.74)      (-2.54)          (-3.08)
   Non-Critical Industries         -22.75∗∗∗           -18.10∗∗∗     -22.60∗∗∗       -17.98∗∗∗
                                     (-4.88)             (-7.68)      (-4.64)          (-7.26)
   Diff: Non-Critical-Critical     -16.73∗∗∗           -11.92∗∗∗     -17.70∗∗∗       -12.19∗∗∗
                                     (-3.29)             (-4.14)      (-3.38)          (-3.92)
   Number of observations             73                  73            73              73

Panels A and B of table reports the coefficients estimates from equation (4) in the document
using employment-weighted and unweighted specifications (t-statistics in parantheses). Odd-
numbered columns repeat the analysis for the subsample of non-critical industries. The
dependent variable is expressed in percentage points and constructed using private sector
employment data from the BLS’ April 2020 employment report at the 3-digit NAICS level.
Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity (White, 1980). The list of critical industries
at the 4-digit NAICS level is in Appendix Table A.1. We classify a 3-digit NAICS industry
as critical if at least 50% of its employment is classified as critical based on our more
disaggregated measure. Panel C reports the average declines in the dependent variable for
critical and non-critical industries, respectively, as well as the difference between the two
averages. The cross-sectional standard deviation across BLS industries is 12.5%.




                                                  39
              Table 3: Covid-19 Work Exposure and Worker Employment Outcomes

   Probability (%) worker is not employed as of...              April 2020              February 2020
   (conditional on being employed as of March 2020)     (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)
                                                          ∗∗∗        ∗∗∗         ∗∗∗
   Critical industry                                  -9.2       -9.2        -8.1            -0.2
                                                      (-4.87)    (-5.32)     (-5.01)       (-0.63)
   Non-critical industry × Covid-19 work exposure     50.6∗∗∗    40.8∗∗∗     36.0∗∗∗         -0.9
                                                      (6.28)     (5.24)      (4.77)        (-0.59)
   Critical industry × Covid-19 work exposure         28.4∗∗∗    18.1∗∗        10.8          -4.1
                                                      (3.22)     (2.11)      (1.43)        (-1.56)
   Controls
   College Graduate Dummy                                        -6.3∗∗∗      -3.8∗∗∗        -0.4
                                                                 (-5.34)      (-3.27)      (-0.88)
   Female Dummy                                                   4.6∗∗∗       3.2∗∗        1.5∗∗∗
                                                                 (3.14)       (2.16)       (2.83)
   Kids under 14                                                   -2.3∗        -1.7         -0.1
                                                                 (-1.65)      (-1.30)      (-0.08)
   Female Dummy × Kids under 14                                   4.0∗∗         2.8          -0.4
                                                                 (2.24)       (1.58)       (-0.56)
   College Graduate Dummy × Kids under 14                           -0.1        0.6          -0.7
                                                                 (-0.09)      (0.45)       (-0.94)
   Age 30 to 39                                                    -2.5∗        -0.7         -0.5
                                                                 (-1.79)      (-0.56)      (-0.50)
   Age 40 to 49                                                  -3.4∗∗∗        -1.2         -0.5
                                                                 (-2.79)      (-0.90)      (-0.56)
   Age 50+                                                        -2.7∗∗        -0.2         -0.7
                                                                 (-2.23)      (-0.19)      (-0.82)
   2019 earnings in bottom quartile                                           12.5∗∗∗       1.8∗∗∗
                                                                              (6.88)       (3.53)
   2019 earnings in 2nd quartile                                               6.2∗∗∗         0.5
                                                                              (4.76)       (1.20)
   2019 earnings in 3rd quartile                                               2.0∗∗∗         0.1
                                                                              (2.87)       (0.49)
   Firm size: Under 10                                                           2.4          0.5
                                                                              (1.27)       (0.71)
   Firm size: 10 to 99                                                           1.0         -0.3
                                                                              (0.58)       (-0.63)
   Firm size: 100 to 999                                                        -0.8          0.1
                                                                              (-0.74)      (0.23)
   Constant                                           0.179*** 0.205***      0.121***      0.0135
                                                       (10.19)  (10.09)       (6.20)       (1.53)
   Number of observations                              9,660      9,273       9,273         6,193
   R2                                                  0.040      0.056       0.075         0.010

Table reports the coefficients estimates from equation (5) in the document. Standard errors
are double-clustered based on occupation and industry (t-statistics in parantheses). The
dependent variable is an indicator which equals one if an individual does not have a job in
April (columns 1-3) or February (column 4) 2020. To be included in the sample, workers
need to appear in the March 2020 CPS and March 2019 ASEC survey, and either the April
and/or February core CPS sample. The list of critical industries at the 4 digit NAICS level is
in Appendix Table A.1. We define critical Census industries as those for which at least 50%
of employment is associated with critical NAICS industries. The cross-sectional standard
deviation of the exposure measure for workers in our sample is 12.4%.
                                              40
            Table 4: Covid-19 Work Exposure, Stock Returns and Analyst Forecasts

                                    Stock                   Analyst Forecast Revisions (%)
 A. Regressions for              Returns (%)   2020Q2     2020Q3     2020Q4     2020       2021       2022
 Non-Critical Industries
                                     (1)         (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)
 Covid-19 Work Exposure            -38.9∗∗∗    -43.9∗∗∗   -17.1∗∗     -8.3∗    -15.1∗∗    -11.6∗∗∗   -8.5∗∗∗
                                    (-5.37)     (-4.32)   (-2.45)    (-1.78)   (-2.13)     (-3.35)   (-2.96)
 Observations                        141         126        127       127        127        127       92
 R2                                 0.295       0.229      0.099     0.053      0.077      0.151     0.134
 B. Averages, All Industries
 Critical industries                 -8.0∗∗     -6.8∗∗∗    -4.5∗∗∗    -2.7∗∗    -3.2∗∗∗     -2.5∗∗  -2.3∗∗
                                    (-2.02)     (-3.08)    (-3.17)   (-2.54)    (-2.71)    (-2.15) (-2.49)
 Non-critical industries           -25.6∗∗∗    -26.5∗∗∗   -15.3∗∗∗   -9.4∗∗∗   -12.5∗∗∗    -9.9∗∗∗ -7.9∗∗∗
                                   (-10.53)     (-8.67)    (-8.58)   (-7.90)    (-6.82)   (-10.08) (-9.57)
 Diff: Non-critical - Critical     -17.6∗∗∗    -19.7∗∗∗   -10.7∗∗∗   -6.7∗∗∗    -9.2∗∗∗    -7.4∗∗∗ -5.6∗∗∗
                                    (-3.78)     (-5.24)    (-4.69)   (-4.22)    (-4.23)    (-4.84) (-4.52)
 Number of observations              203         181        182       182        184        183       140

Table, panel A, plots the coefficients estimates from equations (10) and (8) in the document
for non-critical industries, where the dependent variables are constructed using firm data
from Compustat and Capital IQ, aggregated to the 4-digit NAICS level. The regression is
weighted by total Compustat 2019 employment in each industry. Standard errors are robust
to heteroskedasticity (White, 1980). Panel B reports averages of each outcome for critical and
non-critical industries, as well as differences between the two. The list of critical industries is
in Appendix Table A.1. The cross-sectional standard deviation of exposure across critical
industries is 17.4%




                                                  41
                  Table 5: Covid-19 Work Exposure and Default Probabilities

                                        Change in probability of default (%) in next
        A. Regressions for
        Non-Critical Industries         3 months       6 months   12 months   24 months
                                           (1)            (2)        (3)         (4)
        Covid-19 Work Exposure           0.77∗          1.27∗∗     1.91∗∗∗     2.52∗∗∗
                                         (1.81)         (2.15)     (2.62)      (3.05)
        Observations                      155            155         155         155
        R2                               0.071          0.086       0.102       0.111
        B. Averages, All Industries
        Critical Industries             0.103∗∗∗       0.195∗∗∗    0.306∗∗∗    0.307∗∗
                                         (2.96)         (3.03)      (3.04)      (2.50)
        Non-Critical Industries         0.509∗∗∗       0.858∗∗∗    1.263∗∗∗    1.483∗∗∗
                                         (2.77)         (3.28)      (4.07)      (4.71)
        Diff: Non-critical - Critical   0.405∗∗        0.663∗∗     0.957∗∗∗    1.176∗∗∗
                                         (2.17)         (2.46)      (2.94)      (3.48)
        Number of observations            221            221         221         221

Table plots the coefficients estimates from equation (9) in the document for non-critical
industries, where the dependent variables are constructed using firm data from Compustat
and the RMI Credit Research Database, aggregated to the 4-digit NAICS level (t-statistics
in parantheses). The dependent variable is expressed in percentage points so that the slope
coefficient can be interpreted as the increase, in basis points, of the probability of default
associated with a 1 percentage point increase in exposure. The regression is weighted by total
Compustat 2019 employment in each industry. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity
(White, 1980). The list of critical industries is in Appendix Table A.1. Panel B reports
average changes in default probabilities, in percentage points, for critical and non-critical
industries, respectively, as well as differences between the two means.




                                                  42
Appendix Tables and Figures

                           Table A.1: List of Critical Industries

NAICS Code   Industry Name

1111         Oilseed and Grain Farming
1112         Vegetable and Melon Farming
1113         Fruit and Tree Nut Farming
1119         Other Crop Farming
1121         Cattle Ranching and Farming
1122         Hog and Pig Farming
1123         Poultry and Egg Production
1124         Sheep and Goat Farming
1129         Other Animal Production
1141         Fishing
1142         Hunting and Trapping
1151         Support Activities for Crop Production
1152         Support Activities for Animal Production
2121         Coal Mining
2122         Metal Ore Mining
2123         Nonmetallic Mineral Mining and Quarrying
2131         Support Activities for Mining
2211         Electric Power Generation, Transmission and Distribution
2212         Natural Gas Distribution
2213         Water, Sewage and Other Systems
2373         Highway, Street, and Bridge Construction
3111         Animal Food Manufacturing
3112         Grain and Oilseed Milling
3113         Sugar and Confectionery Product Manufacturing
3114         Fruit and Vegetable Preserving and Specialty Food Manufacturing
3115         Dairy Product Manufacturing
3116         Animal Slaughtering and Processing
3117         Seafood Product Preparation and Packaging
3118         Bakeries and Tortilla Manufacturing
3119         Other Food Manufacturing
3121         Beverage Manufacturing
3254         Pharmaceutical and Medicine Manufacturing
3256         Soap, Cleaning Compound, and Toilet Preparation Manufacturing
3261         Plastics Product Manufacturing
3312         Steel Product Manufacturing from Purchased Steel
3313         Alumina and Aluminum Production and Processing
3331         Agriculture, Construction, and Mining Machinery Manufacturing


                                               43
                        Table A.1: List of Critical Industries (cont)

NAICS Code   Industry Name

3391         Medical Equipment and Supplies Manufacturing
4242         Drugs and Druggists’ Sundries Merchant Wholesalers
4245         Farm Product Raw Material Wholesalers
4413         Automotive Parts, Accessories, and Tire Stores
4441         Building Material and Supplies Dealers
4451         Grocery Stores
4452         Specialty Food Stores
4453         Beer, Wine, and Liquor Stores
4461         Health and Personal Care Stores
4471         Gasoline Stations
4523         General Merchandise Stores, including Warehouse Clubs and Supercenters
4539         Other Miscellaneous Store Retailers
4541         Electronic Shopping and Mail-Order Houses
4812         Nonscheduled Air Transportation
4841         General Freight Trucking
4842         Specialized Freight Trucking
4851         Urban Transit Systems
4852         Interurban and Rural Bus Transportation
4853         Taxi and Limousine Service
4859         Other Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation
4861         Pipeline Transportation of Crude Oil
4862         Pipeline Transportation of Natural Gas
4885         Freight Transportation Arrangement
4911         Postal Service
4921         Couriers and Express Delivery Services
4922         Local Messengers and Local Delivery
4931         Warehousing and Storage
5173         Telecommunications Resellers
5179         Other Telecommunications
5211         Monetary Authorities-Central Bank
5221         Depository Credit Intermediation
5222         Nondepository Credit Intermediation
5223         Activities Related to Credit Intermediation
5231         Securities and Commodity Contracts Intermediation and Brokerage
5232         Securities and Commodity Exchanges
5239         Other Financial Investment Activities
5241         Insurance Carriers
5242         Agencies, Brokerages, and Other Insurance Related Activities
5251         Insurance and Employee Benefit Funds



                                                44
                        Table A.1: List of Critical Industries (cont)

NAICS Code   Industry Name

5259         Other Investment Pools and Funds
5411         Legal Services
5412         Accounting, Tax Preparation, Bookkeeping, and Payroll Services
5621         Waste Collection
5622         Waste Treatment and Disposal
5629         Remediation and Other Waste Management Services
6111         Elementary and Secondary Schools
6211         Offices of Physicians
6214         Outpatient Care Centers
6215         Medical and Diagnostic Laboratories
6216         Home Health Care Services
6219         Other Ambulatory Health Care Services
6221         General Medical and Surgical Hospitals
6223         Specialty (except Psychiatric and Substance Abuse) Hospitals
6231         Nursing Care Facilities (Skilled Nursing Facilities)
6233         Continuing Care Retirement Communities and Assisted Living Facilities for the Elderly
9211         Executive, Legislative, and Other General Government Support
9221         Justice, Public Order, and Safety Activities
9231         Administration of Human Resource Programs
9241         Administration of Environmental Quality Programs
9251         Administration of Housing Programs, Urban Planning, and Community Development
9261         Administration of Economic Programs
9271         Space Research and Technology
9281         National Security and International Affairs




                                                45
                 Table A.2: Covid-19 Factor, portfolio weights (4-Digit NAICS)

                                                                                             Portfolio
Industry (NAICS)                                                                            Weight (%)

4481: Clothing Stores                                                                         19.67
5613: Employment Services                                                                     15.95
7225: Restaurants and Other Eating Places                                                     14.62
7211: Traveler Accommodation                                                                  11.23
4811: Scheduled Air Transportation                                                            11.05
5151: Radio and Television Broadcasting                                                        8.19
4522: Department Stores                                                                        6.12
7223: Special Food Services                                                                    5.99
3363: Motor Vehicle Parts Manufacturing                                                        5.59
4831: Deep Sea, Coastal, and Great Lakes Water Transportation                                  5.57
3361: Motor Vehicle Manufacturing                                                              5.51
3344: Semiconductor and Other Electronic Component Manufacturing                               4.50
3329: Other Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing                                             3.66
4411: Automobile Dealers                                                                       3.04
3339: Other General Purpose Machinery Manufacturing                                            2.76
7131: Amusement Parks and Arcades                                                              2.75
3221: Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard Mills                                                        2.66
5617: Services to Buildings and Dwellings                                                      2.45
4244: Grocery and Related Product Merchant Wholesalers                                         2.28
5121: Motion Picture and Video Industries                                                      2.10
3262: Rubber Product Manufacturing                                                             2.02
3222: Converted Paper Product Manufacturing                                                    1.96
4511: Sporting Goods, Hobby, and Musical Instrument Stores                                     1.90
3311: Iron and Steel Mills and Ferroalloy Manufacturing                                        1.88
2382: Building Equipment Contractors                                                           1.63
2371: Utility System Construction                                                              1.60
3252: Resin, Synthetic Rubber, and Artificial and Synthetic Fibers and Filaments Manufac-      1.48
turing
5616: Investigation and Security Services                                                      1.44
3219: Other Wood Product Manufacturing                                                         1.41
4431: Electronics and Appliance Stores                                                         1.32
3353: Electrical Equipment Manufacturing                                                       1.29
4482: Shoe Stores                                                                              1.29
4231: Motor Vehicle and Motor Vehicle Parts and Supplies Merchant Wholesalers                  1.24
7132: Gambling Industries                                                                      1.19
7139: Other Amusement and Recreation Industries                                                1.14
3399: Other Miscellaneous Manufacturing                                                        1.13
3141: Textile Furnishings Mills                                                                1.12



                                                 46
                       Table A.2: Covid-19 Factor, portfolio weights (cont)

                                                                                        Portfolio
Industry (NAICS)                                                                       Weight (%)

2362: Nonresidential Building Construction                                                1.10
5152: Cable and Other Subscription Programming                                            1.09
8123: Drycleaning and Laundry Services                                                    1.02
3152: Cut and Sew Apparel Manufacturing                                                   1.02
3324: Boiler, Tank, and Shipping Container Manufacturing                                  1.01
4236: Household Appliances and Electrical and Electronic Goods Merchant Wholesalers       1.00
2379: Other Heavy and Civil Engineering Construction                                      0.99
2361: Residential Building Construction                                                   0.95
4532: Office Supplies, Stationery, and Gift Store                                         0.94
3359: Other Electrical Equipment and Component Manufacturing                              0.90
3334: Ventilation, Heating, Air-Conditioning, and Commercial Refrigeration Equipment      0.90
Manufacturing
3366: Ship and Boat Building                                                              0.87
3323: Architectural and Structural Metals Manufacturing                                   0.77
3231: Printing and Related Support Activities                                             0.74
8121: Personal Care Services                                                              0.74
6222: Psychiatric and Substance Abuse Hospitals                                           0.71
4422: Home Furnishings Stores                                                             0.70
3322: Cutlery and Handtool Manufacturing                                                  0.69
5611: Office Administrative Services                                                      0.69
3352: Household Appliance Manufacturing                                                   0.66
3272: Glass and Glass Product Manufacturing                                               0.66
3362: Motor Vehicle Body and Trailer Manufacturing                                        0.66
5615: Travel Arrangement and Reservation Services                                         0.61
7113: Promoters of Performing Arts, Sports, and Similar Events                            0.61
6244: Child Day Care Services                                                             0.61
3332: Industrial Machinery Manufacturing                                                  0.61
3251: Basic Chemical Manufacturing                                                        0.55
3279: Other Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing                                     0.53
3371: Household and Institutional Furniture and Kitchen Cabinet Manufacturing             0.51
3169: Other Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing                                      0.47
3369: Other Transportation Equipment Manufacturing                                        0.45
5614: Business Support Services                                                           0.43
3325: Hardware Manufacturing                                                              0.41
3372: Office Furniture (including Fixtures) Manufacturing                                 0.35
4483: Jewelry, Luggage, and Leather Goods Stores                                          0.33
3379: Other Furniture Related Product Manufacturing                                       0.33
2383: Building Finishing Contractors                                                      0.33



                                                    47
                         Table A.2: Covid-19 Factor, portfolio weights (cont)

                                                                                           Portfolio
Industry (NAICS)                                                                          Weight (%)

4237: Hardware, and Plumbing and Heating Equipment and Supplies Merchant Wholesalers         0.32
7111: Performing Arts Companies                                                              0.31
3351: Electric Lighting Equipment Manufacturing                                              0.28
8129: Other Personal Services                                                                0.25
5619: Other Support Services                                                                 0.23
3212: Veneer, Plywood, and Engineered Wood Product Manufacturing                             0.22
4238: Machinery, Equipment, and Supplies Merchant Wholesalers                                0.19
3321: Forging and Stamping                                                                   0.18
3273: Cement and Concrete Product Manufacturing                                              0.18
6116: Other Schools and Instruction                                                          0.15
3326: Spring and Wire Product Manufacturing                                                  0.15
3132: Fabric Mills                                                                           0.15
4412: Other Motor Vehicle Dealers                                                            0.14
4512: Book Stores and News Dealers                                                           0.14
4832: Inland Water Transportation                                                            0.13
3259: Other Chemical Product and Preparation Manufacturing                                   0.09
4883: Support Activities for Water Transportation                                            0.09
4421: Furniture Stores                                                                       0.08
5612: Facilities Support Services                                                            0.08
3274: Lime and Gypsum Product Manufacturing                                                  0.07
4881: Support Activities for Air Transportation                                              0.06
7224: Drinking Places (Alcoholic Beverages)                                                  0.05
4869: Other Pipeline Transportation                                                          0.04
4543: Direct Selling Establishment                                                           0.04
2372: Land Subdivision                                                                       0.03
3211: Sawmills and Wood Preservation                                                         0.03
6213: Offices of Other Health Practitioners                                                  0.03
3335: Metalworking Machinery Manufacturing                                                   0.02
4247: Petroleum and Petroleum Products Merchant Wholesalers                                  0.01
4889: Other Support Activities for Transportation                                            0.01
4243: Apparel, Piece Goods, and Notions Merchant Wholesalers                                 0.01
3327: Machine Shops; Turned Product; and Screw, Nut, and Bolt Manufacturing                  0.00
4442: Lawn and Garden Equipment and Supplies Stores                                          0.00
7114: Agents and Managers for Artists, Athletes, Entertainers, and Other Public Figures      0.00
8111: Automotive Repair and Maintenance                                                      0.00
7112: Spectator Sports                                                                       0.00
4239: Miscellaneous Durable Goods Merchant Wholesalers                                      -0.01
5174: Satellite Telecommunications                                                          -0.05



                                                    48
                       Table A.2: Covid-19 Factor, portfolio weights (cont)

                                                                                        Portfolio
Industry (NAICS)                                                                       Weight (%)

8122: Death Care Services                                                                -0.09
4251: Wholesale Electronic Markets and Agents and Brokers                                -0.09
4241: Paper and Paper Product Merchant Wholesalers                                       -0.09
5414: Specialized Design Services                                                        -0.10
2111: Oil and Gas Extraction                                                             -0.15
4246: Chemical and Allied Products Merchant Wholesalers                                  -0.24
3343: Audio and Video Equipment Manufacturing                                            -0.29
4233: Lumber and Other Construction Materials Merchant Wholesalers                       -0.40
5419: Other Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services                             -0.50
3333: Commercial and Service Industry Machinery Manufacturing                            -0.52
4249: Miscellaneous Nondurable Goods Merchant Wholesalers                                -0.57
5111: Newspaper, Periodical, Book, and Directory Publishers                               -0.60
5418: Advertising, Public Relations, and Related Services                                -1.05
3241: Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing                                          -1.08
3336: Engine, Turbine, and Power Transmission Equipment Manufacturing                    -1.32
5413: Architectural, Engineering, and Related Services                                   -1.93
5416: Management, Scientific, and Technical Consulting Services                          -2.33
3255: Paint, Coating, and Adhesive Manufacturing                                         -2.70
5417: Scientific Research and Development Services                                       -2.91
4234: Professional and Commercial Equipment and Supplies Merchant Wholesalers            -3.14
3365: Railroad Rolling Stock Manufacturing                                               -3.47
3341: Computer and Peripheral Equipment Manufacturing                                    -5.69
3342: Communications Equipment Manufacturing                                             -10.47
3345: Navigational, Measuring, Electromedical, and Control Instruments Manufacturing     -10.51
3364: Aerospace Product and Parts Manufacturing                                          -14.72
5112: Software Publishers                                                                -16.97
5415: Computer Systems Design and Related Services                                       -31.57
5182: Data Processing, Hosting, and Related Services                                     -35.46
5191: Other Information Services                                                         -41.46




                                                   49
