                         NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ARE ESTIMATED TAX ELASTICITIES REALLY JUST
                         TAX EVASION ELASTICITIES?
                    THE CASE OF CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS




                                Joel   Slemrod




                           Working Paper No. 2733




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 October 1988




This research was supported by a contract with the Office of Tax Analysis!
U.S. Department of the Treasury. National Science Foundation Grant No. SES-
86-10021 also provided financial support. Len Eurman Daphne Kenyon, and
Mike Udell have provided valuable assistance. Helpful comments on an earlier
draft were received from Jerry Auten, Len Burman, and Jerry Schiff. The
views expressed here do not necessarily represent the views of the Department
of the Treasury. This research is part of NBER's research program in
Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of the author not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                        NBER Working Paper 2733
                                        October 19B8

                 ARE ESTIMATED TAX ELASTICITIES REALLY JUST
                          TAX EVASION ELASTICITIES?
                    THE CASE OF CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS

                                   ABSTRACT

    Tax return data, which   has been a principal   source   for econometric
investigations of the behavioral response to tax policy, is subject to mis-
reporting that may bias estimates of tax responsiveness. The misreporting
arises because understatement of taxabLe income may itself be a function of
an individuals marginal tax rate, it being the return to a dollar of under-
stated taxable income. To the extent that misreporting of income and
deductions is a function of the same factors that determine the behavior
under study, estimated relationships based on reported data wiLl reveal a
composite of the tax (and income) responsiveness of the actual behavior and
of the misreporting of the behavior.
     This paper used data from tax returns that have been subject to
intensive audits to confront the quantitative importance of misreporting for
the estimated tax responsiveness of charitable contributions. This has been
the subject of numerous empirical studies using tax return data which use a
common empirical framework. It concludes that the tax responsiveness of
charitable giving that has been detected using tax return data cannot be
ascribed to the tax responsiveness of overstating actual giving        In fact.

overstatement is apparantly less price responsive than actual giving,
implying that the responsiveness of actual giving is higher than is suggested

by studying reported contributions.


                                         Joel Slemrod
                                         Department of   Eco -rnics
                                         The University of lichigan
                                         Ann Arbor, MI 48109
                  •re Estimated Tax Elasticities Really Just

                          Tax Evasion Elasticities?

                    The Case of Charitable Contributions'


.   tntroduction
     Cross—section data from tax returns has been a principal source for econo-

metric investigations of the behavioral response to tax policy. Although all

data is subject to error, there is special reason to suspect that tax return

data is subject to misreporting that may bias estimates of tax responsiveness

based on cross—sectional variation. The special reason is. of course, that

understatement of taxable income reduces tax liability, and the incentive to

understate taxable income nay itself be a function of an individual's marginal.

tax rate, it being the return to a dollar of understated taxable income, to

the extent that misreporting of income is a function of the same factors that

determine the behavior under study, estimated relationships based on reported

data will reveal a composite of the tax (and income) responsiveness of the

actual behavior and of the misreporting of the behavior.

     Although this issue has been recognized in the literature,' there has been

no systematic attempt to assess its quantitative importance. This paper uses

data from tax returns that have been subject to intensive audits to confront

this issue. The tax responsiveness of charitabLe contributions is a natural




tClotfelter and Steuerle (98I), after noting the relative advantage of tax
 return data over survey data (incLuding the belief that charitable contribu-
 tions are reported more accurately on tax returns, primarily because the tax-
 payer is required to keep some records for tax purposes), note:

     'Contributions, of course, may be overstated by taxpayers. Further-
    more, the incentive to overstate contributions is proportional to
    the marginal tax rate, making it virtually impossible to separate
    the true incentive effect on contributions from any systematic over-
    statement effect.'  (p. 424)
                                        —2—


issue to investigate in this context because it has been the subject of           numer-
ous empirical studies using tax return data2 which use a common empirical

framework. In addition, evidence to be discussed below indicates that over-

statement of charitable contributions is a quantitatively significant

phenomenon.


2.     Motivation

       Most empirical studies of charitable contributions assume that the under-

lying demand may be expressed as a constant—elasticity function of the after—

tax price of making a contribution (F), income (Y), and other factors. Subsum-

ing factors other than price and income into a constant term, this relationship

can be written as


                      S
(1)
             CRcIRPRY,
where the subscripts R are meant to stand for the amount reported on unaudited

tax returns. The after—tax price of making a one dollar contribution is equal

to one for taxpayers who do not itemize deductions, and is equal to l—t, where

     is the marginal tax rate, for taxpayers who do itemize deductions.

       Now suppose that reported contributions are the sum of two components,

actual contributions and overstated contributions, so that CR -         4         where
                                                                   CA       CE.
CA is actual contributions and CE is overstated contributions. Further suppose

that overstated contributions are also a constant elasticity function of Y          and
F, so that


                      5F Yg
(2)
             CE E


2An excellent survey of this literature is contained in Clotfelter and
 Steuerle ([981).
                                                                -.3—



Here, P should be interpreted as one minus the return to successfully over-

stating charitable deductions by one dollar, also equal to i—t.

       Combining (1) and (2), we see that


                            —          =
                                                    3R 1R   —
                                                                       BE 1E
(3)             CA =                            P     Y                P   Y
                       CR         CE       aR


       The relationship between the price elasticity of reported charitable con-

tributions, equal to BR. and the price elasticity of actual contributions, BA.

can be calculated from (3) to he



                     = B CR            BE CE
                                   A


       The ratio of the price elasticity of actual contributions to the price

elasticity of reported contributions can also be written, using the fact that

            +
CR =   CA       C,     as




Expression (5) indicates that the absolute value of BA will be less than

as long as BEI > !BR1. Here and below we assume that                           and BR are less

than zero. The degree by which BR will misrepresent 8A depends on both the

divergence of               and            and the relative magnitude of overstated contributions

compared to actual contributions.

       Ignoring the distinction between reported and actual charitable contribu-

tions may also bias estimates of the responsiveness of reported contributions,

which are important in their own right because it is the response of reported

and not actual contributions that determines the revenue implications of changes
                                      —4—


in the tax treatment of charitable contributions.3 For example, one criterion

for judging the appropriateness of allowing a deduction for charitabls contri-

butions is whether the increase in contributions is greater than the loss in

government revenues from the policy. The standard reasoning that ignores mis-

reporting finds that this occurs if the price elasticity of contributions

(assumed to be constant) is greater than one in absoLute value, or if tB(    >   1.


When the possibility of overreporting is considered, the condition becomes


                                      Cr
(6)              >   1 + GIBE'
           BRI
                                    (1_t)CR


According to (6), if there is any price responsiveness of overstatement, a

value of R' higher than one is required for the increase in contributions

to exceed the revenue cost. Furthermore, the estimate of       remains a criti-

cal factor itt the determination of the effectiveness of the deduction. If

estimates of SR based on tax return data are too high, then this criterion of

effectiveness nay be accepted when it in fact does not hold.

      The goal of what follows is to assess the quantitative significance of

recognizing the difference between reported and actual contributions. A theo-

retical framework for this investigation is presented next.


3. A Simple Model of Individual Behavior

      Assume that the representative individual derives utility from two goods,

a composite good and actual charitable contributions (CA), which must be

financed from an exogenous level of income, Y. The individual must take three

decisions——what level of CA to choose, what level of contributions to report




3This statement, and the condition derived below, do not consider the revenue
 obtained from fines and assessments, which is small relative to total revenue
 collected.
                                              —5—


to the tax authorities (CR). and what level of non—charity income understate-

ment to attempt (C). There is a probability p that the individual's tax return

will be audited, in which case all evasion is uncovered. Detected evasion is

subject to a fine, denoted F, which depends on the amount of income understate-

ment. The probability of detection is presumed to be positively related to the

amount of charity evasion that is attempted and on the amount of non—charity

evasion. The precise relationship between evasion and p nay                involve   CA, for

reasons discussed below, and other factors, represented by Z. This maximiza-

tion problem can be written as


(7)        Maximize [1_p(CR.Ck.C,Z)]U[Y_t(Y_G_CR)_CA,CA] +
                  A

                     p(CR,CA,C,Z)U(Y_t(Y_CA)_CA_F(C+CR_CA).CA]


          subject to CA. CR ) 0


Expression (7) presumes a proportional income tax system where actual charit-

able contributions are fully deductible, and recognizes no difference between

real income and taxable income, except that contributions are a deductible item.

       Assuming that the inequality constraints are not binding, the first—order

conditions for CR C, and CA are, respectively,


                                     —
(8)         (i—p) t1J' —   p?'           pR'(U_U")        0,




(9)         (l—p)tU — pFhlJt     —
                                     p    (U—Ifi) =   Q




and


                                                      +             (un_Ud) =
(10)        (l_p)[-U?(i_t)+U] +          p[-Ut(I-t)       14] - p
where superscripts n and d refer to utility (marginal or total) evaluated at

the levels appropriate to the state of the world in which the taxpayer is not
                                      —6—


audited and audited, respectively, and p, p, and p are P/3CR Dp/aG, and

P/3CA respectively. F' is aF/(G+CR — CA).

     Note that the first—order condition for C is no different from the one

that would apply if the problem was posed as a choice of CF instead of CR;

that is, given CA the choice of CR is equivalent to choosing CE. Expression

(B) indicates that a lower probability of detection and a higher marginal tax

rate4 make the expected payoff from charity overstatement higher. A higher

value of lint_udi, the utility cost of detection, lowers the expected payoff from

charity overstatement, ceteris paribus. The utility cost of detection depends

positively on the total amount of evasion attempted, the fine rate, and the

degree of risk aversion. A higher value of     pjl
                                                     . which   nay depend on actual

contributions and non—charity evasion, also reduces the attractiveness of

charity overstatement.

     The first—order condition for non—charity evasion is of similar form to

the condition for charity reporting (overstatement), except that p is replaced

by p. This implies that the mix of evasion attempted will depend on the rela-

tive impact on the likelihood of detection of charity overstatement versus non—

charity evasion. This wilt vary depending on the opportunities for evasion

available to the individual and, in a more general model, the resources

expended to camouflage the evasion so as to escape detection.

     Note that, although total evasion will never be negative, either CE or

G may be negative. To see this, consider a taxpayer who has an excellent



4Although note that if the penalty for evasion is a fixed percentage of tax
 liability understated, as is often the case in the U.S. • a change in the
 marginal tax rate affects the return to successful evasion proportionally
 to the cost of unsuccessful evasion, As Yitzhaki (1974) has argued, this
 implies that when p is fixed a change in t causes no substitution effect.
 In this model where p depends on CR and C, a change in t would in general
 change the form of (B) and (9).
                                          —7—


opportunity (p is low) to do a large amount of non—charity evasion. Thus

the utility cost of detection, 1n_13, is high. As long as p'is positive, it

may be optimal to understate charitabLe contributions so as to reduce the pro-

bability of an audit that would uncover the non—charity evasion.5

       Now consider the first—order condition for actual contributions, expres-

sion (10).       ignoring the final term on the left—hand side, this is a slightly

modified version of the standard first-order condition for desired charitable

contributions, stating that the ratio of expected marginal utility from the

composite good and charitable contributions should equal their relative price,

1—t. The extent that the amount of actual contributions influences the prob-

ability of detection (p) also enters the first-order condition. This may

be important in the ease of overvaluation of noncash contributions, where the

existence of some actual contributions may facilitate the act of overstate-

ment       < 0). Thus, an individual who Is inclined to evade taxes by over—

stattng charitable deductions may also do more actual contributions than
             6
otherwise.


4. Description of Data

       The data used in this study were collected by the Internal Revenue Service

as part of their Taxpayer Compliance Measarement Program (TCMP). The data con-

tains information about the tax return filed and the result of an intensive

audit of a stratified7 random sample of the ixpaying population in 1982.        For




51t is assumed that, upon audit, the. understatement of charitable contributions
 will be revealed and rectified.

6ritt (1981) has studied this phenomenon in connection with smuggling, where
 legal imports facilitate underinvoicing, allowing other imports to escape
 input tariffs.

 7Returns are randomly selected within each of twelve examination classes.
                                        —8—




each    line on the tax return, the data contains the figure reported by the tax-

payer and the amount deemed by the auditor to be "correct."8

        According to the IRS Manual, an auditor may adjust the amount reported

for the deduction for charitable contributions for any of twenty—six different

reasons.9 For example, the auditor may judge that some or all of the reported

contributions were not actually made, that some donated property was over-

valued by the contributor, or that the recipient was not a qualified charitable

organization. It is aLso possible that the auditor may disallow the deduction

for some contributions that were actually made because of inadequate documenta-

tion. Because of this possibility and more generally because the auditing pro-

cess is an imperfect one,10 there is no presumption that the auditor—adjusted

figure for charitable contributions represents the actual value of contribu-

tions. Nor should it be assumed that the difference between reported contri-

butions and auditor—adjusted contributions represents willful tax evasion.

        Table I presents some summary statistics from the 1982 TCMP about reported

charitable contributions and auditor—adjusted charitable contributions by

income class. in addition, the ratio of the difference between reported and

auditor—adjusted contributions to reported amounts is given, both including

and not including upward adjustments to the reported amount. Table 1 indicates

that total downward adjustments in reported charitable contributions amounted



 8Tbe    micro—unit data from the 1969 TCMP survey has been used by Clotfelter
  (1983) in a study of the effect of tax rates on the extent of tax evasion,
  and TCMF data aggregated by zip code has been used by Witte and Woodward
  ([985) and Dubin and Wilde (1986) to study the determinants of taxpayer
  noncompliance.

 9lnformation about the reason given by the auditor for adjusting a given
  reported contribution was not available for this study.

10Ale,cander and Feinstein (1986) control for differential auditor effective-
  ness in their study of the determinants of tax evasion.
                                        —9—




to    8.9% of reported contributions. This is offset by upward adjustments of

1.7% of reported contributions, so that the net adjustment is 7.2% downward.

The other important aspect of Table 1 is that the relative extent of downward

adjustment is, for the most part, sharply decreasing with income. The downward

adjustments amount to more than 107. of reported contributions for taxpayers

with income between $20,000 and $50,000, between 4% and 10% for taxpayers with

income between $50,000 and $1,000,000 and is only 1.1% for taxpayers with

income over $1,000,000. Ignoring variations In the price of giving, this find-

ing suggests that the income elasticity of reported contributions understates

the income elasticity of auditor—adjusted contributions. Because the price of

giving tends to decrease with higher Lncome, the data suggests that the sum of

the income elasticity and the (absolute value) of the price elasticity is

higher for auditor—adjusted contributions than for reported contributions.


5. Empirical Models and Results

        As a first step I attempt to replicate the standard log linear ordinary

least—squares regression analysis of charitable contributions using reported

data. Because the focus of this study is the empirical importance of noncom-

pliance on standard estimation results, I will not discuss in detail alterna-

tives to the standard econometric approach of which Clotfelter and Steuerle

 (1981) is an excellent example.11

         Following Clotfelter and Steuerle, the dependent variable is Ln(C + 10).

The     first independent vatLabie is the natural logarithm of the after—tax price
 of    one dollar of contribution (LNP), equal to one minus the marginal federal




 t1See Reece and Ziesohang (1985) for an econometric technique that takes into
   account the progressive step function nature of the marginal price of
   contributions.
                                                      —10-—



                                                     TABLE 1


                              Suacary Statistics on Reported and Auditor—Adjusted
                                     Contributions by tncome Class, L982.
                                                                                                     Ratio of
               Number of
                                                                                      Ratio of        Total
             Returns with                                  Total        Total           lotal        Downward
 Adjusted      Reported                    Fraction of   Reported      Auditor—       Adjustments
  Cross        Contrt—                                                                              Adjustments
                            Fractton of    Returns with   Contri—      Adjusted        to Total       to Total
 lncome**      butions      Returns with    Downward      butiona    Contributions     Reported       Reported
  Class       (millions)     Adjustment    Adjustment   ($billlon)     ($billion)    Contributions Contributions
 Under           1.34            .24           .15            0.83       0.33             .004          .083
 10,000

10,000—                          .30           .22            3.67       3.47             .053          .076
20,000

20,000—         7.83            .38           .29             5.91       5.              .088           .106
30,000

30,000—         6.76            .39           .29             5.96       5.36            .101           .117
40,000

40,000—         3.83            .39           .29             4..        3.75            .090          .105
50, 000


50.000—         2.76            .37           .28             4.19       3.90            .068          .079
75,000

75.000—         0.63            .33           .22             1.58       1.48            .066          .067
100, 000

100,000—        0.54            .34           .23             2.24       2.15            .061          .153
200, 000

 00,000—        0.13            .33           .22             1.50       1.44            .042          .047
500, 000

500,000—        0.017           .31           .22         0.56           0.53            .058          .059
1,000.000

Over            0.0073          .18           .13         0.67           0.66                          .011
1,000,000

TOTAL          28.8             .36           .27        31.2           29.0             .072          .089

 Figures do not include reported contributions of itemizing taxpayers who, upon audit, were decreed not
 to have enough deductions to qualify for Itesization.

            as claseifed by reported adjusted gross income.
                                      —ii—


tax rate on the first dollar of charitable contribution.12 A standard correc-

tion for the tax advantage of giving appreciated assets is taken.'3 The second

independent variable (Lw?) is the natural logarithm of adjusted gross income

plus IRA contributions minus the taxes that would be due in the absence of

charitable contributions.'4 The other three independent variables are dummy

variables for the demographic indicators available in the data set: marital

status (MAR), the presence of any over—65 exemptions (AGE), and the presence

of dependent children (DEP). In order to minimize sample selection bias, the

sample is restricted to include only those households who would have itemized

deductions even in the absence of any charitable contributions.'5

     In the absence of evasion, this equation can be interpreted as a struc-

tural equation relating the demand for charitable contributions to characteris-

tics of the taxpayer's environment and preferences. When evasion is consid-

ered, a structural equation explaining reported (actual) contributions would

include as explanatory variables actual. (reported) contributions and non—

charity evasion. The first four equations estimated in this paper are thus



'2The marginal federal tax rate is calculated by applying taxable income to
  the tax table appropriate for the taxpayer's filing status. Thus it does
  not correctly account for some features of the tax law such as the minimum
  tax and income averaging. Redoing the regression analyses with interactive
  dummy variables for taxpayers subject to these provisions did not reveal
  any substantive differences from the results reported here.
liThe price variable used is equal to C(1—t)+(1—C)((i—t)—(O.5.0.4t)), where C
  is the proportion of gifts given in cash given by the taxpayer's adjusted
  gross income group, 1—t is the price of giving cash, 0.5 is the assumed ratio
  of appreciation to .,alue, an O.4t is the capital gains tax rate.

14For comparability with earlier studies, I use reported rather than auditor—
  corrected adjusted gross income both in the calculation of price and in the
  construction of the income variable.

15The sample also excludes taxpayers who, upon audit, are deemed to have insuf-
  ficient deductions to qualify for itemization and married taxpayers who file
  separate returns.
                                         —12—


reduced—form relationships. The estimated coefficient of an independent

variable represents not only the direct effect on the dependent variable but

also   the indirect   effect due to the induced change in the other endogenous

variables.

       The results of this estimation are presented in the first column of
Table   2. The estimated coefficients on the demographic variables are of the
same sign and of comparable magnitude to those estimated by others. The par-

tial effects of being married, having one household member over 65, and of hav-

ing dependent children are all positive and significant. The estimated price

elasticity of —2.04 is in the upper range of findings of other researchers.

The estimated income elasticity of 0.35 is near the bottom of the range of
                       16
previous estimates.

        The second column of TabLe 2 displays the results of redoing the esti-

mation replacing reported contributions with auditor—adjusted contributions.

The estimated coefficterits do not change drastically, although there is a

statistically significant change in the estimated coefficients of each of the

variables except DEP. Of principal interest is that the estimated price

elasticity increases in absolute value from 2.04 to 2.34, while the estimated

income elasticity falls from 0.35 to 0.27. This result strongly suggests that

the estimated price elasticity of reported contributions is not principally an

evasion elasticity. On the contrary, purging the reported statistics of data

overstatement increases the estimated price responsiveness of charitable

giving.



16See Clotfelter and Steuerle's Table 1 for a summary of the earlier findings.
17
  I also experimented with using as a dependent variable auditor—adjusted con-
  tributions, as long as they did not exceed reported contributions. This
  excludes from consideration upward adjustments of charitable contributions.
  The results were not significantly different from those reported here.
                                                        —13—


                                                      TABLE 2


                                    Regression Equations Explaining Reported and
                                           Auditor—Adjusted Contributions

                   Log of           Log of           Log of          Log of             Log of         Log of
  Dependent I     Reported      Auditor—Adjuatedç Reported       Auditor—Adjustedl     Reported     Auditor—Adjusted
  Variable      Contributions Contributions       Contributions Contributions        Contributions Contributions

    LYP             -2.04             —2.34            —1.73           -2.96             —1.53           -1.70
                     (0.060)           (0.063)         (0.069)         (0.072)            (0.133)        (0.166)
    LNY               0.35             0.27             0.36            0.28              0.34            0.26
                     (0.009)           (0.009)         (0.009)         (0.009)            (0.017)        (0.021)

    3IAR             0.64               0.72            0.57            0.65               0.53           0.59
                     (0.029)           (0.030)         (0.029)         (0.031)            (0.056)       (0.070)
    AGE               0.45              .54             0.47            0.56              0.50            0.60
                     (0.034)           (0.036)         (0.034)         (0.036)           (0.064)         (0.081)
    DEL'              0.13              0.14            0.12            0.13              0.16            0.28
                     (0.023)           (0.023)         (0.023)         (0.023)           (0.043)         (0.054)
   PROS                                                 4.96            5.97               4.58          6.46
                                                       (0.54)          (0.56)             (1.02)         (1.28)
  PCOST                                                                                    0.071         0.094
                                                                                          (0.008)        (0.010)

 Constant                1.14           1.62            0.98            1.42               1.12            1.62
                     (0.077)           (0.080)         (0.079)         (0.082)            (0.150)         (0.188)

  No. of
Observations)        23894              23894           23894           23894             23894           23893

  Standard               1.53           1.60            1.53            1.59               1.52            1.58
  error of
  estisate


_____________        0.307              0.276           0.309           0.280             0.318           0.293


NOTE: Standard errors are in parentheses.
           Measured in    thousands of dollars.
                                     —14—


     I next investigate expanding the set of independent variables to include

proxies for the additional influences on charitable contributions and their

overstatement suggested by the first—order conditions of the individual's maxi-

mization problem. One such factor identif ted was the probability of detection

of evasion.
                                                                          18
     The probability that a given tax return wilt be subjected to audit

clearly is not constant and depends on certain characterictics of the return.

The IRS develops formulas for identifying particularly likely candidates for

audit; the TCMP survey is one input into developing these formulas. For

obvious reasons, the formulas themselves are a secret closely guarded by the

IRS. Rowever, it is public information how the fraction of returns audited

differs for different subgroups, called examination classes, of the taxpaying

population.

     The result5 of including as an explanatory variable the appropriate frac-

tion of returns audited in the taxpayer's examination class (PROB) are pre-

sented in the third and fourth columns of Table 2.19 The estimated coefficient

on PROS is positive and significant for both reported contributions and

auditor—adjusted contributions, although the estimate is significantly higher

for auditor—adjusted contributions, 5.97 compared to 4.96. This implies that




'8This refers to a standard audit, not a TCMP audit, for which the selection
  procedure is different.

t9Note that the amount of reported charitable contributions cannot affect which
  examination class a return is placed in, which depends on the sum of the
  positive elements of income, the presence of self—employment income, and
  the presence of farm income. One's examination class does, though, depend
  on the taxpayer's report of other components of income, and therefore PROS
  may depend on the extent of non—charity evasion.   if the disturbance term
  in the non—charity evasion equation is correlated with the disturbance term
  in a charity equation, then PROS and the latter disturbance term will be
  correlated, so that the OLS estimator wilt be inconsistent.
                                     —15—


a higher value of p tends to decrease charity overstatement, as the theory

would suggest.2°

     According to the behavioral model of Section 3, another influence on

charitable contributions and their overstatement is the utility cost of detec-

tion, which depends on the total amount of evasion attempted, the pecuniary

penalty likely to be charged, and any psychic costs to being audited. To the

extent that psychic costs can be proxied by demographic variables such as age,

they are already accounted for in the vector of independent variables. The

expected penalty to be charged for any given amount of evasion probably does

not vary systematically by individual. The data does, though, contain a proxy

for the dollar cost of detected non—charity evasion——the auditor's suggested

change in the taxpayer's total tax liability, net of the change due to any

adjustment in charitable contributions. 9ecause non—charity evasion is

endogenous, it is an inappropriate right—hand side variable.

     Columns 5 and 6 of Table 2 report the results of an instrumental—variables

estimation procedure. The instruments for the dollar cost of detected non—

charity evasion are dummy variables for the presence of total income, rental

income, Schedule C income, and capital gains income. These are presumed to

infLuence the opportunities for non—charity evasion, but not the attractiveness

of charity overstatement. Including the predicted value of the dolLar cost of




20To a first approximation, estimated charity overstatement will increase with
  an explanatory variable if        —        is   positive, where 6R and A are the
  estimated responses to the variable of reported and auditor—adjusted contri-

  butions, respectively. Because ()     is    approximately 1.07 in the aggregate.
  (CR)R —     is negative for PROB, suggesting that overstatement declines
  with a higher probability of detection.
                                     —16—


detected non—charity evasion (PCOST) does not substantially affect the esti-

mated coefficients of the other variables.   It does slightly reduce the esti-

mated price responsiveness of reported and actual contributions. As the theory

suggests, a higher value of PCOST reduces the amount of charity overstatement.

Both reported and auditor—adjusted contributions increase with PCOST, but the

increase in reported contributions falls short of the increase in auditor—

adjusted contributions.

     Finally, the dependence of the probability of detection on the amount of

charitable contribution overstatement is likely to affect taxpayer behavior.

Unfortunately, no appropriate proxy for this is available. If this is propor-

tional to the probability of detection itself, then the PROS variable is

already picking up the effect of this variable ott behavior.

     The procedures reported in Table 2 were repeated separately for cash and

non—cash contributions. The results for cash contributions, which accounted

For 87% of the value of all contributions by itemizers in 1982, are quite

simil.ar to the aggregated results——price elasticities in excess of two, which

rise slightly when reported contributions are replaced by auditor—adjusted

contributions. For non—cash contributions, the estimated price elasticity is

approTtixately minus one and the estimated income elasticity is approximately

0.1. Neither f these estimated coefficients changes much when auditor—

adjusted contributions are substituted for reported contributions.


6. Conclusions

     These preliminary results suggest that the answer to the question posed

in the title—are estimated tax elasticities really just tax evasion elasti

cittes?——is no in the case of charitable contributions. The tax responsiveness

of charitable giving that has been detected using tax return data cannot be
                                     —17—


ascribed to the tag responsiveness of overstating actual giving. In fact,

overstatement is apparently less price responsive than actual giving, implying

that the responsiveness of actual giving is higher than is suggested by study-

ing reported contributions.

     Estimates of all types of behavioral response, based on tax reports,

inevitably reflect both an evasion elasticity and an underlying behavioral

elasticity. Poterba (1987), using aggregate time—series data on reported

capital. gains realizations and compliance rates, concludes that at least one—

quarter of the observed capital gain realization response to changes in mar-

ginal tax rates is due to changes in reporting behavior, rather than portfolio

behavior. Thus, the answer to the question posed in the title of this paper

may be "to some extent, yes" for activities other that charitable giving. This

is a subject worth pursuinc .ecause the policy implications of observed respon-

siveness to taxation depend on how much of this response is in the reporting

of behavior rather than the behavior itself.
                                        —18—


                                   RE      NCE S


Alexander, C. and Feinstein, J., "A Microeconometric Analysts of Individual
     Income Tax Evasion Behavior," minco, M.I.T. (August 1986).

Allingham, M. C. and Sandno, A., "Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis."
     Journal of Public Economics 1 (1972): 323—338.

Clotfelter, C., "Tax Evasion and Tax Rates: An Analysts of Individual
     Returns." Review of Economics and Statistics 45 (1983): 363—373.

C1otfeltei, C. and Steuerle, C. E., "Charitable Contributions." In II. Aaron
     and J, ?echrnan, eds. , flow Taxes Affect Economic Behavior. Washington,
     D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1981.

O'abin, Jeffrey A. and Wilde, Louis L., "An Empirical Anal.ysis of Federal
     income Tax Auditing and Compliance." California Institute of Technology
     Social Science Working Paper 615. October 1986.

Internal Revenue Service, Taxpayer Compliance Measurement Program Handbook,
     January 1984.

Pitt, M., "Smuggling and Price Disparity." Journal of International Economics
     11 (1981): 447—458.

Poterba, J,, "Tax Evasion and Capital Gains Taxation," American Economic Review
     77 (1937).

Reece, W. and Zieschang, K., "Consistent Estimation of the Impact of Tax Deduc—
     ttbility on the Level of CharitabLe Contributions," Econornetrica 53
     (1985): 271—293.

Witte, A. and t'toodward S., "The Effect of Tax Laws and Tax Administration on
     Tax Compliance: The Case of the U.S. Individual Income Tax," National
     Tax Journal 38 (March 1985):   1—14.

Yitzhaki, S., "A Note on 'Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis'."
     Journal of Public Economics 3 (1974): 201—202.
