                         HBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                MAKING BEQUESTS WITHOUT SPOILING CHILDREN:
             BEQUESTS AS AN IMPLICIT OPTIMAL TAX STRUCTURE AND
        THE POSSIBILITY THAT ALTRUISTIC BEQUESTS ARE HOT EQUALIZING




                           Laurence 2. Kotlikoff

                                Assaf Ream




                           Working Paper No. 2735




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                             Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 October 1988




We are grateful to the National Institute of Aging (grant #1P01AC05842-Ol)
and the International Nonetary Fund for research support. This research is
part of the NBER's research programs in Aging and Taxation. The views
expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Institute of Aging, the International Monetary Fund, or
the National. Bureau of Econoalc Research.
                                           NEER Working Paper #2735
                                           October 1988


                     MAKING BEQUESTS WITHOUT SPOILING CHILDREN:
                 BEQUESTS AS AN IMPLICIT OPTIMAL TAX STRUCTURE AND
            THE POSSIBILITY THAT ALTRUISTIC BEQUESTS ARE NOT EQUALIZING


                                     ABSTRACT




     This   paper examines the bequest\gift behavior of altruistic parents who

do not know their children's sbilities and cannot observe theit children's

work effort. Parents are likely to respond to this information problem by

making larger bequests to higher earning children and by using their transfers

implicitly either to tax at the msrgin low earning children or to subsidize at

the margin high earning children. These implicit tax ratea may be quite

large, despite the fact that total transfers are small. The paper suggests

that labor supply studies should take into account potential implicit family

taxation as wall as official government taxation. In addition, the fact that

the family may play an implicit role in taxation means that there may be less

need for the government to play auch a role.




Laurence J. Kotlikoff                      Asaaf Razin
NEER                                       Research Department
1350 Massachusetts Avenue                  IMU
Cambridge, NA 02138                        700 19th Street, NW.
                                           Washington. DC 20431
                                     —3—




     The assumption that parents know perfectly the abilities of their

children underlies most, if not all, of the theoretical research on

intergenerational transfers. This assumption has s strong implication, namely

that sltruistic psrenta will make transfers to their children that are

independent of their children's work efforts. As this paper demonstrates, if

altruistic parents do not know their children's abilities and cannot observe

their work effort, they will condition their transfers on the level of their

children's labor earnings. To keep their children from pretending (by working

and earning less) to be of low ability in order to garner a larger transfer,

parents are likely to sake larger transfers to high earning children and

smaller transfers to low earning children. Indeed, in addressing their

information problem, altruistic parents may produce more inequality in. the

final consumption of children than would arise if parents were not altruistic.

To help keep their children from freeloading, parents may alao make their

transfers, at the margin, a function of their children's labor earnings. As a

consequence children's marginal returns to labor supply can.differ, and

potentially greatly, from their observed after tax wages.

     Thoae familiar with the optimal income tax literature (Mirrleea, 1971;

Sadka, 1976; Stiglita, 1987) may sense a parallel between a parent who

redistributea among children of unobserved ebilitiea and a government that

rediatributes among citizen of unobaerved abilities. Indeed, the two problems

are essentially isomorphic. An immediate implication of this proposition is

that if government and parental preferences about the distribution of welfare

coincide there may be no optimal income tax role for the government; i.e.

parental choice of average and marginal transfers may substitute perfectly for

the government's optimal tax structure.
                                      -4-




     The next section. II. contsins a simple model that illustrates the nature

of the parent's information problem. The model is used to show how the

parent's total and marginal transfers depend on the child's observed aarnings

Section III calculates for a specific utility function and a specified list of

parameters the values of transfers, the implicit marginal tax associated with

transfers, and other endogenous variables. Section IV discuases the model's

implications concerning debt neutrality pointing out that, as in Feldstein

(1988), Ricardian Equivalence will not hold in states of nature in which

transfers are operative provided that in other states of nature transfers are

inoperative. States of nature refer here to the realized abilities of

children. Section IV also concludes the paper with suggestions for additional

research.




II. The Choice of Transfers under Asymmetric Information

     A static model suffices to clarify the problem of an altruistic parent

who wishes to transfer to a child, but does not know the child's ability and

can not observe the child's effort: The parent must infer from his (her)

observation of the child's earnings the ability and effort of the child. The

parent's utility depends on the parent's own   consumption   and the utility of

the child. The utility of the child, in turn, is a concave function of the

child's own   consumption and the child's effort. Prior to observing the
child's labor earnings, the parent announces a set of transfers to the child

conditional on the child's labor earnings    Hence, the parent maximizes his

(her) expected utility over the different possible states corresponding to

different levels of the child's ahility. The constraints in this maximization
                                         —5—




problem include the parent and child's combined budget constraint, self

selection constraints, and nonnegativity constraints on transfers from parents

to children. The self selection constraints ensure that the child will

truthfully reveal hia (her) ability,

      With the exception of the nonnegativity constraints on transfers, the

problem is isomorphic to that of a government maximizing a weighted average of

its own utility from consumption and the utility of low and high ability

workers in the case that ability is unobservable. In place of an optimal

income tax, the parent uses his (her) trensfer to the child both to

redistribute end to provide the proper marginal incentives necessary for

truthful revelation.

      To illustrate the problem in the siaplest manner let the child have two

possible ability levels, A1 and Ah, where A1 t Ah.            Earnings of the low and

high ability children are denoted by E1 and Eh. respectively. The

relationships between earnings, ability, and effort of the low and high

ability children, 4 and Lh, are given by


(1)          —
                 A1L1

           EhAhLh
In equation (1) the wage per unit of effective labor supply is normalized to



      The expected utility function of the parent is given by



(2) W                                    +                +
           q[U(C1) +    $V(Ckl,El/Al)]       (l—q)[U(C)
                                           —6—




where q is the probability the child is of low ability, C,1 and Cph are the

consumption values of the parent if the child turns out to have low or high

ability respectively, and V( ,     ) is    the utility function of the child which

depends on his (her) conaumption (Ckl for the low ability child and Ckh for

the high ability child) and his or her effort L1 or Lb. In (2) these effort

levels are replaced (using (1)) by earnings divided by ability.

      The parent's problem is to maximiss (2) with respect to
                                                                           Ckl. Cph
Ckh. l' and h subject to the budget constraints given in (3) and (4), the

self selection constrsints given in (5) and (6), and the nonnegativity

constraints on transfers given in (7) and (8). In the budget constraints Y

stands for the parents income. Note that Y —              is   the parent's transfer to

the low ability child, and Y —            is the parent's transfer to the high
                                   Cph
ability child.



           1' +
(3)
                  E1 C1 + Ckl
(4)        Y+EhCh+Ckh
(5)
           V(Ckh.   E*n/An)   V(C1, E1/A.0)

(6)        V(Ckl. E1/A1)      V(Ckh,   h"1
(7)
           YC1
(8)
           YCh
      Let us associate the Lagrsngian multipliers l and            with the

constraints (3) and (4), respectively, the multipliers A1 and Ah with the

constraints (5) and (6), respectively, and the multipliers p and h with the

constraints (7) and (8), respectively. Equations (9)—(14) present the first
                                              —7—




order conditions for the choices of Cr1, Cph. Ckl. C, E1, and                under the

assumptions that (5) is binding, that (6) is not binding, and that transfers

are nonnegative, i.e. ,   that   p1 and TMh are 0.



(9)         qU(C1) —      —0


(10)        (L—q)U (Ch) — 9h — 0

                                      —                       — 0
(11)        qflV1(C1,E1/A1) —    oi       AhVl(Ckl.El/A.fl)

(12)        (1—q)fiV1(C,E.0/A,0) — 0h +       AhVl   kh.Fh'Ah) —    C



(13)        qfiV2(C1.E1/A1)—— + 01 —         hV2
                                                                    —


(14)        (]._)flV2(Ckh.Eh/Ah) + 0h          ÷ Ah21ththt)Ah

       The combinations of (9) and (11) and (10) and (12) indicate that the

parent equates his (her) marginal utility of consumption to             times the

child's marginal utility of consumption plus a term that indicates how

increasing the child's consumption through an increase in transfers (since

transfers equal Y minus parent's consumption) affects the self selection

constraint (5). In the case of equation (11) transferring another dollar to

the child (increasing the child's consumption by a dollar) raises the high

ability child's utility when he pretends to be of low ability; this makes the

self selection more difficult to satisfy and therefore raises, at the margin,

the cost of transferring to the child. The opposite occurs with respect to

equation (12).

       The addition of equations (12) and (14) indicate that the high ability

child's marginal rate of substitution —(V2/V1) between consumption and effort
                                                —8—




is equated to his        (her)   marginal productivity (Ah) -   This   is not the case for

the low ability child. The addition of (11.) and (13) indicates that the low

ability child faces an implicit marginal tax at rate r, where '-              is   given by



(15)            —                                H,
                    (qP —   A)   Vl(CklEl/Al)
and

(16) H —                                                                —
           V1(C1     Ekl/A.fl) —   V1(C1 Ekl/Al) +
                                                      V2(CklEl/A.h)_        V2(Ckl,El/Al)3-

If V12     0,   i.e. ,   the   marginal utility of consumption decreases with the

amount of effort (increases with the amount of leisure), qfl —              )th (from
equation (LI)) and H (from equation (16)) are positive. Hence, the tax rate

on the high ability child is positive since 1h is positive.

       If the self selection constraint on the low ability child's utility

(equation (6)) is binding, a similar argument indicates that the low ability

child will face a zero implicit marginal tax, while the high ability child

will face an implicit marginal subsidy.

       In the case of full information there are no self selection constraints,

so the solution can be found by simply setting Ah or A1 equal to zero in the

first order conditions for the choice of Cr1, Cph 0k1' kh' E1, and Eh. In

this case there is, of course, no distortion of the child's work effort, and

the parent equates his (her) marginsl utility of consumption to $ times the

child's marginal utility of consumption.

       Figure 1 depicts the case in which the self selection constraint on the

high ability child is binding. The diagram, which is, except for symbols,

identical to that in Sadka (1976), plots the utility of the child in
                  Figure 1.   Using Bequests as an ImpUcit Tax to

                                           Sort Children



[       ,L
    k        kh




                                                              ---—-slope = 1




                         '-slope < 1




                                                                    C
                                                                        1      h
                                        —9—




consumption and earnings space assuming V12 s    0.   At any paint in this space

the slope of the high ability child's indifference curve i smaller than that

of the low ability child. At the optimum the high ability child is at point A

and    faces no implicit marginal tax (i.e. the slope of his (her) indifference

curve is I). At point A the high ability child is Indifferent between

truthfully revealing his (her) ability and pretending to he of low ability by

earning E1 and consuming Ckl at point B. The low ability child ends up at

point B with the slope of his (her) indifference curve less than 1, indicating

a positive implicit tax.1



UI. Comparisons of the Asymmetric end Perfect Information Solutions

       The log—linear utility function given in equation (17) is useful for

illuatrating differences between the full information and asymmetric

information   problems -


(17)        W — q[logC
                           1 fl(logC1— a(E1JA)] + (l—q)(logC+     $(logCkh—aE.fl/A.hfl]

It is easy to show for this function that the two self selection constraints
can not   simulataneously be   binding. From the first order conditions it is
easy   to confirm the following relationships, where the superscript f stands

for the case of full information and the superscript a stands for the case of

asymmetric information.
(18)                    >

                        <


                   ph       ph

                   a        f
                   kh       kh




                   4?E
        In words,       in the asyassetric information case the parent of the high

ability child consumes less and makes a larger tranafer (since transfers equal

Y —           P   while     the parent of the low ability child consumes more and makes a
       Cph)
smaller transfer. Hence, transfers are less equalizing for this utility

function when information is asymmetric, and as presently described, under

asymmetric information the transfer to the high ability child csn exceed that

to the low sbility child, while the reverse holds under full information. The

equations in (18) also indicate that the high ability child consumes the same,

but earns less in the asymmetric information case with increased transfers

making up for the lower earnings. The low ability child consumes less in the

asymmetric case, but his (her) earnings may be larger or smaller.

        Table 1 comparea the asymmetric and full information solutions for this

utility function for a range of parameter values. The results are quite

striking. For each of the sets of parameters asymmetric information leads

parents to transfer more to the high ability child than to the low ability

child, i.e., transfers are not equalizing. For example, for the benchmark
                                     —11—




parameters the transfers, under full information, are 1.42 to the low ability

child and .9 to the high ability child. With incomplete information, however,

the transfers are almost the reverse, with only 1.04 going to the Low ability

child and 1.34 going to the high ability child. The counterpart of these

differences in transfers is that the conaumption of parents will be quite

different when information is asymmetric than when it is not. For the

benchmark parameters parents of high ability children consume 2.10 under full

information but only 1.66 under asymmetric information, while parents of Low

ability children consume 1.58 under full information but 1.96 under asymmetric

information.

     The consumption of low ability children in the benchmark case is 1.50

with full information, but only 1.36 with asymmetric information; for high

ability children, earnings adjust to maintain the same consumption level under

full and asymmetric information. Hence, compared with the case of full

informstion, the consumption of high and low ability children is less equal

when information is asymmetric. Indeed, when information is asymmetric the

process of parents transferring to their children can lead to more inequality

in their children's consumption than would occur if parents were not

altruistic and made no transfers to their children. For the benchmark

parameters, but with — 0, the high ability child's consumption is 2.00,

while the low ability child's consumption is 1.50 (as in the full information

case with — .95),

     The implicit marginal tax rates on the low ability child listed in Table

1 range from 7 percent to 28 percent. The 28 percent figure is particularly

interesting. This implicit tax rate arises when Ah equals 1.25 while A1
                                      —12—




remains at 75. Compared with the benchmark case the implicit marginal tax

rate is over three times larger, although the total transfer to the low

ability child is almost 25 percent smaller. This comparison indicates that

implicit marginal taxation through parental bequests and intervivos transfers

can be quite large despite the fact that total transfers are small.

     The different parameter combinations considered in the second two columns

of Table 1 suggest that children's labor earnings can be quite sensitive to

the extent of altruism (the level of fi).    Columns 5 and 6 of this Table

consider a lower value of the probability q of having a low ability child. In

the case of asymmetric information the smaller value of q leads to smaller

transfers to both the high and low ability children, but to a higher implicit

tax on the low ability child.



Section IV Implications for Debt Neutrelity end Conclusions

     Any new model of intergenerational transfers should be immediately

examined with respect to Robert garro's (1974) debt neutrality proposition

(Ricardian Equivalence). As in Feldatein (1988) the model presented here will

not exhibit Ricerdian Equivalence in states of nature when altruistic

transfers are operative unless transfers are operative in all states of

nature. To see this suppose that the solution to the parent's problem

involves zero transfers to the high ability child, but positive transfers to

the low ability child. The self selection constraint (5) in this case may

still be binding, because the high ability child may try to disguiee himself

(herself) as a low ability child to receive a transfer. If the government

redistributes from the parent to the child independent of the child's earnings
                                     —13—




(in a lump sum fashion) the utility of the high ability child will increase.

Eut this will alter the self selection constraint (5) and, thereby, alter the

outcome when the child is of low ability. In particular, by increasing the

left bend side of (5) the government policy relaxes this self selection

constraint evaluated at the pre—government transfer optimum. As a consequence

the total (government plus parent) transfers to the low ability child will

likely be greater as a result of the government's policy. Hence, the policy

will likely be effective in redistributing to the child regardless of whether

the child turns out to be of high or low ability.

     to summarize this paper's findings, the inability of parents to know or

to monitor perfectly their children's work efforts can significantly alter

parental transfers to children. Parents are likely to respond to their

information problem by making larger bequests to higher earning children and

by using their transfers implicitly either to tax at the margin low earning

children or to subsidize at the margin high earning children. These implicit

tax rates may be quite large, despite the fact that total transfers are small.

Hence, labor supply studies should take into account potential implicit family

taxation as well as official government taxation. In addition, the fact that

the family may play an implicit role in taxation means that there may be less

need for the government to play such a role.
                                     —14—




                                    Notes



1. To be more precise, the slope (the right derivative) of the budget

constraint relating the child's pre—perent transfer earnings to his (her)

post—parent transfer consumption at point 3 must be less unity. Indeed, this

slope must be less then or equal to the elope of the high ability child's

indifference curve at point B; ie, the "marginal tax schedule must have a

kink at point B.
                                     —15-—




                                  References


Feldstein, Martin, "The Effects of Fiscal Policies when Incomes are Uncertain:
A Contrediction to Ricardien Equivalence." American Economic Review, March
1988.

Mirrlese, James, "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation,"
Review of Economic Studies, vol. 38, 1971, 175—208.


Sadka, Efrai'n, "On Income Distribution, Incentive Effects and Optimal Income
Taxation," Review of Economic Studies, vol 43, 1976, 261—68.


Stiglitz, Joseph, "Pareto Efficient and Optimal Taxation and the New New
Welfare Economics," in The Handbook of Public Economics, Amsterdam, Holland:
North Holland, 1987.
                                    —16—




                                  Table 1

           Calculations Based on the Log—Linear Utility Function

       Benchmark      fl—.75        q— .25       a— .40       Ah.l.25
              FT     AT   Fl       AT   Fl       Al   Fl      Al   Fl
       1.96 1.58    2.43 2.00     2.20 1.58     2.46 1.97    2.26 1.58
C,1
       1.66 2.10    2.15 2.67     1.87 2.10     2.09 2.63    1.75 2.63
Cph

Ckl    1.36 1.50    1.39 1.50     1.30 1.50     1.72 2.24    1.07 1.50

Ckh    2.00 2.00    2.00 2.00     2.00 2.00     2.50 2.50    2.50 2.50

E1       .34 .08      .83 .50      .50 .08      1.18 .85      .33 .08

Eh       .67 1.11    1.15 1.67     .87 1.11     1.58 2.13    1.25 2.13

        1.04 1.42     .57 1.00     .80 1.42      .54 1.03     .74 1.42
T1

Th      1.34 .09      .85 .33     1.13 .90       .91 .37     1.25 .37

         .09 .00      .07 .00      .13 .00       .08 .00      .28 .00


Except where indicated all parameters are the benchmark parameters. The
benchmark parameters are?— 3, A1 — .75. A— 1, q — .5, fi — .95, a—
  r stands for the implicit marginal tax on the low ability child, It is
defined by Wi — A1.(1—r1) for i—1,h, where MRS is the marginal rate of
substitution between consumption and effort.
