                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            EMES AND COVID-19:
           SHUTTING DOWN IN A WORLD OF INFORMAL AND TINY FIRMS

                                          Laura Alfaro
                                         Oscar Becerra
                                         Marcela Eslava

                                       Working Paper 27360
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27360


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Laura Alfaro, Oscar Becerra, and Marcela Eslava. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
EMEs and COVID-19: Shutting Down in a World of Informal and Tiny Firms
Laura Alfaro, Oscar Becerra, and Marcela Eslava
NBER Working Paper No. 27360
June 2020
JEL No. F0,O17,O20,O47

                                          ABSTRACT

Emerging economies are characterized by an extremely high prevalence of informality, small-
firm employment and jobs not fit for working from home. These features factor into how the
COVID-19 crisis has affected the economy. We develop a framework that, based on accounting
identities and actual data, quantifies potential job and income losses during the crisis and
recovery for economies with different economic organization structures. Our analysis
incorporates differential exposure of jobs across categories of firm-size and formality status, as
well as sectors and occupations. We account for the direct supply shock caused by lockdowns,
the idiosyncratic demand shock suffered by sectors that rely on high contact with their
costumers, the transmission of both shocks through IO linkages, and the overall aggregate
demand effect derived from these shocks. Applying our framework to data for Colombia,
which exhibits an employment distribution similar to that of other emerging market countries,
in particular Latin America, we find that well over 50% of jobs are at risk in the initial stages of
the crisis. Because informal jobs and those not fit for telework are at higher risk, this number
goes down to 33% if the US employment distribution is imposed on the Colombian data. As
the crisis deepens, the risk of unemployment grows. However, informality rebounds quickly
in the recovery, an employment at risk is quickly reduced to 20% of the baseline, all
concentrated in formal jobs. Our findings point to the importance of action to maintain formal
matches from dissolving, given their scarcity and rebuilding difficulty, while protecting the
poor and the informal via income transfers.

Laura Alfaro                                     Marcela Eslava
Harvard Business School                          Universidad de los Andes
Morgan Hall 263                                  Calle 19A # 1-37 Este. Bloque W of. 810
Soldiers Field                                   Bogotá, Colombia
Boston, MA 02163                                 meslava@uniandes.edu.co
and NBER
lalfaro@hbs.edu

Oscar Becerra
Universidad de los Andes
Calle 19A No 1-37 Este. Office W-824
Bogota
Colombia
obecerra@uniandes.edu.co
1        Introduction
Informality and employment in microenterprises are prevalent in emerging and developing countries,
accounting for over 50% of the labor force in many of them. Informal workers lack employment
protection. Those in very small …rms, not all of which are also informal, are more exposed to
job losses than those in larger …rms, as the former are less able to continue paying workers in the
absence of income. Moreover, workers in poorer countries locate in occupations less …t for telework,
given low education levels, greater concentration of workers in the production of low-sophistication
goods and services, and low connectivity.
    Given these di¤erential features, workers in emerging economies, are exposed to immediate labor
income losses in the face of physical-distancing policies to limit the e¤ects of the pandemic, and
less able to self-isolate in the absence of mandatory lockdowns. The overall impact on livelihoods
is starker in these countries because automatic stabilizers via the social security system are weak,
frequently even nonexistent. On the other hand, informal jobs come back to life in a recovery phase
more easily than do jobs in formal …rms, which, unlike them, depend on high organizational and
physical capital, and are subject to entry, exit and hiring costs of regulation.
    In this paper, we assess the vulnerability of employment and income to the COVID-19 crisis
in emerging and poorer markets relative to the developed world. Our comparison accounts for the
distribution of workers across sectors, …rm size categories, and occupations. In our framework,
the risk of losing one’s income increases as the duration of the crisis progresses. This is because
employers, who act as insurers by continuing to pay payroll expenses in markets with …ring and
layo¤ restrictions, erode their cash reserves as time passes. Larger companies tend to have more
cash reserves and better access to credit than smaller …rms and are thus better able to continue
paying employees.1
    We consider exposure to the economic e¤ects of the crisis that depends on the following mecha-
nisms. First, a direct supply shock emerging from lockdowns will a¤ect primarily sectors producing
non essentials (e.g. apparel).2 In any sector a¤ected by closures, however, a worker is less ex-
posed to income/job losses if she usually works from home or her occupation is such that she can
telecommute. Second, an idiosyncratic (domestic) demand shock can result from a reduction of
demand for speci…c goods and services as a result of the health emergency. This a¤ects primarily
sectors dependent on face-to-face interactions with customers, such as hotels or theaters and, to
a lesser extent, restaurants and non-essential retail. Third, the previous e¤ects can be ampli…ed
by input-output (IO) linkages. Finally, we consider overall income reductions caused by the above
channels a¤ecting all sectors, creating a Keynesian aggregate demand multiplier e¤ect.3
    1A recent survey by Bartik et al. (2020) documents the small cash reserves for small businesses in the U.S., in
emerging markets, it is often less than three weeks. See Section 3.1 for a description of the Colombian context.
  2 Besides lockdown, supply shocks include other policy regulations (like work protocols for functioning businesses),

and also voluntary closures in the absence of lockdown measures.
  3 In this sense, our approach relates to that of Farhi and Baqaee (2019, 2020) who also incorporate these di¤erent




                                                          1
    In our environment, informal and self-employed workers are most exposed, to the point that
they can lose their income sources as soon as the crisis hits and/or con…nement /quarantine is in
place. This is because they are not protected by links to an employer bound by …ring restrictions
or other employment protection regulations. The next most-a¤ected are formal workers in smaller
…rms, and …nally those in larger …rms. The high prevalence of informality and employment in small
…rms in EMEs thus implies higher vulnerability to the economic e¤ects of the crisis, in particularly
the risk of immediate income and job losses.
    Paradoxically, informal jobs and informal businesses are relatively easily recoverable because
they face minimal organization capital and entry, hiring and …ring costs. In many EMEs, these
costs are substantial, implying labor market rigidities that increase the duration of unemployment
spells. Though formal …rms, particularly the large ones, are more resistant to initial shocks, they
su¤er disadvantages during protracted downturns. Recovering the lost value from destroyed formal
jobs and formal …rms, for which organizational capital is highly valuable and hard to rebuild and
labor and corporate regulations are binding, is much more di¢ cult than recovering informal jobs.
    We quantify and analyze the e¤ects of the aforementioned four di¤erent channels for the case
of Colombia, which is representative of Latin America and other EMEs in terms of having a labor
market with extremely high informality and a high concentration of workers in self-employment
and very small …rms. We then run a counterfactual analysis by assuming that workers are relo-
cated across occupations, sectors and …rm size categories to mimic the distributions of a developed
economy, with minimal informality and a lesser prevalence of employment in microenterprises and
in occupations un…t for telework. In terms of policies, we focus on lockdowns, which have been the
prevalent approach to deal with the pandemia in most EMEs.4
    We …nd that, compared to baseline data for 2019, as many as 56% of jobs and 43% of aggregate
value added are at risk in the initial stages of the crisis. Because the informal sector is at higher
risk, these numbers go down to 33% and 30%, respectively, if the distribution of employment in
the U.S. is imposed on the Colombian data. As the crisis deepens, employment at risk grows to
67%, (60% under the U.S. distribution). Informality rebounds quickly during recovery, however,
and employment at risk is quickly reduced to 20% of the baseline, while under the U.S. distribution
(but maintaining labor market rigidities such as in Colombia) risk would remain at 40% in the
initial recovery phase.
   Our work relates to a broader literature aiming to understand the di¤erence in …rm hetero-
geneity across nations and its role for aggregate activity. Researchers have documented that, in
dimensions of the economic shock.
    4 TTI expansion is clearly on the agenda, and probably should be prioritized, but it has faced de facto constraints

in light of limited capabilities of the governments in EMEs to access testing kits. Age policies, in turn, are subject
to questions. First, most elderly live with their families, especially in EMEs and developing economies, so that they
are exposed to contagion when any member of the family is exposed. In Colombia, close of 70% of those over 65 live
in households with members under that age. Second, age policies may not be constitutional, as they limit liberties
in light of criteria that are discriminatory.



                                                          2
manufacturing, average …rm size is smaller, and the …rm size distribution is much more concentrated
in the far lower tail in less developed economies in comparison to the developed world (Tybout,
2000; Hiseh and Klenow, 2009; Poshke, 2018). That fact has been recently traced back to a lower
average life cycle growth of manufacturing establishments in developing countries, driven especially
by poorer dynamics in super star plants (Hsieh and Klenow, 2014; Eslava, Haltiwanger and Pinzon,
2019). More recently, the prevalence of small …rm employment in developing economies has been
shown to hold for sectors other than manufacturing, and be particularly acute in certain services
sectors (e.g. Alfaro and Eslava, 2020; Alfaro, Charlton and Kanczuk, 2009).5 A large literature
links the prevalence of small …rms and small …rm employment to the existence of distortions to
the optimal allocation of resources. Much of this literature aims at quantifying the magnitude and
distribution of the distortions implicit in the …rm size distribution in developing vs. developed
economies (e.g. Hsieh and Klenow, 2009; Bento and Restuccia, 2020). In this paper we show that
the fact that the size and growth distribution are shifted to the left has important economic and
policy implications for the management of crises in emerging markets.
    As such, our paper relates to a rapidly emerging literature studying the aggregate economic
consequences of COVID-19. The theoretical literature on the economics of pandemics is already
vast.6 Here, we focus on the vulnerability of individuals based on data on the full distribution of
occupations and type of employment, using accounting identities. In that sense, our work is closer to
recent papers studying the evolution of the labor market and employment trends during the COVID-
19 pandemic (Cajner et al. 2020 and Coibion et al. 2020)), and those focusing on small businesses
(Humphries et al. 2020 and Bartik et al. 2020). Several researchers have provided estimates of
the supply shock from labor supply (Dingel and Neiman, 2020; Koren and Petot, 2020; Leibovi et
al. 2020). Compared to these works, our methodological innovation is the joint consideration of
demand, supply shocks and multiplier e¤ects in an empirical framework that highlights the role of
informality and small …rms.
    Indirect ampli…cation have been also analyzed by Barrot et al. (2020) who focus on the dis-
tancing e¤ects in a model of production networks, and analyze the sectoral e¤ects of the shock
for France. Baqaee and Fahri (2020 a, b) among others, advance the theoretical implications of
network models in the COVID context and analyze quantitative counterfactuals. In contrast to
these theoretical approaches, ours builds on accounting identities and observed characteristics of
labor markets, entry and exit and …rm-organization modes, and policy responses to the epidemics,
   5 Consistent with this, Bento and Restuccia (2020) show that average …rm size is smaller in services than manu-

facturing. Alfaro and Eslava (2020) also …nd that, although the distribution of …rm sizes is shifted to the left relative
to developed economies in all sectors, and shifted to the left in services relative to manufacturing in all countries,
the developing-developed gap is smaller in services than in manufacturing.
   6 See Acemoglu et al. (2020), Alvarez et al. (2020), Atkenson (2020), among others. Alfaro, Faia, Lamersdorf,

and Saidi (2020) modify the SIR model to include agents’ optimizing decisions on social interactions. Susceptible
individuals internalize infection risk based on their patience, infected ones do so based on their fear and altruism,
and reciprocity matters for internalizing risk.




                                                           3
focusing on emerging markets.
    Alon et al (2020) also incorporate di¤erences betwen more and less developed economies. They
o¤er a contrast between countries with di¤erent demographics and prevalence of informality, in
terms of the evolution of contagion and economic outcomes in the crisis. Our focus, meanwhile, is
on job and labor income losses, under exposure di¤erentials associated with the structure of the
economy across sectors, occupations, and business organization modes. We also have a di¤erent
take on informality. While in Alon et al.’s environment informal sector workers are individual units
which can operate even under lockdown policies, we model an informal sector that, as has been
the case in the predominant urban areas of Latin America, is a¤ected by lockdowns.7 Rather than
segmented, informal and formal activities in many EMEs form an integrated market in which …rms
and workers interact based on their comparative advantage and regulation barriers (Meghir, Narita,
Robin, 2015). Informal workers have in fact been a major concern, and the focus of mitigation e¤orts
during the crisis in EMEs. While lockdown measures have indeed been ine¤ective in many rural
and isolated areas across the world, and in some urban areas in the poorest countries, we see this
more as an expression of lack of state presence than a consequence of informality per se.
    Our work also relates to Barrero et al. (2020) who focus on the reallocation e¤ects of the COVID-
19 shock. Alfaro, Chari, Greenland and Schott (2020) link the seemingly con‡icting narratives from
the stock and labor markets based on the disease progression, showing that day-to-day changes in
the predictions of standard models of infectious disease forecast changes in aggregate stock returns
in pandemics and investors views regarding …rms capacities to adjust and cut costs.
    Di¤erent economic structures between wealthy and poorer countries factor into how the crisis
a¤ects the economy and optimal policy options. Informality, prevalent in emerging markets, and
…rm size distribution tilted towards micro-enterprises, should be considered when designing the
response to the pandemic. The urgency of protecting livelihoods of the poor and informal suggests
that income transfers for this population should be immediately considered, as has in fact been
done in many Latin American countries. Meanwhile, measures aimed at alleviating income losses
for formal workers may be insu¢ cient. Avoiding the loss of formality, especially in environments
where formal jobs and …rms are scarce, is of the foremost importance. Moreover, given the limits
to the …scal capabilities of states, this will only be possible if health strategies such as testing and
tracing are expanding at a su¢ ciently rapid pace to reduce the need for extended lockdowns.
    Section 2 presents our conceptual and empirical frameworks. The context in Colombia, data
and the measurement strategy builds on the …rst sections and are discussed in detail in Section 3.
We present our results in sections 4 and 5, …rst describing the Colombian labor market in light of
our measures of exposure, and then quantifying potential job and value added losses. We close with
a discussion of implications in the last section.
   7 Urbanization rates are not too di¤erent in Latin America nowadays compared to the developed world. For 2018,

for instance, close to 82.3% of population in the United States lived in urban areas, not far from the 80.5% on average
in Latin America, and 80.7% in Colombia.


                                                          4
2     Framework
2.1     Conceptual Framework
We develop an accounting framework to assess the vulnerability of employment and income to the
COVID-19 crisis. Our framework is based on data at the level of individual workers who had a job at
the beginning of the crisis, including information on the industry and occupation for each employee,
as well as the size of the …rm for which they worked (including the possibility of a one-person …rm
for, e.g., the self-employed).
    We assume that the economic risk for di¤erent workers and incomes depends on a variety of
attributes of the jobs, the sectors and the …rms to which they were attached before the crisis. In
particular, we evaluate the role of four attributes: formality/informality, …rm size, economic sector,
and occupation.
    Labor informality is a lack of compliance with labor regulations. Informal jobs are much more
‡exible than formal ones, both in terms of separations and hirings. They are not covered by
employment protection mechanisms, including …ring restrictions and severance payments. This
means they will be harder hit at the beginning of the crisis, potentially from its very onset. They
also open up easily, because they rely on low organizational and physical capital, which means that
in a recovery phase they are likely to come to life before other jobs do. Formal jobs in formal …rms,
meanwhile, take time to recover, and may even never do so.
    Firm-size is a determinant of the likelihood that the worker loses their job. For a job to survive
in a period where income is not generated, the employer has to either use its cash reserves or access
credit. Medium and large …rms typically have both larger cash reserves and more access to credit,
which implies that they can keep employment for longer periods. Meanwhile smaller …rms have
much more limited reserves and frequently no access to credit, so they are a¤ected more rapidly.
Once the shocks that gave birth to the crisis are gone, it is more likely that larger formal …rms
survived, so jobs attached to them may recover faster than those in smaller formal …rms. Both,
however, are more di¢ cult to recover than informal jobs.
    Some economic sectors are more vulnerable than others in the presence of lockdowns, due to
the nature of the lockdown policies applied to mitigate the health crisis. In the case of Colombia,
sectors producing and distributing essential goods and services, such as food or internet services, are
less vulnerable, and so are the jobs in those sectors, because they are typically allowed to continue
operating. This was also the case for sectors that are most easily transferred to the virtual world,
such as education and professional services.8 In the absence of lockdowns, sectors where buyers are
exposed to high contact with other people, such as hotels, restaurants and retail stores, are at risk
of facing demand reductions. The next section explains in detail the policies adopted.
   8 Arguably, preschool and primary education are less conducive for virtual education. It also a¤ects the ability of

caregivers to go to back to contact jobs and limits online work.



                                                          5
   The occupations that require high physical contact and that are not …t for telework are at higher
economic risk, regardless of the …rm-size and the economic sector. The inability to operate virtually
makes them more susceptible to lockdowns and demand contractions.
    For each worker, we consider exposure to the following shocks and mechanisms of transmission
of the e¤ects of the crisis:
   First, a direct supply shock that occurs when the sector in which the worker is in cannot operate
due to lockdowns (primarily sectors producing non-essentials) and the worker is not in an occupation
that is …t for telework. While there may be additional supply shocks due to voluntary closures of
businesses, we currently do not evaluate them due to a lack of relevant data. Worker illness related
to the pandemic from another potential supply-side shock. Up to mid-May, however, the spread
of the virus has been modest in Colombia (15K identi…ed cases and less than 600 deaths, for a
population of 50 million), so that this shock has not been sizeable.
   Second, a direct idiosyncratic demand shock that occurs when demand falls speci…cally for the
sector that depend on face-to-face interactions with customers (e.g. hotels or theaters and, to a
lesser extent, restaurants and non-essential retail).
   Along with the direct shocks, we also consider indirect supply and demand shocks that refer to
the indirect e¤ect of lockdown shocks because either downstream or upstream sectors (or both) are
a¤ected directly by lockdowns, and the indirect e¤ect of direct demand shocks because upstream
sectors are a¤ected by the direct demand shock (i.e. the food chain a¤ected by lower demand at
restaurants and hotels).
   Finally, all of the previous shocks are ampli…ed by an aggregate demand multiplier due to income
reductions implied by the above channels, which a¤ect demand in all sectors.


2.2     Accounting Framework
2.2.1   Aggregation

We use three di¤erent metrics for welfare-related outcomes that we calculate at the two-digit level
of aggregation: employment, labor income, and value added. For each individual i who had a job
at the baseline, employment (Li = 1) and labor income Wi are directly reported in the data for
the baseline case (actual 2019 data). De…ning Fi = f0; 1g as an indicator that individual i was in
a formal job at baseline, we generate the at-risk number of formal, informal, and total workers in
sector s, under di¤erent scenarios, as:




                                                   6
                                       f ormal
                                                   X
                                  Lriskst      =         it    Fi    Li
                                                   i2s
                                     Inf ormal
                                                   X
                                Lriskst        =         it    (1    Fi )     Li                             (1)
                                                   i2s
                                                       f ormal        Inf ormal
                                        Lriskst = Lriskst      + Lriskst        :

 it   2 [0; 1] measures the probability that worker i loses her job or income due to the crisis in period
t, taking into account the four dimensions of shocks previously discussed. t is a stage in the advance
of the crisis.
   We similarly generate at risk aggregate labor income (formal, informal, and total) and value
added in sector s as

                                             f ormal
                                                         X
                                       W riskst      =         it   Fi      Wi
                                                         i2s
                                           Inf ormal
                                                         X
                                     W riskst        =         it   (1      Fi )       Wi                    (2)
                                                         i2s
                                                       f ormal    Inf ormal
                                           W riskst = Wst      + Wst
                                                                    V AIO
                                          V Ariskst = Wst                          ;
                                                                    W IO       s

           V AIO
where      W IO
                       is the ratio of value added to labor income in s, obtained from the IO matrix.
                   s
We …nally aggregate across sectors to obtain aggregate measures of employment and value added:
     X          XX h                    i
                                V AIO
VA=      V As =         Wi      W IO
                                          .
                                               s
          s             s i2s


2.2.2     Economic Exposure

For any individual i who worked in sector s at baseline, her own exposure to potential income losses
from alternative crisis scenarios depends on an array of characteristics of her occupation and the
sector. We de…ne the probability that i losses her job and income,                      it   2 [0; 1], as:

                                it   = min f1; (S_shockit + D_shocks )                 ADg ;                 (3)

where S_shockit is a supply shock a¤ecting i’s job, D_shocks is a demand shock a¤ecting her
sector, and AD is an aggregate demand shock. S_shocki depends on whether person i’s sector
is in, or its customer or supplier sectors, is forced to shut down on-site activities; whether her
occupation is not …t for telework or requires high contact; and whether she is an employee at a




                                                          7
large or small …rm. In particular

 S_shockit = Sit          min f1; (1     Ti ) + High_contacti g           min f1; Locks + L_ups + L_downs g (4)

Ti is the probability that i can telework, while High_contacti is the probability that her job requires
high physical contact with others, both calculated based on i’s occupation. Sit = 0 if i works for
a …rm large enough that it does not need to …re its workers in period t even if it is not generating
income (because, for instance, it can rely on cash reserves to continue paying workers). Locks = 0
if sector s is among those allowed to continue operating under the lockdown, for di¤erent lockdown
scenarios. If the sector is not allowed to operate, Locks = 1. L_ups captures the indirect e¤ect of a
lockdown through reduced or closed operations at customer sectors (s is up from j), and L_downs
captures the indirect e¤ect through providers (s is down from j). More explicitly:
                                                 X                  purchasesj:f rom:s
                                       L_ups =           Lockj                                              (5)
                                                                       grossouts
                                                  j6=s
                                                 X                  purchasess:f rom:j
                                  L_downs =              Lockj
                                                                       grossouts
                                                  j6=s

   Notice that a sector that is allowed to continue on-site operations during lockdowns (Locks = 0)
will still be exposed to the lockdown shock of downstream and upstream sectors. And workers in
sectors a¤ected by the lockdown are not subject to the supply shock if they can telework and their
occupations do not require high physical contact with probability one. However, if lockdowns do not
a¤ect the sector either directly or through IO linkages, i.e. min f1; Locks + L_ups + L_downs g =
0, workers in that sector are not a¤ected by lockdowns, independent of their ability to telework.
That is, in this case S_shockit = 0.
   As discussed above, we assume that jobs in larger …rms take longer to be a¤ected by the crisis,
because those …rms have both cash reserves and access to credit on which they can rely to continue
payments to workers. In particular, denoting the number of workers at the …rm where i works as
Sif irm , and adopting the convention that Sif irm = 1 for self employed and informal workers, we
assume the following sequencing for the crisis period, where t is an indicator for stages of process:

                                       Sit = 1 if Sif irm        10 and 1     t                             (6)
                                       Sit = 1 if 10 <    Sif irm       50 and t   2
                                       Sit = 1 for all i if t       3

and Sit = 0 otherwise. The 10 and 50 employees thresholds are somewhat arbitrary, but aim at
de…ning micro, small, and medium-large …rm size categories. They follow the cuto¤s with which
size categories used to be de…ned by law in Colombia for the targeting of policies aimed at …rms.9
  9 Size   categories are currently de…ned in terms of assets rather than employees in the country.


                                                             8
   We also incorporate “recovery”phases in the analysis. These are characterized by the lifting of all
lockdown measures and the end of idiosyncratic demand shocks, but may still exhibit employment
losses relative to baseline because of search frictions and …rm entry costs due to which creating
formal jobs and opening new …rms takes time. Informal …rms and the self-employed recover more
easily, as they depend on themselves for going back to work. But recovering formal jobs takes
longer, especially for small (but formal) …rms. We thus incorporate two recovery phases, “initial”
and “advanced”, where, starting from Sit = 1 for all workers, we set



                       Sit = 0 if i informal or self-employed for both phases                     (7)
                       Sit = 0 if 50 <   Sif irm   and t = advanced recovery

   D_shocks is an indicator of the fraction of demand lost for sector s as a result of its customers’
choice to self isolate, considering both …nal and intermediate customers. It is computed as:

                                         f inalsaless X                purchasesj:f rom:s
              D_shocks = Dlosss                      +   Dlossj                           ;       (8)
                                          grossouts    j
                                                                          grossouts

where Dlosss is the fraction of …nal demand lost in sector s. We compute Dlosss based on sales
contractions of consumer goods and services observed in countries where lockdowns were not im-
plemented. Dlosss = 0 for all intermediates, but notice that even for these sectors D_shocks > 0
if the …nal goods sectors to which they sell experience demand contractions. For instance, textile
producers are hit by the contraction of sales in apparel and accessories.
   The aggregate demand shock, meanwhile is modeled through a standard Keynesian multiplier,
which takes into account heterogeneity in the population and higher marginal propensity to consume
among poorer households:
                                      X                          1
                             AD =              income                     :                       (9)
                                    income
                                                          1   M P Cincome

   We simulate di¤erent lockdown scenarios. For each of these, we initially compute our welfare
metrics using the actual distribution of workers across sectors, …rm sizes Si , and occupations (Ti
and High_contacti ). We then relocate workers across these dimensions based on counterfactual
distributions that simulate a developed economy.




                                                      9
3     Context, Data and Measurement
3.1    Context: Colombia
Similar to other EMEs, especially in Latin America, Colombia has high informality rates. Depending
on the measure of informality used, between 47% and 61% of jobs in the country are informal, over
95% of them either consist of self-employment or …rms of less than 10 workers. Over 45% of workers
are self-employed, many of them also informally. More than 80% of the population live in urban
centers (WDI, 2019), which is close to the average of Latin American countries.
    Informal jobs do not comply with labor market regulations, like mandatory social security
contributions and other non-salary labor costs, and are not covered by employment protection
mechanisms, like …ring restrictions. Non-salary costs imposed by the regulations represent increases
in labor costs of over 40% for employers, while the minimum wage to which all formal jobs are subject
is high enough to approach the median income of workers. Firing restrictions include limits to the
fraction of workers that can be …red without permission by the Ministry of Labor and mandatory
compensation to …red workers. Unemployment insurance in Colombia is extremely weak, granting
one minimum monthly wage once in a lifetime, and up to six months of continued public health and
pension coverage. Workers in the formal sector who become unemployed are entitled to severance
payments. All of these sources of rigidities in the labor market imply that the loss of formal jobs is
likely to be persistent.
    The pandemic hit Colombia in the second half of March, with the …rst case reported on March
6th, 2020. The lockdown in Colombia has been strict. Starting on March 21st, other than the
production and distribution of essentials, and their inputs, all sectors were ordered to stop in-situ
operations. Schools and universities closed. People were not allowed to exercise or be outdoors
except to buy essentials. Many cities imposed restrictions based on gender or national ID numbers,
so that a person could buy groceries, for instance, only once every four or …ve days. On May 1st,
some of the measures were partially eased. In particular, a few manufacturing and construction …rms
were allowed to go back to work, and previous approval of on-the-job safety and social distancing
plans varied by …rm. In several cities, these approvals took up to two weeks to be obtained, so
that openings did not become realistic until mid-May. At that point, other manufacturing sectors
were also allowed to request approval of their social distancing protocols. Openings have been
uneven across regions, with some cities being more willing and e¤ective in allowing and regulating
the reopening of authorized activities than others. This lighter lockdown has been extended to the
beginning of June. It has been announced that schools will not return to classes before August,
and international travel will be banned at least until September.
    Colombians initially closely complied with the lockdown. As time has passed, observance of the
measures has deteriorated, especially with the informal sectors going back to work. With streets
semi-empty, street vendors and beggars go door-to-door.


                                                 10
   The economy has already been hit hard. By April 30th, 5.3 million jobs, equivalent to 25% of
pre-crisis employment, had been lost. Growth in the …rst quarter was 1.1%, despite an estimated
4.6% growth in January and February. Expectations for April, with full lockdowns in place for
the entire month were extremely low. The economic mitigation package has included transfers
to informal workers and poor families, building on the pre-existing social transfers system; public
credit guarantees of 90% for payroll payments by businesses; and more recently grants to support
payroll payments for …rms hit hard by the crisis. The overall size of the package, which remains
timid by international standards, is currently valued at 3% of GDP in spending with an additional
line of up to 5% in guarantees.
   One dimension of contrast with other Latin American economies is that the pandemic hit Colom-
bia at a time when economic prospects were relatively bright. The country’s GDP per capita
($15,000 in PPP terms) is similar to that of Brazil, and slightly below that of Chile and Mexico
($20,000 PPP). Since 2010, Colombia has been growing close to 1.5 percentage points above the
average of Latin America and the Caribbean annually, despite the country being hard hit by the
decline in oil prices around 2015 (oil represents close to 50% of income from exports and over 10%
of government revenue). In January, 2020, the IMF projected that Colombia would grow 3.5% in
2020. Capital ‡ight and impossibility for EMEs’governments to issue new debt have been pointed
at as a potential consequence of the crisis. However, this concern has become e¤ective mainly for
countries whose …scal situation was already under stress. Colombia was relatively well placed to
start with, and has in fact successfully issued debt in international markets well into the crisis.10


3.2       Employment Characteristics
Our main source of data is the Colombian household survey GEIH (“Gran Encuesta Integrada de
Hogares”) for 2019. The GEIH, collected by the Colombian Bureau of Statistics, DANE, is the
basis for o¢ cial statistics on the labor market, including the measurement of unemployment.
   We obtain employment, labor income, individual characteristics and employment characteris-
tics, from the GEIH. This survey records whether the person has a job, and in which sector (at
a four-digit level of disaggregation of the ISIC revision 4 classi…cation); whether they are salaried
or self-employed; the size of the …rm in which the individual works; and her occupation among
83 minor occupational categories (following the ISCO-68 classi…cation). Information about formal-
ity/informality status, such as whether the worker and her employer comply with mandatory social
security contributions, is recorded. The data also allow us to identify whether the person works
from home, at a …xed location out of home (an o¢ ce, production plant, construction site, etc), or
on the streets (driving or as a street vendor); and the transportation mode the individual most
frequently uses to go to work. The survey is representative at a national level, and for each of 23
 1 0 On June 1st, 2020, for instance, the government announced it successfully placed long run bonds for $2,500 at
rates below 4.2%.


                                                       11
metropolitan areas in the country. It is not designed to be representative of the labor force at the
sector level, yet it is the o¢ cial source used to report employment statistics by economic sector and
its results square with sector statistics from administrative records.
   From a conceptual standpoint, labor informality is the lack of compliance with labor regulations.
Given the variety of labor regulations with which workers and employers must comply, there is no
single operative de…nition of labor informality. We settle here for a de…nition based on compliance
with pensions contributions, which in Colombia are mandatory for any worker. Paying the con-
tribution is the shared responsibility of the worker and her employer, each of whom must pay a
fraction of the mandatory contribution. In particular, we label a worker as informal when she is not
contributing to the pension system, except when she is retired, in which case she is not mandated
to contribute. This is a strict de…nition of informality because, when a worker and her employer
comply with the worker’s pension contribution, they generally also comply with the other relevant
regulations (Bernal, 2009). Informality is prevalent in the country: in 2019, close to 60% of workers
were informal according to this de…nition. Although there are less strict operational de…nitions of
informality, all point to extremely high levels, in general above 50%.11


3.3     Occupations: Fit for Telework vs. High Physical Contact
For equation (3), our measures of the probability that the worker can work from home and the
probability that she is exposed to high physical contact are based on reports of her occupation and
her journey to work in GEIH. Our measure of the probability of telework, Ti ; is based in Dingel
and Neiman (2020).          Dingel and Neiman classify 478 occupational categories in the American
Community Survey, which follows the Standard Occupational Classi…cation (SOC), as either …t for
telework or not. Given that the classi…cation of occupations in the Colombian GEIH is much less
granular, we aggregate SOC classes to the level of GEIH occupational categories. We then obtain
for each of those categories the fraction of US workers in the American Community Survey whose
SOC occupational class is classi…ed as …t for telework. Ti is computed as equal to the fraction for
the GEIH occupational category that i is in.
    We follow a similar procedure to compute the probability that i works in a high contact occu-
pation (denoted HCjobi ). As proxy for high contract, we use the share of US workers in GEIH
occupations that are classi…ed as medium and high contact by Leibovici, Santacreu and Famigleti
(2020). Combining HCjobi with the indicator of whether in 2019 i regularly used public trans-
  1 1 Following International Labor Organization’s statistical standards, the o¢ cial measure of informality produced

by DANE is based on the number of workers employed at …rms of 5 workers or less and independent non-professional
workers. This is a proxy for informality, as not all informal employees are in …rms of these characteristics, and not all
micro …rms fail to comply with labor regulations. This o¢ cial measure generates a lower, but still very high …gure
for informality: close to 50% over 2019.




                                                           12
portation to get to work in the GEIH, we obtain our measure of High_contacti for equation (3)

 High_contacti = HCjobi + U ses_P ub_T ransporti              HCjobi     U ses_P ub_T ransporti : (10)


3.4       IO linkages
To compute the indirect supply and demand shocks in equations (5) and (8), we complement the
data from GEIH with the Colombian 2015 IO matrix. The IO matrix follows the National Accounts
sector classi…cation, which has a slightly higher level of aggregation than ISIC two-digit. We use
the IO matrix not only to incorporate IO linkages into our analysis, but also to obtain sector level
labor/capital income ratios that we use to approach sector value added from the reports of labor
income in the GEIH.


3.5       Measurement of Demand Shocks
To measure idiosyncratic demand shocks we rely on data on the behavior of the demand of di¤erent
consumer goods and services in Sweden. We take advantage of the fact that Sweden did not impose
lockdowns to deal with the COVID-19 crisis to isolate e¤ects related to the change of consumer
behavior. The data come from McKinsey (2020) consumer survey, where consumers are asked to
report whether in April 2020 they increased or decreased spending relative to normal times, for a
series of categories of goods and services. We equate Dlosss to the fraction of consumers who report
a decrease net of the fraction of consumers that reported an increase. Since the data refer only to
consumer goods and services, we impose Dlosss = 0 for all sectors producing only intermediates.
Notice from equation (8) that even for these sectors D_shocks > 0, the …nal goods sectors to which
they sell experience demand contractions. For instance, leather producers are hit by the contraction
of sales in apparel and accessories. Appendix Table A1 shows net changes in spending by product
category in Sweden according to McKinsey (2020), which we match to the ISIC sectors in GEIH.
   As for the aggregate demand multiplier (9), in the absence of reliable estimates of the M P C
for Colombia and other EMEs, we rely on M P Cincome estimates by quintile of income in the US
by Carrol et al. (2017). Wide income di¤erences between Colombia and the US are recognized by
setting    income   to the fraction of workers that in Colombia fall within each of U.S. income bracket.
In fact, over 90% of workers in the Colombian household survey exhibit income levels that fall in
the lowest quintile of the U.S. distribution. Table 1 documents our M P C levels and the fractions
of workers in each bracket. The resulting AD multiplier is 1.692.




                                                    13
           Table 1: Monthly labor income and Marginal Propensity to Consume
       Labor    Ave. Income      Min. Income     Ave. Income   Min. Income      Workers in
      Income                     From US Income Distribution                     Category    MPC
     Quintiles            US$ (2016)                    COP (thous.)                %
        0-20            15,657              13          4,122             3.4      99.4      0.41
       20-40            41,491         30,041          10,923           7,908      0.43      0.21
       40-60            71,712         54,858          18,879          14,442      0.11      0.23
       60-80          129,544          94,042          34,104          24,758      0.03      0.21
      80-100        1,127,782         186,778         296,901          49,172      0.01      0.18
     Notes: The resulting AD multiplier is 1.692. MPC taken from Carroll et al. (2017). Source for
     Colombia income distribution and employment, Colombia Statistical O¢ ce (GEIH data).


4      The Labor Market
Table 2 presents basic statistics of our data, and re‡ects basic characteristics of the Colombian
labor market in 2019. Column 1 shows statistics pooling sectors, while columns 2 and 3 divide
the sample between sectors least and most vulnerable to lockdown. The least vulnerable sectors
are those producing essentials, plus education and professional services, a good part of which have
continued operating remotely.12 The detailed classi…cation of the sectors least and most vulnerable
to lockdowns is presented in Appendix Table A2, together with a characterization of each.

    Table 2: Employment, labor income and value added by vulnerability to lockdown
                                                                           Sectors Least  Sectors Most
                                                                 Total     Vulnerable to Vulnerable to
                                                                             Lockdown      Lockdown
         Employment (mill.)                                  22.3                   12.8            9.5
         Monthly total labor income (trill. of COP)          22.0                   13.8            8.2
         Monthly average labor income (thous. COP)            989                  1,079            869
         Monthly value added (trill. of COP)                 77.4                   49.3           28.1
         Monthly value added per worker (thous. COP)       3,474                   3,857          2,957
         Informal (mill.)                                    13.6                    7.2            6.5
         Self-employed (mill.)                               10.1                    5.4            4.7
         At …rm 10 employees (mill.)                         15.6                    8.3            7.2
         At …rm 11-50 employees (mill.)                       1.8                    0.9            0.8
         Average IO linkages index                           1.66                   1.67           1.63
         Average % Decline Sales of G&S, Sweden1             0.10                   0.05           0.16
         Average idiosyncratic demand shock                  0.15                   0.10           0.20
         Average supply shock                                0.50                   0.18           0.92
         1
           April 2020 against previous year (normal). Source: for        Colombia income and employ-
         ment, Colombia Statistical O¢ ce (GEIH data).


    The total number of workers in Colombia in 2019 reached 22.3 million. The average worker
earned slightly less than one million Colombian Pesos a month (close to $300). A key characteristic
  1 2 A detailed classi…cation of the sectors least and most vulnerable to lockdowns and their general characteristics

are presented in Appendix Tables A2 to A4.


                                                         14
of the Colombian labor market is that, similar to other emerging economies, most of the employment
concentrates in informal activities and small …rm production. Out of the 22.3 million workers,
61% (13 million) have informal jobs as identi…ed by failure to comply with mandatory pension
contributions, while 70% (15.5 million) work in a …rm with at most 10 employees. This includes a
self-employed workers, who represent 45% of all. By contrast, self-employment in the US accounts
for just around 10% of workers.
   As in other developing economies, especially in Latin America, informality in Colombia cannot
be fully explained as the byproduct of poverty. It is rather a state to which many workers and
…rms reallocate given their comparative advantage and regulation barriers (Magnac, 1991; Maloney,
1999)). Table 3 presents characteristics of employment in Colombia for the formal and informal
sector. Being informal and working in tiny production units are highly correlated phenomena. 64%
of informal workers are self-employed, while an additional 31% are employees in small …rms, so that
only 5% work at …rms with more than 10 employees. Meanwhile, among formal workers only 16%
are self-employed and an additional 14% are employees in …rms with at most 10 workers, so that
70% work in …rms of larger size.


        Table 3: Attributes of jobs for formal and informal workers (Shares,%)
                                                                   Formal Informal1
                  Self-Employed                                       15.8        64.2
                  At …rms 10 employees                                30.3        95.1
                  At …rms 11-50 employees                             15.2         3.2
                  Bottom labor income quartile                         6.1        41.3
                  Second labor income quartile                         5.7        35.0
                  Third labor income quartile                         39.8        13.9
                  Top labor income quartile                           48.4         9.9
                  A¢ liated to contributory health care system        95.9         7.1
                  Has occupational safety and health                  91.5         3.2
                  Has a contract                                      89.6        33.5
                  Has a verbal contract (if has contract)              5.9        90.8
                  High contact job                                    84.6        86.7
                  Can telework                                        21.4        10.5
                  With labor income under minimum wage                10.0        68.0
                  1
                    A worker is labeled as informal if their mandatory pension contri-
                  butions are not paid. Source: Colombia Statistical O¢ ce (GEIH
                  data).


   Most informal workers are in the bottom part of the earnings distribution, with 35% of them
in the bottom quartile. Meanwhile, almost half of formal workers are in the top earnings quintile.
However, there is a signi…cant overlap between the earnings distributions for formal and informal
workers up to the third quartile of labor earnings. As we pointed out in the de…nition of our
measure of formality, non-compliance with mandatory contributions to the pension system is often
related to non-compliance with other mandated contributions, such as a contributory health care


                                                  15
system, occupational health and safety, compliance with minimum wage laws, and even having a
written contract. Less than 10% of workers we classify as informal pay health contributions, only
3% have access to occupational safety and health, 68% report monthly earnings below the statutory
minimum wage, and a third of them have any contract, over 90% of which are verbal. Among formal
workers, meanwhile, almost all have written contracts, pay health contributions, report earnings
above the statutory minimum wage, and report access to occupational safety and health. Colombia,
thus, replicates the prevalence and features of informality that also hold for other Latin American
and developing economies (Perry et al., 2007; La Porta and Shleifer, 2014; Meghir et al., 2015). In
that sense, it is a good laboratory in which to analyze the di¤erential impact that the crisis may
cause in countries with labor market characteristics typical of EMEs.
   The di¤erent underlying characteristics of sectors and occupations determine economic vulnera-
bility. Figure 1 summarizes dimensions of economic vulnerability to complement Table 2, splitting
sectors into those we deem most and least vulnerable to lockdowns. These detailed dimensions by
sector are shown in Appendix Tables A2 to A4.
   Comparing sectors least and most vulnerable to lockdowns in Table 2 and Figure 1, we …nd
high correlation between vulnerability to lockdowns and other aspects of economic vulnerability.
Workers in more vulnerable sectors account for 43% of total employment (9.5 million). Sectors more
vulnerable to the lockdown are less productive, as measured by both average earnings and value
added per worker. Employment in those sectors is also more concentrated on small, informal …rms
and self-employed workers (mostly informal). 68% of those workers are informally employed (versus
56% in less vulnerable sectors), 50% are self-employed (versus 42%), and 76 % work in …rms with
ten workers or fewer (versus 65%). The ability to telework is also less prevalent precisely in sectors
most vulnerable to lockdowns (8% versus 20% in less vulnerable sectors). More and less vulnerable
sectors have similar levels of exposure to contact (87 versus 85 %) and similar incidence of workers
who regularly work from home (12 versus 10%). The combination of these di¤erent factors implies
that the supply shock (equation 4) is much larger in sectors most vulnerable to lockdowns, a¤ecting
92% of employment, in contrast to 18% in less vulnerable sectors. Notice that even the latter are
a¤ected by lockdowns via input-output linkages.
   Figure 2 summarizes the implications of these characteristics in terms of economic exposure to
the crisis (equation 3) by sector. The …gure depicts average exposure across workers in the sector.
Though by construction sectors that we classify as more vulnerable to lockdowns have essentially
100% exposure, even those that are less vulnerable may face very high exposure levels through
demand shocks and IO linkages. The economy’s vulnerability is made obvious also by the fact that
the sectors that absorb the most employment are among those with high exposure.




                                                 16
                                         Figure 1: Employment characteristics by sector vulnerability to lockdown


                                                              Informal

                                                  Self-employed

                                    At firm ≤10 employees

                                At firm 11-50 employees

                                                   Can telework

                                Worked at home in 2019

                                             High contact job


                                                                         0                  20                 40                60                  80

                                                                                 Sectors more vulnerable to lockdown       Sectors less vulnerable to lockdown




                                                                               Figure 2: Economic exposure by sector

                              100    5
                                         11         189           38            7
                                                                             13 15
                                                                                   18
                                                                                              40
                                                                                                              28
                                                                                                                                           17
                                                                                                                                                   2 92 1
                                         1 09 6
                                                          2
Economic exposure (percent)




                              80


                              60


                              40


                              20


                               0
                                    0.0                                         0.5                   1.0                                1.5                     2.0
                                                                                         Employment (millions of workers)

                                                    Sectors more vulnerable to lockdown                                Sectors less vulnerable to lockdown
                                    Note: Sectors marked with a triangle are those with the highest linkages (top quartile)
                                    Sectors: 2 Mining and quarrying; 5 Tobacco; 6 Textiles; 7 Wearing apparel; 8 Leather; 9 Wood; 11 Printing and
                                    reproduction of recorded media; 13 Rubber, plastics and metal products; 10 Paper; 15 Machinery and equipment;
                                    17 Construction; 18 Wholesale and Retail of motor vehicles; 19 Wholesale non-basic goods; 21 Retail of non-basic;
                                    goods 28 Transport; 29 Accommodation and food service activities; 38 Arts, entertainment; 40 Activities of households.
                                    The graph does not include sector of agriculture and forestry (less vulnerable)




                                                                                                       17
5     Employment in the COVID-19 World
We now quantify the e¤ect of the crisis, using the accounting framework in section, under two dif-
ferent economic lockdown scenarios: strict lockdown and opening manufacturing and construction.
    Under the Strict Lockdown scenario all of the sectors that we labeled as most vulnerable to
lockdowns (see Appendix tables for the full list) come to a complete stop, so that Locks = 1 for
those sectors. This essentially replicates the lockdown in place in Colombia from the end of March
to the beginning of May.
    Under the Opening Manufacturing and Construction scenario, we ease lockdown allowing man-
ufacturing and construction to open, replicating the easing of the lockdown that Colombia adopted
in May (gradually over the course of the month). This reduces the lockdown to non-essential ser-
vices, including retail and wholesale of non-essentials, and restaurants and hotels. These tend to
be the sectors with highest probability of involving high physical contact (see Appendix Table A2).
While construction and wood products display as high contact for some of the sectors that remain
closed, they were allowed to reopen.


5.1    Employment at Risk
Table 4 and Figure 4 present results for the labor market. Table 4 reports jobs at risk. The
top panel shows the combined e¤ects of the supply and demand shocks (that is, full exposure as
de…ned in equation 3). To provide a sense of the di¤erential e¤ects of lockdowns over the di¤erent
phases of the crisis and the subsequent recovery period, rows in the Table cover the di¤erent phases
described in equations 6 and 7. Both the demand and lockdown shocks remain in place during the
crisis periods (t = 1 to t = 3) and vanish in the recovery phases. In the latter, however, jobs recover
only progressively given matching frictions and costs for …rms to enter.
    The sheer magnitude of informality and small …rm employment in sectors directly hit and in
their customer and provider sectors, implies that an astonishing 56% of Colombian workers (12.5
million) face a potential job and income loss from the very onset of the crisis in the strict lockdown
world, given the lack of employment protection for most of these workers and the scarcity of savings
and credit for employees and their employers.
    As the crisis advances, supply shocks extend to larger …rms (see equation 6), so that the number
of workers at risk by an extended lockdown eventually reaches 14.9 million (67 percent of total).
Even though large …rms hold cash and have access to credit, and employment protection regulations
supposedly ban them from …ring workers without permission, liquidity is limited and the plausibility
of relying on credit (both in terms of being granted credit and wanting to demand it) erodes as
time under con…nement elapses. Larger …rms are also more likely to comply with lockdown orders,
which in a sense implies that they eventually become potentially more vulnerable than smaller …rms
and self-employed workers .who more likely bypass such measures.


                                                  18
Table 4: Jobs at risk under di¤erent lockdown measures, compared to baseline 2019
employment
                                                              Total              Of which formal
                          Phase                                    Opening
                                                              Strict            Strict      Opening
                                                                  Manuf. &
                                                              Lock-             Lock-       Manuf. &
                                                              down Constr.      down         Constr.
                                                             Millions                Share (%)
                                                          Idiosyncratic Demand & Lockdown
 Early crisis. Informal & …rms 10 workers at risk      12.6           10.5        23           22
 Intermediate crisis. Firms 50 workers at risk         13.2           10.9        25           26
 Advanced crisis. Firms of all sizes at risk           14.9           11.9        32           33
 Initial recovery. Informal & self-employed re-enter    3.8            2.5       100          100
 Advanced recovery. Large …rms re-enter                 1.6            1.1       100          100
                                                                      Only Lockdown
 Early crisis. Informal & …rms 10 workers at risk       8.5            6.3        15           15
 Intermediate crisis. Firms 50 workers at risk          9.2            6.7        21           21
 Advanced crisis. Firms of all sizes at risk           11.0            7.8        32           34
 Initial recovery. Informal & self-employed re-enter    3.2            2.0       100          100
 Advanced recovery. Large …rms re-enter                 1.4            0.9       100          100
                                                           Only Idiosyncratic Demand Shock
 Crisis. Decline in …nal sales for all sectors                 3.2                      28.7
 Recovery. Final sales recover                                  0                         0
 Note: Total number of workers in 2019 was 22.3 millions. Source: Own calculations based on Colombia
 Statistical O¢ ce (GEIH data and IO data).


    Our calculations using o¢ cial balance sheet data from medium and large …rms indicate that in
normal times they hold cash and liquid …nancial assets worth about three months of the combined
value of their payroll and rent.13
    Of course, these are counterfactual calculations that do not take into account possible failures
to comply with lockdowns, or government actions to mitigate losses. Thus, they only capture the
magnitude of jobs at risk, rather than actual losses. But the …nding that for 12.5 million workers
their employers (sometimes themselves) were left without income with which to pay their salaries
is likely to be close to the reality the Colombian labor market experienced during April 2020, when
lockdown measures were most e¤ectively enforced and the government had not yet implemented
programs to support …rms.
    The medium and bottom panels of Table 4 separate the two sources of exposure into the supply
shock caused by lockdowns (equation 4) and the demand shock (8). Separating the e¤ect of demand
   1 3 We use Balance Sheet information for all medium and large …rms from Supersociedades (the government body in

charge of the …nancial supervision of …rms, except those under special regulation), we calculate the median ratio of
liquidity to operational income in the sector, where liquidity is the sum of cash and …nancial current assets. We then
multiply this median ration by the median ratio of operational income to …nd the sum of payroll and rent costs,.This
is obtained from DANE´ s survey of the respective industry (manufacturing, wholesale and retail, or services), which
we restrict to only medium and large …rms as well, for consistency. The product of these two ratios is our measure
of the fraction of a year’s worth of payroll and rent that the …rm can pay for without generating income.




                                                         19
shocks from that attributed to lockdown-related supply shocks (adjusted for mitigating factors, such
as the possibility of working from home), we …nd that the e¤ects of lockdowns are about three times
as large as those related to idiosyncratic demand contractions. The direct e¤ect of shutting down
…rms and its indirect e¤ects due to input-output linkages represent 8.5 million jobs at risk from the
onset of the crisis, even accounting for the potential of telework, that eventually reach 11 million.
In contrast, demand shocks (including input-output linkages) have a more modest yet still sizable
e¤ect on employment. For the strict lockdown scenario, the reduction in …nal sales of goods and
services associated with social distancing generates an economic exposure of 3.2 million jobs (14.5%
of total).14
    In the recovery phase, the high prevalence of informality and self-employment, subject to min-
imal hiring and setup costs, should allow for a relatively fast recovery of the bulk of employment.
In the initial recovery period, where we assume that informal and self-employed workers go back
to work, at risk jobs are reduced to nearly 3.8 million. As the recovery stage advances, formal
employment in large …rms recovers and the jobs at risk are those associated with small formal …rms
and jobs at risk reduce to about 1.6 million jobs.
    Though the extent and design of the lockdown can have signi…cant e¤ects on the magnitude of
jobs and income at-risk, the importance of high contact services in the economic structure implies
that easing those measures only for the relatively low contact sectors has a quite limited ability to
mitigate employment e¤ects. If manufacturing and construction are allowed to reopen, the jobs at
risk at the height of the crisis are reduced from 14.9 to 11.9 million.


5.2     E¤ects on Value-Added
We now use the estimated e¤ects on employment summarized in Table to predict e¤ects on value
added, and therefore aggregate output, based on the equation system (2), in which we use a pro-
portionality assumption between value added and wages. Under this assumption, we compute the
potential of value-added losses based on the labor income of jobs at risk, as displayed in Table 4.
    Table 5 presents the results of the monthly value added at risk obtained by using equation (2)
and the lockdown scenarios presented in Table 4. As reported in Table 1, the aggregate baseline
monthly value added is close to 77 trillion of Colombian Pesos. As much as 43% of value added
(33 trillion COP) per month maybe lost under full compliance with lockdowns, unless, of course,
a¤ected …rms …nd ways to continue operating under distancing (i.e. e-commerce for retail sectors).
The e¤ects of an extended lockdown could put at risk as much as 60% of total monthly value
added (47 trillion) for each additional month that they are in place. Even in the less strict scenario
where construction and manufacturing are operating, the value added at risk in the advanced crisis
  1 4 The two separate sources do not add up to the total both because of the aggregate demand e¤ect that transmits

through both sources and because of the nonlinearity in the e¤ect implied by the fact that a worker cannot be more
than 100% exposed (equation 3).



                                                        20
scenario eventually reaches 45% of the pre-crisis level (34.5 trillion). Most of the value added at risk
is explained by supply shocks (20.8 of the total 33 trillion in the early crisis under strict lockdown),
while demand shocks have a relatively small impact on value added (8.5 trillion COP in the same
case).


Table 5: Total monthly value added at risk under di¤erent lockdown measures (assuming
full compliance)
                                                                   Total                Of which formal
                        Phase                              Strict       Opening        Strict      Opening
                                                           Lock-       Manuf. &        Lock-      Manuf. &
                                                           down          Constr.       down        Constr.
                                                             Trillions of COP               Share (%)

                                                              Idiosyncratic Demand & Lockdown
 Early crisis. Informal & …rms 10 workers at risk           33.2       26.0      42.4      38.7
 Intermediate crisis. Firms 50 workers at risk              36.5       27.8      46.1      43.5
 Advanced crisis. Firms of all sizes at risk                47.0       34.6      56.6      54.5
 Initial recovery. Informal & self-                         20.8       13.5       100      100
 employed re-enter
 Advanced recovery. Large …rms re-enter                      8.1      5.1         100          100
                                                                      Only Lockdown
 Early crisis. Informal & …rms 10 workers at risk        20.8        13.7         27.7         24.6
 Intermediate crisis. Firms 50 workers at risk           24.2        15.6         36.4         35.0
 Advanced crisis. Firms of all sizes at risk             34.3        22.1         55.3         54.1
 Initial recovery. Informal & self-employed re-enter     16.5        10.5         100          100
 Advanced recovery. Large …rms re-enter                   6.4         3.9         100          100
                                                            Only Idiosyncratic Demand Shock
 Crisis. Decline in …nal sales for all sectors                  8.6                      50.6
 Recovery. Final sales recover                                   0                        0
 Note: Total value added in 2019 was of 77.41 trillion Colombian pesos. Source: Own calculations based
 on Colombia Statistical O¢ ce (GEIH data and IO data from National Accounts).


   Potential output losses are smaller than employment losses, given the characteristics of sectors
and occupations hardest hit by the crisis. As documented in Table 2, jobs in sectors that are
most vulnerable to the lockdown have lower average earnings and have a higher probability of
being informal than those in less vulnerable sectors.15 Since formal-sector jobs tend to be more
productive than informal-sector jobs, formal jobs at risks have a disproportionally higher e¤ect on
value added.
   As a result of these factors, value added at risk accounts for a smaller share of total value added
than the share of jobs at risk on total employment. For the same reasons, the rebound in the
recovery phases is slower in output than employment. The recovery starts with informal sector
employment and self-employment, which implies that it is the less productive workers that come
 1 5 Bothgroups exhibit a similar value added to wage ratio. Using the …gures from Table 2, this ratio is 3.4 in
sectors most vulnerable to lockdowns, while it is about 3.6 in the least vulnerable sectors.


                                                      21
                         Figure 3: Employment characteristics Colombia vs. USA


                         Informal

                   Self-employed

           At firm ≤10 employees

          At firm 11-50 employees

                    Can telework

                 Worked at home

                 High contact job


                                    0      20             40               60         80

                                                       U.S.     Colombia




back at this stage. Thus, the share of value added at risk in the initial recovery scenario (27% of the
baseline value added) is larger than the share of jobs at risk (17% of employment in the baseline).
These di¤erences vanish as the economy enters to the advanced recovery phase.


5.3    The Role of the Economic Structure
The prevalence of informality and the fraction of workers in small …rms and occupations not …t for
telework is crucial for the magnitude of the e¤ect of the crisis. Developing economies display high
informality and high prevalence of employment at small …rms, as well as a high concentration of
workers in occupations that require them to be in direct contact with customers and co-workers.
In high development economies, meanwhile, informality is so irrelevant that, frequently, it is not
even measured, large …rms absorb the bulk of employment, and many workers are able to work
from home, both because of the types of occupations they are in and the much more extensive
connectivity to internet.
   Figure 3 shows that this is the case for the US, based on data from the American Community
Survey. Less than 15% of U.S. workers are either self-employed or at …rms with at most ten
employees, by contrast to 70% in Colombia. While self-employment represents about 10% of total
employment in the US, it represents near 50% of employment in Colombia. The fraction of those
in occupations …t for telework in the U.S. is double that of Colombia, even without factoring in the
much greater access to internet in the U.S.



                                                  22
                                           Figure 4: Jobs at Risk Under Strict Lockdown Measure: All Shocks

                         16
                         14
   Millions of workers




                         12
                         10                                                                          9.9

                         8                                          9.9
                                   9.9
                                                                                                                 13.5
                         6
                                                                               9.1                                                                       9.2
                         4                     7.1
                                                                                                     5.1
                         2         2.7                              3.3                                                                       3.8                                        3.2
                                                                                                                                                                              1.6
                         0
                                               U.S. structure




                                                                               U.S. structure




                                                                                                                  U.S. structure




                                                                                                                                                         U.S. structure




                                                                                                                                                                                         U.S. structure
                                    Colombia




                                                                    Colombia




                                                                                                      Colombia




                                                                                                                                              Colombia




                                                                                                                                                                              Colombia
                                  Early crisis                  Intermediate crisis                Advanced crisis                       Early recovery                   Advanced Recovery

                                                                                                Formal                             Informal
                              Notes: Early crisis: informal workers and workers in firms of up to 10 em ploy ees at risk.Intermediate crisis: workers
                              in firms of up to 50 employ ees also at risk. Initial recovery : informal and self-employ ed re-enter. Advanced
                              crisis: workers in firms of all sizes at risk. Advanced recovery : workers in large firm s re-enter. The bars
                              labeled "U.S. structure" recalculate Value Added at risk under the assumption that the distribution of workers
                              is as in the U.S. between formal/informal status, in terms of firm size, and in terms of occupations.




      To assess the importance of these dimensions of the economic structure in determining the
magnitude of our Table 4 results, we run an alternative simulation where we change the economic
structure of employment in Colombia to emulate the distribution of the U.S. economy. To do
this, we alter the sample weights for observations in the GEIH to match the distribution of U.S.
employment by industry, …rm size, and economic sector based on the distribution of workers across
occupations in the 2017 American Economic Survey (ACS), and their across sectors and …rm sizes
in the 2014 Business Dynamic Statistics (BDS). We assume that all employment reported in the
US is formal.
      Figure 4 presents the simulation results for employment. The less-developed economy structure
implies much higher e¤ects on employment in the short run yet a faster recovery. Moving the eco-
nomic structure to that of the US yields an immediate employment exposure of 7.1 millions, which
is much smaller than the exposure of 12.6 million under the Colombian employment distribution
(33% rather than 56% of baseline employment). The gaps between the e¤ects under the two eco-
nomic structures shorten as the crisis advances and employment in larger …rms becomes a¤ected,
but jobs at risk still remain lower under the U.S. economic structure due to lower reliance on high


                                                                                                   23
contact in the US, thanks to the greater prevalence of occupations …t for telework. In the initial
recovery period, the return of self-employed and informal sector workers generates a rapid rebound
of employment under the Colombian economic structure, a gain relative to the U.S. structure that
erodes as the economy moves to the advanced recovery period and medium-large …rms, more preva-
lent in the US, go back to work. In both the crisis and the recovery horizons the di¤erences with
a more developed economy-like structure are mostly driven by the incidence of informality and
self-employment, as shown by the formal/informal breakdown in the bar that corresponds to the
Colombian economic structure.
    The equivalent value-added results are presented in Figure 5. The di¤erences in economic
structure between Colombia and the US have a more modest e¤ect on value added at risk than
on jobs at risk. This is due to the low contribution of value added at risk from informal sector
activities, the ones that explain the largest potential job losses in the crisis periods and the fast
initial recovery under the Colombian economic structure. In the early crisis phase, the overall
value added at risk in the baseline scenario is 33 trillion using the actual Colombian distribution
of employment and 27 trillion using the counterfactual distribution. This is, respectively, 43%
and 30% of the baseline 77 trillion of monthly value added captured by the household survey. In
the advanced crisis phase, value-added at risk is, respectively, 47 trillion and 60 trillion under the
Colombian and U.S. employment distributions.
    Taken together, our simulation results in employment and value added suggest that the sheer
size of the informal sector in developing economies exposes more people, precisely people who are
not covered by automatic social security stabilizers, to immediate losses of their income. At the
same time it should allow for faster recovery, compared to developed economies. To an extent, this
faster recovery of some people’s income is already seen in many countries of the developing world,
as informal workers fail to continue complying with stay at home orders to make a living. But
to the extent that poor enforcement of lockdowns for informal workers is compensated by stricter
lockdown rules and stricter enforcement for the formal sector, the most highly productive segment
of the economy, the recovery of aggregate output caused by the return to work of the informal is
very limited.


6     Discussion and Conclusions
High informality and prevalence of microenterprises render emerging market economies more vul-
nerable to the COVID-19 crisis, which involves supply and demand shocks and propagation though
the linkages network. Firms face …nancial contractions and potential reallocation e¤ects. The per-
fect storm implied by this combination generates huge uncertainty about the duration of the crisis,
which has proven not to be over or close to it. The extent of the economic devastation, however, is
not independent of the policy options used to deal with the epidemic.


                                                 24
                    Figure 5: Total Value Added At Risk Under Strict Lockdown Measure: All Shocks

                   70
                   60
Trillions of COP




                   50
                   40                                                                            20.2
                   30                                                                                        59.6
                                                              20.2
                            20.2                                                                                                                      43.9
                   20                                                     37.2
                                         26.8                                                    26.8
                   10                                         16.3                                                                        20.8
                                                                                                                                                                                       15.9
                            13.0
                                                                                                                                                                            8.1
                                          U.S. structure




                                                                           U.S. structure




                                                                                                              U.S. structure




                                                                                                                                                       U.S. structure




                                                                                                                                                                                        U.S. structure
                              Colombia




                                                               Colombia




                                                                                                  Colombia




                                                                                                                                           Colombia




                                                                                                                                                                            Colombia
                            Early crisis                   Intermediate crisis                 Advanced crisis                       Early recovery                     Advanced Recovery

                                                                                            Formal                             Informal
                        Notes: Early crisis: informal workers and workers in firms of up to 10 em ploy ees at risk.Intermediate crisis: workers
                        in firms of up to 50 employ ees also at risk. Initial recovery : informal and self-employ ed re-enter. Advanced
                        crisis: workers in firms of all sizes at risk. Advanced recovery : workers in large firm s re-enter. The bars
                        labeled "U.S. structure" recalculate Value Added at risk under the assumption that the distribution of workers
                        is as in the U.S. between formal/informal status, in terms of firm size, and in terms of occupations.




                                                                                               25
   The pandemic has opened an important debate regarding how to isolate the economy through
the crisis, and in particular, how best to support workers and …rms. There has been a push to
increase access to unemployment insurance to laid-o¤ workers, support to sick workers and cash
transfers to vulnerable populations. In addition, there has been widespread call, and use, of policies
aiming to preserve formal employer-employee relationships by subsidizing some of the payroll costs
to …rms (OECD, 2020). Most of these programs are inspired by existing practices in developed
countries, such as Germany’s Kurzarbeitin, which allow for the ‡exibility to reduce the number of
hours worked instead of terminating the employer relation, thus permitting companies to hold on
to workers’know-how and experience.
   The objective of such programs is to maintain jobs in …rms that experience temporary closures
or drops in demand, while providing income support to workers. The argument is that given
…xed costs, and facing liquidity constraints, …rms may ine¢ ciently separate a higher number of
workers. Based on organizational capital and skills externalities imbedded in the employer-employee
match, maintaining these relations will accelerate the recovery in relation to other worker protection
programs such unemployment insurance. Positive evidence of the e¤ect of this type of practices
is drawn from experience during the Global Financial Crisis and particular schemes and economic
structures such as Germany’s Kurzarbeitin (Boeri and Bruekcer, 2011). While related programs
are currently being implemented in Germany, Denmark, France, and the UK, the current shock is
di¤erent.
   We argue that the bene…ts from subsidizing formal jobs, rather than just providing ex-post
support via unemployment insurance, are exacerbated in Emerging Markets, where they constitute
a small, laboriously built fraction of economic activity, and concentrate the bulk of society’s orga-
nizational capital. In the face of widespread labor market rigidities, coupled with barriers to formal
…rm entry, these jobs will take long, potentially very long, to recover. Of course, policies should
also aim to reduce the barriers to formality as a way to speed up a recovery that promises to be
costly and lengthy. While informal workers are a very substantial fraction in these countries, the
relative ease of restarting these jobs implies that the loss of income among the informal population
is better addressed via income transfers than job protection schemes.
   In addition, our results point to the extremely high costs of insisting on a strategy based solely
on continued lockdowns to deal with the pandemia. The magnitude of potential employment and
income e¤ects is such that strategies to appropriately mitigate these e¤ects, if their full potential is
realized, will simply not be feasible. E¤ects must therefore be minimized, which requires limiting
lockdowns as much as possible. Selective lockdowns based on age or economic activities have been
proposed, but they are also highly problematic. First, households in EMEs are larger than in
the developed world and varied in size composition, implying a larger contagion risk at home and
rendering selective lockdowns less e¤ective. The average household in middle income countries in
Latin America, for instance, has close to 3.5 members, compared to close to 2.5 in the US, Italy and


                                                  26
Spain, and just 2.1 in Germany. Meanwhile, over 70% of people above 65 live with younger people
in Colombia. Age-based lockdowns are also subject to heated debate given the discriminatory
treatment of people’s liberties that they imply. Activity-based lockdowns, meanwhile, sever IO
linkages making recovery more di¢ cult.
    It is therefore crucial that governments in EMEs decidedly adopt strategies that allow them
to deal with the epidemia with minimum resort to lockdowns. These include well designed and
scaled testing, tracing and isolation, as well as increases in the capacity of ICUs to receive COVID
patients and of mass transport systems to move passengers minimizing crowds. Though increasing
these capabilities is hard for the relatively weak states of emerging and developing economies, these
di¢ culties are dwarfed by the sheer costs of lockdowns. Since their economic exposure is greater,
the ammunition available to mitigate economic impacts more limited, and the capacity to enforce
lockdowns weaker, governments in the developing world bear a particularly large responsibility to
carefully assess the costs and bene…ts of these di¤erent options.


7     References
Acemoglu, D., Chernozhukov, V., Werning, I., and Whinston, D. (2020). A Multi-Risk SIR Model
with Optimally Targeted Lockdown.
    Alfaro, Laura and Marcela Eslava (2020) “Development and the Comparative Advantage of
Services”. Mimeo.
    Alfaro, Laura, Andrew Charlton, and Fabio Kanczuk. (2009) “Plant-Size Distribution and
Cross-Country Income Di¤erences.”In NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2008, edited
by Je¤rey A. Frankel and Christopher Pissarides. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic
Research
    Alfaro, Laura, Ester Faia, Nora Lamersdorf, Farzad Saidi Social Interactions in Pandemics:
Fear, Altruism, and Reciprocity, NBER Working Paper No. 27134
    Alfaro, Laura, Anusha Chari, Andrew N. Greenland, Peter K. Schott (2020) “Aggregate and
Firm-Level Stock Returns During Pandemics, in Real Time,” NBER Working Paper 26950
   Alvarez, F., Argente, D., and Lippi, F. (2020). A Simple Planning Problem for COVID-19
Lockdown. CEPR W.P., 14658.
    Atkeson, A. (2020, March). What will be the economic impact of covid-19 in the US? rough
estimates of disease scenarios. Working Paper 26867, National Bureau of Economic Research.
    Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2020. “Supply and Demand in Disaggregated Keynesian
Economies with an Application to the COVID-19 crisis”. Working Paper,
    Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi. 2020. “Nonlinear Production Networks with an Applica-
tion to the COVID-19 crisis”. Working paper.



                                                 27
   Barrero, Jose Maria and Bloom, Nicholas and Davis, Steven J. (2010) “COVID-19 Is Also a
Reallocation Shock”, NBER Working Paper No 27167.
   Bartik, A. W., M. Bertrand, Z. Cullen, E. L. Glaeser, M. Luca, and C. T. Stanton (2020). How
are small businesses adjusting to covid-19? early evidence from a survey. NBER w26989.
   Barrot, Jean-Noel and Grassi, Basile and Sauvagnat, Julien, Sectoral E¤ects of Social Distancing
(April 2, 2020).
   Bento, Pedro. and Restuccia, Diego (2020) “On Average Establishment Size across Sectors and
Countries.”Journal of Monetary Economics.
   Bernal, R. “The Informal Labor Market in Colombia: identi…cation and characterization”. Re-
vista Desarrollo y Sociedad, no. 63 (2009): 145-208.
   Boeri, T. and HJ. Bruecker (2011) “Short-time work bene…ts revisited: Some lessons from the
Great Recession,” Economy Policy 26 (68): 697-765
   Cajner, T., L. D. Crane, R. A. Decker, A. Hamins-Puertolas, and C. Kurz (2020). Tracking
labor market developments during thecovid-19 pandemic: A preliminary assessment. Finance and
Economics Discussion Series 2020-030 .
   Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, and M. Weber (2020). Labor markets during the covid-19 crisis:
A preliminary view. NBER w27017
   Davis, S. J. and T. von Wachter (2011) “Recessions and the cost of job loss,”Brookings Papers
in Economic Activity 43(2): 1-72.
   Dingel, J. I., & Neiman, B. (2020). How many jobs can be done at home? NBER Working
paper No. 26948.
   Eslava, M, J. Haltiwanger and A. Pinzón (2019) “Job Creation in Colombia vs the U.S.: ’Up or
out Dynamics’Meets ’The Life Cycle of Plants.”NBER WP 25550.
   Eslava, M, and J. Haltiwanger (2019) “The Life-cycle Growth of Plants: The Role of Produc-
tivity, Demand and Wedges.”SSRN Working Paper.
   Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2013) “Who Creates Jobs? Small vs.
Large vs. Young.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 347-361.
   Haltiwanger, John, Ron Jarmin, and Javier Miranda (2013) “Who Creates Jobs? Small vs.
Large vs. Young.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 347-361.
   Eslava, M. John Haltiwanger and Alvaro-Jose Pinzon (2019) Job Creation in Colombia vs the
U.S.: ’Up or out Dynamics’Meets ’The Life Cycle of Plants’. NBER Working Paper 25550.
   Hsieh, Chang-Tai. and Olken, Benjamin A. (2014) “The Missing “Missing Middle.””Journal of
Economic Perspectives, vol. 28 (3), pp. 89–108.
   Hsieh, Chang-tai and Peter Klenow (2014) “The Life Cycle of Plants in India and Mexico,“Quarterly
Journal of Economics 129, 035-1084.
   Hsieh, Chang-tai and Peter Klenow (2009) “Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China
and India, “Quarterly Journal of Economics 124, 1403-1448.


                                                28
   Humphries, J. E., C. Neilson, and G. Ulyssea (2020). The evolving impacts of covid-19 on small
businesses since the cares act. working paper.
   La Porta, R., and A. Shleifer. (2014). Informality and development. Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 28(3), 109-26.
   Leibovici, F., Santacreu, A. M., & Famiglietti, M. (2020). Social distancing and contact-intensive
occupations. On the Economy, St. Louis FED.
   Magnac, T. (1991). Segmented or Competitive Labor Markets. Econometrica, 59(1), 165-187.
   Maloney, W. F. (1999). Does informality imply segmentation in urban labor markets? Evidence
from sectoral transitions in Mexico. The World Bank Economic Review, 13(2), 275-302.
   Meghir, C., Narita, R., and Robin, J. M. (2015). Wages and informality in developing countries.
American Economic Review, 105(4), 1509-46.
   OECD (2020) Policy Responses to Coronavirus (COVID-19), “Supporting people and compa-
nies to deal with the COVID-19 virus: Options for an immediate employment and social-policy
response.” March.
   http://www.oecd.org/coronavirus/policy-responses/supporting-people-and-companies-to-deal-with-
the-covid-19-virus-options-for-an-immediate-employment-and-social-policy-response-d33d¤e6/
   Perry, G., O. Arias, P. Fajnzylber, W. Maloney, A. Mason, and J. Saavedra-Chanduvi. Infor-
mality: Exit and exclusion. The World Bank, 2007.
   Poschke, Markus (2018) “The Firm Size Distribution across Countries and Skill-Biased Change
in Entrepreneurial Technology.”American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol. 10 (3), pp.
1-41.
   Tybout, James R. 2000. “Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How Well Do They
Do, And Why?” Journal of Economic Literature 38(1): 11–44.




                                                 29
Table A1: Sweden: Fraction of consumers reporting increases vs. spending decreases
                                                                              Change
        McKinsey spending category                 Sector                     Fraction
                                                                             Spending1
        Groceries                      Agriculture, forestry and …shing           3
        Snacks                         Agriculture, forestry and …shing         -14
        Tobacco                        Tobacco products                         -14
        Food Takeout & delivery        Accommodation and food service           -12
        Alcohol                        Beverages                                -22
        Quick-service restaurant       Accommodation and food service           -46
        Restaurant                     Accommodation and food service           -63
        Footwear                       Leather and related products             -42
        Apparel                        Wearing apparel                          -39
        Jewelry                        Wearing apparel                          -42
        Accesories                     Wearing apparel                          -46
        Non-food child products        Wholesale, basic goods                    -7
        Household supplies             Wholesale, basic goods                    -9
        Personal-care products         Wholesale, basic goods                    -6
        Skin care & makeup             Wholesale, basic goods                   -26
        Furnishing & appliances        Wood and products of wood                -46
        Entertainment at home          Arts, entertainment and recreation         6
        Books/magazines/newspapers Paper and paper products                     -18
        Consumer electronics           Computer and electronic products         -32
        out-of-home entertainment      Arts, entertainment and recreation       -75
        Pet-care services              Arts, entertainment and recreation       -35
        Fitness & wellness             Arts, entertainment and recreation       -43
        Personal-care services         Arts, entertainment and recreation       -45
        Gasoline                       Coke, re…ned petrol, and chemicals       -24
        Vehicle purchases              Wholesale, retail, repair of vehicles    -46
        Short-term home rentals        Accommodation and food service           -69
        Travel by car                  Passenger transport                      -31
        Cruises                        Passenger transport                      -67
        Adventures & tours             Passenger transport                      -66
        International ‡ights           Passenger transport                      -80
        Hotel/restor stays             Accommodation and food service           -80
        Domestic ‡ights                Passenger transport                      -76
        1
          Fraction reporting more spending minus fraction reporting less spending.
        Source: Own calculations based on McKenzie’s (2020) Consumer Survey.




                                              30
                                                 Table A2: Sector’s weight in the economy
                    Sector                   Vulnerable        Employ. Labor Income     Value Added /     Linkages
                                            to Lockdown        (thous.)  (bill. COP)     Labor Income      Index
     Agriculture, forestry and …shing            No            3,521.3          1,797.6       4.49           1.76
     Food products                               No              556.3            519.7       2.53           1.84
     Beverages                                   No               93.6             73.6       5.22           1.66
     Coke, re…ned petrol, and chemicals          No              142.1            257.3       2.80           1.69
     Computer and electronic products            No                7.2             13.8       2.07           1.73
     Electricity, gas and water supply           No              197.2            280.4       5.78           1.67
     Wholesale, essentials                       No              294.9            348.4       2.12           1.68
     Retail trade, essentials                    No            1,571.3          1,099.9       2.12           1.68
     Cargo transport (water, land, and air)      No              306.6            345.8       5.14           2.02
     Transport via pipelines                     No                1.2              7.2       5.17           2.02
     Transport support activities                No              130.8             73.4       3.07           2.17
     Warehousing                                 No               19.0             21.0       3.07           2.17
     Courier activities                          No               88.3             86.3       2.54           2.26
     Telecommunications                          No              323.2            559.4       3.06           1.79
     Financial and insurance activities          No              316.8            705.0       2.48           1.77
     Real estate                                 No              281.9            328.2      47.37           1.33
     Prof., scienti…c and technical              No              577.8          1,079.8       2.62           1.99
     Administrative and support                  No              804.0            690.8       1.30           2.04
     Public administration                       No              649.0          1,536.7       1.21           1.43




31
     Education                                   No              951.1          1,847.1       1.22           1.29
     Human health                                No              929.5          1,404.3       1.63           1.14
     Other services                              No            1,026.1            722.7       3.24           1.62
     Mining and quarrying                       Yes              196.2            359.6       8.27           1.92
     Tobacco products                           Yes                4.5              5.4       5.22           1.69
     Textiles                                   Yes               98.0             75.6       2.40           1.72
     Wearing apparel                            Yes              450.6            362.6       2.45           1.49
     Leather and related products               Yes              169.0            111.2       2.15           1.50
     Wood and products of wood                  Yes               51.1             29.0       3.60           2.23
     Paper and paper products                   Yes               34.0             44.0       2.85           1.83
     Printing, reprod., recorded media          Yes               36.6             40.5       2.85           1.83
     Rubber, plastics and metal products        Yes              399.8            442.5       2.94           1.99
     Machinery and equipment                    Yes              460.6            453.0       4.47           1.58
     Construction                               Yes            1,521.3          1,525.3       5.00           1.66
     Wholesale, retail, repair of vehicles      Yes              535.4            515.0       2.55           1.81
     Wholesale, non-essentials                  Yes              164.8            247.4       2.12           1.68
     Retail trade, non-essentials               Yes            1,683.8          1,279.6       2.12           1.68
     Passenger transport                        Yes              999.4            920.9       4.89           2.00
     Accommodation and food service             Yes            1,655.4          1,080.5       2.66           1.52
     Arts, entertainment and recreation         Yes              308.9            280.8       3.12           1.43
     Households as employers                    Yes              724.2            476.8       1.01           1.00
     Source: Own calculations based on Colombia Statistical   O¢ ce (GEIH data and IO data from National Accounts).
                                   Table A3: Characteristics of employment in the sector
                                            Most Vul-     Informal Self-     At Firm      At Firm    Work       Use       Av. Prob.
                  Sector                      nerable               Emp.       <10          10-50     at      Public     of High Int.
                                                to                           Empl.1        Empl.     Home    Transport   Contact Oc-
                                            Lockdown                                 Share (%)                           cupation (%)
     Agriculture, forestry and …shing           No          88       52         90            4        3        10            95
     Food products                              No          53       22         55           10       16        28            69
     Beverages                                  No          53       46         54            3       45        24            70
     Coke, re…ned petrol, and chemicals         No          13        8         16           12        3        50            66
     Computer and electronic products           No          20       16         27           19        8        45            66
     Electricity, gas and water supply          No          23       20         26            7        0        31            74
     Wholesale, basic goods                     No          48       29         57           16        3        30            75
     Retail trade, basic goods                  No          75       44         81            5       25        18            71
     Cargo transport (water, land, and air)     No          53       45         70            9        1        33            89
     Transport via pipelines                    No           0        0          0            0        0        59            22
     Transport support activities               No          88       89         90            2        0        31            78
     Warehousing                                No          13        6         12           22        2        40            75
     Courier activities                         No          43       39         47            7        0        26            88
     Telecommunications                         No          33       29         43           10       18        36            57
     Financial and insurance activities         No          13        9         18            8        2        47            56
     Real estate                                No          18       17         62           18        4        47            69
     Prof., scienti…c and technical             No          37       46         67           13       18        37            44




32
     Administrative and support                 No          56       53         61            7        3        53            59
     Public administration                      No           2       31         32            2        0        33            66
     Education                                  No          17       17         23           13        3        37            76
     Human health                               No          20       31         39            9       13        39            80
     Other services                             No          83       76         88            4       26        22            85
     Mining and quarrying                       Yes         44       31         44           13        0        36            65
     Tobacco products                           Yes         58       47         59            1       34        19            65
     Textiles                                   Yes         65       50         68            7       50        24            56
     Wearing apparel                            Yes         65       45         65           13       35        31            59
     Leather and related products               Yes         77       56         77           11       37        21            47
     Wood and products of wood                  Yes         80       60         83            8       46        16            69
     Paper and paper products                   Yes         17       11         17           12        7        51            70
     Printing, reprod., recorded media          Yes         41       26         59           21        8        47            60
     Rubber, plastics and metal products        Yes         43       25         50           15        6        36            81
     Machinery and equipment                    Yes         57       39         65           12       23        28            75
     Construction                               Yes         65       40         68           13        0        39            92
     Wholesale, retail, repair of vehicles      Yes         74       51         82            9        6        25            85
     Wholesale, non-essentials                  Yes         38       25         51           22        5        32            72
     Retail trade, non-essentials               Yes         73       58         84            6       10        28            80
     Passenger transport                        Yes         65       69         77            4        1        19            93
     Accommodation and food service             Yes         82       37         85            9       21        24            88
     Arts, entertainment and recreation         Yes         61       49         69            9        8        30            79
     Households as employers                    Yes         81       87        100            0       16        41            68
     1 Includes Self Employment. Source: Own calculations based on Colombia Statistical O¢ ce (GEIH data).
                               Table A4: Characteristics of employment in the sector
                                                                                     Coronavirus in the sector
                                                   Most        Economic         Health        % Decline        Demand   Supply
                    Sector                     Vulnerable to    Exposure      Exposure      Sales of G&S,       Shock    shock
                                                 Lockdown      Index (%)      Index (%)     Sweden (%)1
     Agriculture, forestry and …shing               No            31.3           59.5            0.02            0.07     0.12
     Food products                                  No            35.4           32.8            0.03            0.09     0.14
     Beverages                                      No            79.3           11.9            0.09            0.22     0.34
     Coke, re…ned petrol, and chemicals             No            44.4           30.1            0.06            0.12     0.23
     Computer and electronic products               No            99.5            6.3            0.33            0.37     0.47
     Electricity, gas and water supply              No            42.6           32.8            0.00            0.07     0.29
     Wholesale , basic goods                        No            57.0            7.3            0.05            0.11     0.27
     Retail trade, basic goods                      No            62.1            3.7            0.05            0.11     0.27
     Cargo transport (water, land, and air)         No            88.6            5.8            0.00            0.10     0.50
     Transport via pipelines                        No            55.6           13.5            0.00            0.10     0.46
     Transport support activities                   No            99.5            0.0            0.00            0.24     0.57
     Warehousing                                    No            93.8           0.0             0.00            0.24     0.61
     Courier activities                             No            71.3            4.8            0.00            0.11     0.40
     Telecommunications                             No            30.8           13.4            0.00            0.05     0.18
     Financial and insurance activities             No            30.4            2.0            0.00            0.05     0.21
     Real estate                                    No            24.4            1.3            0.00            0.04     0.12
     Prof., scienti…c and technical                 No            40.0            0.7            0.00            0.05     0.22




33
     Administrative and support                     No            48.5            0.4            0.00            0.08     0.26
     Public administration                          No            12.6            6.1            0.00            0.00     0.11
     Education                                      No             6.8           1.9             0.00            0.00     0.06
     Human health                                   No             3.4           63.8            0.00            0.00     0.03
     Other services                                 No            77.6            0.0            0.18            0.21     0.25
     1 April 2020 against previous year (normal). Source: Own calculation based on Colombia Statistical O¢ ce (GEIH data and IO

     data from National Accounts).
                          Table A4: Characteristics of employment in the sector-Cont’d
                                                                                    Coronavirus in the sector
                                                  Most       Economic         Health        % Decline       Demand    Supply
                    Sector                   Vulnerable to    Exposure       Exposure     Sales of G&S,       Shock    shock
                                               Lockdown      Index (%)      Index (%)      Sweden (%)1
     Mining and quarrying                         Yes           92.5            3.0            0.00            0.17      0.83
     Tobacco products                             Yes           99.8            0.0            0.11            0.25      0.75
     Textiles                                     Yes           93.1            0.0            0.00            0.14      0.70
     Wearing apparel                              Yes           99.7            0.4            0.41            0.43      0.79
     Leather and related products                 Yes           99.8            0.0            0.44            0.46      0.60
     Wood and products of wood                    Yes           94.7            0.0            0.04            0.14      0.75
     Paper and paper products                     Yes           95.0            0.0            0.06            0.11      0.90
     Printing, reprod., recorded media            Yes           97.5            0.0            0.06            0.11      0.87
     Rubber, plastics and metal products          Yes           96.7            0.0            0.05            0.08      0.93
     Machinery and equipment                      Yes           97.1            1.0            0.08            0.12      0.87
     Construction                                 Yes           96.4            2.1            0.00            0.01      0.98
     Accommodation and food service               Yes           99.9            0.0            0.12            0.24      0.96
     Wholesale, retail, repair of vehicles        Yes           99.9            0.0            0.12            0.24      0.96
     Wholesale, non-essentials                    Yes           99.6            0.0            0.21            0.27      0.94
     Retail trade, non-essentials                 Yes           99.9            0.0            0.21            0.27      0.96
     Passenger transport                          Yes           99.9            0.0            0.20            0.29      0.97
     Accommodation and food service               Yes           99.9            0.3            0.47            0.49      0.92




34
     Arts, entertainment and recreation           Yes           99.5            0.0            0.31            0.35      0.93
     Households as employers                      Yes           97.7            0.0            0.00            0.00      0.85
     1 April 2020 against previous year (normal). Source: Own calculation based on Colombia Statistical O¢ ce (GEIH data and IO

     data from National Accounts).
