NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MULTICOUNTRY MODELLING OF FINANCIAL MARKETS

Jon Cockerline
John F. Helliwel].
Robert Lafrance

Working Paper No. 2736

NAIIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1988

and Department of
Department of Finance, University of British Columbia
This paper was prepared for the
Finance, and Bank of Canada, respectively.
Federal Reserve Board Conference on Monetary Aggregates and Financial Sector
of
Behaviour in Washington, May 26-27, and as part of the research program
We are grateful to
the working group in international macroeconomics.
members of that group, and to several other colleagues, for their advice and
We are especially graceful to Hoasein Roatami for his creative
assistance.
assistance in preparing the sections dealing with international financial
to the model groups, and especially to Jaime
linkages. We are alao graceful
and advice. Our
Marques, for the provision of data, model description,
revisions have been aided by helpful comments from Ralph Bryant, Peter
Simon Wren-Lewis.
This research is parr
Hooper, Bill Poole, John Taylor and
of the NBER'a research program in International Studies. The views expressed
are those of the authors. Ho responsibility for these views should be
attributed to the Department of Finance, the Bank of Canada, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2736
October 1988

MULTICOUNTRY MODELING OF FINANCIAL MARKETS

ABSTRACT

After a survey of alternative theoretical approaches to modelling financial markets, the domestic and international financial linkages of major
rulticountry models are examined and assessed.

The properties

of these

models are compared by calculating the slopes of their UI and BP curves for
the United States, Germany, and Japan. The BP curves (horizontal by
assumption in several models) are almost always found to be flatter than the
estimated UN curves.

International differences in UI slopes are not

generally greater than inter-model differences in the estimated slopes of LN
Models with rstional or model-consistent
in
their
financial
markers tend to show mere appreciation of rhe
expectations
U.S. dollar, in response to fiscal expansion, than do models with adaptive
curves for any given country.

expectations, although in both types of model the induced nominal exchange
rate changes play a modest role in the transmission linking domestic spending
to the current account.

Suggestions are made for modelling

the increasing

globalization of financial markets, and for more explicit treatment of
learning behaviour in the modelling of expectations.

Jon Cockerline
Department of Finance
Ottawa, Ontario
K1A DCI
Robert Lafrance
Bank of Canada
Ottawa, Ontario
K1A 0G9

John F. Helliwell
University
Vancouver,
V67 lY2

of British Columbia
B.C.

Multicouiitry

Modelling of Financial Markets

John F. Helliwell, Jon Cockerline and Robert Lafrance

1. Introduction

What theoretical approaches are available for the modelling of
domestic and international financial markets in multicountry
econometric models? What structures have been chosen and applied in the
major models, and what are the main properties of the financial sectors
that have been estimated? What do the models appear to reveal about the
comparative behaviour of financial markets in the United States, Japan
and Germany? Finally, what are the implications of these estimated
financial models for the domestic and international effects of fiscal
and monetary policies? These are the main questions that we shall be
addressing in this paper.
Although the main emphasis of this paper is on the modelling of
domestic financial sectors, and on the resulting implications for
macroeconomic behaviour, there are three ways in which our focus has
been made more international.
First, since the multicountry models that we are surveying include
separate national blocks for (at least) the three largest industrial
economies, we shall be comparing the treatment and properties of the
monetary Sectors of the United States, Japan and Germany. The stage for
this comparison will be set in section 2, where we review some of the
main questions of theory and model design that underlie the
specification of domestic financial markets in multicountry models. We
then present our empirical comparisons, looking across models and
across countries, in section 3 and a related Appendix.
Second, we shall emphasize the modelling of the international
linkages of financial markets, as captured by the modelling of
international asset movements, interest rates, and exchange rates. This
will be done in section 4.
Finally, since a primary purpose of the multicountry models is to
show how the effects of national policies are transmitted to other
countries, our review will emphasize those aspects offormonetary
international
structure that have the most important implications
transmission. To do this, we shall present and discuss, in sections 5
and 6, a number of the key simulation results prepared for this and
related earlier conferences. We shall be trying to assess the
implications of alternative modelling strategies as well as of the

apparent differences in financial structures in the largest industrial
countries. Our comparison among national economies will be mainly
limited to the United States, Japan, and Germany, since these countries
are the focus of the simulations prepared for this conference.
In our concluding section, we shall summarize our evidence about
the character and properties of the modelling of financial markets in
multicountry models, and make some suggestions for further work.
2. Domestic Financial Markets
2.1 Model Design

The design of a macroeconomic model is a compromise between a set
of objectives (e.g. forecasting, policy simulations), theoretical
inclinations, and data limitations including the evaluation of the
empirical evidence. Multicountry models were built to focus mainly on
spill—over effects of national policy settings and the effects of
exogenous shocks.
Broadly speaking, three basic approaches were adopted in
formulating these models: linkage, replication and standardization.
In linkage models, independently developed national models are linked
together via trade and international capital flows. Project LINK (Ball,
ed., 1973) is the most comprehensive model in this category. For
replication models, the designers set up a prototype model which is
replicated over a number of countries with some allowance for
differences in institutional characteristics and a common framework for
international linkages. The Federal Reserves Multicountry Model (MCM(
is the archetype of this class of models. The World Economic Model of
Japans Economic Planning Agency (EPA) falls somewhere in between
linkage and replication models. There is a discernible trend in recent
multicountry models towards standardization of macroeconomic
relationships. Countries of a comparable level of development share
common specifications and in some instances common parameter estimates
in these models. The OECD's INTERLINK model (Richardson 1988), the
National Institute model (NIESR 1988), the IMF's MULTIMOD (Masson et
al. 1988) arid models developed by McKibbin and Sachs (1986) and Taylor
(1988( are cast in this mold.
The trend towards standardization appears to be motivated by a
desire to increase the transparency of large models and to ensure
greater consistency between theory and application, in behaviour (of
similar agents between markets), in accounting relationships
(particularly between flows and stocks and wealth effects) and in
transmission of information (e.g. by the application of model—

1 The Federal Reserve Board Conference on
Monetary Aggregates and
Financial Sector Behaviour in Washington, May 26-27, 1988.

3

consistent2 expectations). Smaller research groups and technological
of
innovations (microcomputers) have also contributed to the process
simplifying and standardizing the national blocks of multicountry
models.
The focus on international linkages and the trend towards
standardization have meant that the contribution of multicountry models
to the modelling of domestic financial sectors has been relatively
modest. We will argue that the models that we have elected to examine
share a common view as regards the representation of domestic financial
markets and that they differ basically in terms of the level of
they treat expectations.
aggregation of financial assets, and the way
In the treatment of expectations, the key difference is that between
the model—consistent expectations used in the Taylor model, and the
adaptive learning processes typically assumed in the other models.
2.2 A Framework
National balance sheet accounts provide a convenient framework to
structure the financial block of a macroeconomic model. A stylized
in Table 2.1. The fundamental
representation of these accounts is given
the
column headings while the
are
identified
in
the
by
economy
agents
rows represent the various asCet markets. The relevant sectors include
non—financial (NFF), the
persons (H), firms, both financial (FF) andand
the monetary authorities
public sector including the government (G)
but not
(CB),and foreign nationals or non—residents (NR). A typical,
of liabilities
unique, configuration of asset demands (D) and supply
(S( is provided for illustrative purposes.
The accounts identify the nature and extent of financial claims among
the various sectors of the economy. Financial claims can be
such as currency
categorized according to their basic characteristicsand
the modality of
of deicmination, marketability, liquidity, maturity
type
payments (fixed or variable rates, contingent returns ...). Each
of claim when viewed over the set of identified economic agents defines
a market whose rate of return may be determined endogenously from the
or policy.
equilibrium of market forces or exogenously by regulation

2 Most of the macroeconomic literature, following Muth (1961),
uses the term rational expectations' to define expectations that are
consistent with the forecasts of the model used for analysis. Walters
(1971) suggested that the term 'consistent would be a more accurate
refine this to be 'model—
description, and Masson et al (1988) further
consistent'. We shall generally use the latter term, to avoid possible
later confusion when consideration is given to modelling learning
behaviour in ways that assume rational behaviour under uncertainy and
not be
Costly information, but where the resulting expectations may model.
identical with specific forward solutions of the underlying

4

Table 2.1

Structure of Financial Claims

Sectors
Claims
Money
Credit
Bonds
Equity
Foreign sec.
Forn money

H

NFF

FF

CE

D
S
0
D
D

D
S
S
S

S
D
S
S
D

S

D

0
0

D

D
D
D

G

S

HR
0
0
D
D
S
S

From the accounting framework it is relatively straightforward to
derive a set of behavioural relationships whereby asset demands are
defined in stock terms within the context of a portfolio according to
risk/return characteristics of the various assets. The formulation of
asset demands within the framework of a portfolio implies a common set
of explanatory variables and cross—equation restrictions that are well
known (Tobin/Brainard 1968, Christ 1971). The characterization of these
restrictions in a dynamic context have also been thoroughly discussed
(Purvis 1978, Owen 1981). The multicountry models in our survey have
simplified, and sometimes ignored, important aspects of the portfolio
approach. For instance, exclusion restrictions are typically the norm
when it comes to interest rates on competing assets in the various
portfolios. Furthermore, in the disaggregated models such as MCM and
EPA, the wealth variable does not represent the sum of the components
in the financial portfolio that is considered in these models.
The complexity of these financial relationships can he reduced
somewhat by adopting various modelling strategies. One possibility, is
to group all the liabilities of a sector into one asset category. For
example the government issues only bonds, firms only equity, money is
non—interest bearing government debt etc.... This reduced set of
claims may
be modelled according to the aforementioned
principles.hen
More typically, the size of the financial block is reduced by
aggregating over sectors and omitting specific markets altogether.
Credit and the equity markets are particularly susceptible to this
treatment by aggregation over households, firms and the banking sector,
or private financial intermediaries. Markets may be dropped if they are
"internalized" when aggregating over agents. But this procedure is
acceptable only if it assumed that the remaining sectors have no claims
on each other that take the form of the omitted assets (eg. no bank

The Bank of Canada's Small Annual Model adopts this strategy.
See Rose and Selody (1985).

5

the
loans to foreigners; non—residents have no equity claims on
domestic capital Stock).
Markets may be integrated by assuming that various financial
assets are very close substitutes and therefore that their particular
in a
characteristics (risk, maturity...) are of secondary importance
models either
macroeconomic framework. As a consequence, multicountry
do consider
focus on a restricted number of rates of return or, if they
rates move
a wide range of interest rates, assume that the interest
together according to "stable' historical relationships.
This may be viewed as a reduced—form approach to interest rate
determination. The matrix of inter—sectoral claims in Table 2.1
sectoral asset demands and
suggests a more structural approach whereby
interest rate is
and
the
are
representative
supplies
aggregated
determined by a market equilibrium condition. The structural approach
to
is attractive because it uses the theory of portfolio behaviour
the adoption of
However,
interest
rate
the
equation.
constrain
implied
model.
a structural approach does not require a highly disaggregated
The structural versus reduced—form choice, and the aggregated versus
disaggregated choice, are separate issues.4
2.3 Disaggregation

pros and cons

Microfoundations are potentially more transparent in a
model identifies
disaggregated framework but this assumes that themarket
opportunities
with
motivations,
agents
specific
representative
and constraints. The advantages of a detailed representation of a
in EPA
disaggregation of monetary assets
particular market segment (ie. when
other financial markets are
and MCM) may be less apparent
summarily described or ignored altogether.
There is a presumption that a more disaggregated approach might
reduce potential simultaneity problems and help to identify the
fundamental market equations (supply/demand) by using sector—specific
characteristics as supplementary information. However, in most
macroeconomic models disaggregation involves separate classes of assets
rather than classes of agents, so that the equations tend to employ
similar structures and variables.
As a practical matter disaggregation implies more potential
sources for errors in specification and estimation. One reason for this
is the sheer volume of coefficients and data involved, which limits the
Comparing the alternative approaches for U.S. long—term bond
rates, Friedman (1980) concluded that "the structural modelling
fairly well without
approach to interest rate determination...performs
sectoral disaggregation empirically [and) .. . in comparison with familiar
unrestricted reduced—form term structure equations".

6

attention that can be given to ensure that each component of the
disaggregated structure has sensible doefficients and properties. In
particular, the pervasive use of partial adjustment processes and
backward—looking expectations in a fairly disaggregated model structure
could very well result in rather sluggish responses to policy shocks,
thereby limiting the interest of policy makers in these models.
Models that derive their dynamic process from estimates based on
low frequency data may be subject to problems of time aggregation bias.
The adjustment path of the various economies in response to external or
policy shocks may be misrepresented. Temporal aggregation can lead to
lower precision in estimation and prediction, low power for tests and
inability to make short—run forecasts (Zeilner and Montmarquette
(1971)). Empirical studies using temporally aggregated and
disaggregated data document the sensitivity of inferences on lag
structures to the level of temporal aggregation (Engle and Liu (1972),
Wei (1978)).
2.4 The Demand for Money
The key behavioural relationship in the money market is the demand
for money -defined in terms of an aggregate or its components. Three
motives are traditionally invoked for holding money balances: for
transactions purposes, to speculate or to hold as a precautionary
reserve. With each motive one could associate different explanatory
variables: relative yields and transactions proxies, wealth and
expected holding period yields, relative yields and measures of
transactions uncertainties.
However, macro models typically eschew this complex Set of
motivations to focus on a narrow set of variables: one to represent
transactions (GNP, GDP, absorption or consumption), another to express
opportunity costs (short—term competing rates plus, where applicable,
own rates for certain sub—components of monetary aggregates,) and,
perhaps, a wealth variable (which in most models does not represent the
aggregate of the financial portfolio)
The use of a single representative interest rate (opportunity
cost) is most probably the Outcome of multicollinearity in estimating
asset demand equations. However, it may be justified either (1) by
assuming that portfolio decisions are separable between broad types of
financial claims (and that marginal allocative decisions are made
between cose substitutes), Or (2) by considering that all non—monetary
financial assets are perfect substitutes for each other such that their
expected holding period yields would be equalized.
Surveys of empirical research on the demand for money (Cooley and
Leroy, Judd and Scadding, Laidler 1985, Podolski 1986) present evidence

7

of unstable relationships.5 One explanation of the instability of the
incomes and
relationship between monetary aggregates, interest rates, nature
and
prices is that financial innovatios have transformeda the
certain extent
Various, and to
attractiveness of monetary assets.
of
complementary, hypotheses have been offered to explain the process
financial innovation.
Silber (1975, 1983) argues that innovations in financial
instruments and practices occur to remove or lessen the constraints
that firms face. Innovations are most likely to appear when the nature
of constraints change (i.e. modifications in the regulatory
environment) or when the costs of adhering to the constraints are
modified (e.g. circumventing deposit rate ceilings when market rates
are high). Kane (1977) proposed the hypothesis of circumventive
innovation or a "regulatory dialectic" in which the political process
of regulation and the economic process of regulation avoidance interact
by continuously adapting to each other. Wojnilower (1980) has observed
that, according to the U.S. post—war experience, credit shortages at
the peak of trade cycles were mainly responsible for financial
innovation and regulatory change. Technology has provided a further
impetus to financial innovation (Niehans), particularly in the sphere
of information processing, as financial intermediaries have sought to
lower transaction costs while providing more flexible financial
instruments.
What are the implications of financial innovations? First, one
would not expect to find very stable money demand functions and would
not therefore be surprised if key parameter values differed between
models for similar aggregates (different sample periods and/or
conditioning variables). Secondly, one would favour broader aggregates
or a more aggregated" approach to the structure of the financial block
in a model as substitutions between components due to innovations would
tend to be internalized. However, there is some evidence indicating
that broader aggregates are not necessarily mor stable, in a
functional sense, than are narrower aggregates.

In particular, functional instability may appear as the result
of targeting a particular monetary aggregate, as financial innovations
are developed to economize on scarce forms of money. Such an outcome
illustrates "Coodhart's Law" - that any monetary aggregate chosen as a
policy instrument will quickly see its financial significance change
(Laidler 1985, p. 160).

.it

6
does appear that
Laidler (1985, p. 120) states ".
institutional change is an important factor influencing the demand for
money. . . Such change turns Out tO have been important for a long time
and rather wide variety of countries."
.

See, e.g., floughton (1981) and Blundell—Wignall at al.

(1984).

Third, financial innovations could affect the properties of the
macro model and in particular the slope of the LM curve. The
conventional interpretation would be that greater substitution
possibilities (new financial instruments) would make the monetary
assets more responsive to interest rates changes. Conversely,
financial innovations may leave money holdings in the hands of less
market—sensitive agents or sharpen the "moneyness" of the monetary
aggregates such that the interest rate elasticity of the demand for
money decreases. The net effect could go either way, as noted much
earlier by Marty (1961).
2.5 Monetary Policy Channels
The relative importance that is given to asset characteristics
influences behavioural relationships in macro—models and the channels
of transmission of monetary policy. For instance, Keynes focussed on
the maturity of the asset and accentuated the relative illiquidity of
long term assets (higher capital risk). Money and short—term bonds
would be close substitutes at the short end of the maturity spectrum
while long—term bonds and real capital were close substitutes at the
long end. Tobin (1969) provided an alternative view whereby assets are
classified according to the nature of their claims, either in nominal
or real terms, thereby grouping money and bonds together. The buffer
stock approach8 identifies money as the residual asset in the portfolio
and assumes temporary disequilibrium in the money market as a
consequence of exogenous changes in the money supply with spill—over
effects on goods and asset markets.
Each approach entails a different characterization of the
transmission mechanism of monetary policy impulses to the real economy.
The standard Keynesian version, which is favoured by all the
multicountry models under review, establishes a money market
equilibrium condition which solves out for a short—term interest rate.
Short—term interest rates are determined in the money market
either in terms of the "narrow" institutional framework of managing
bank (free) reserves (MCM, EPA), or as the result of equilibrating
supply and demand for a conventional monetary aggregate. The detailed
framework which characterizes the MCM and EPA models broadens the range
of monetary policy instruments (setting discount or equivalent rates,
reserve ratios or the monetary base via open market or foreign exchange
operations). For the highly aggregated "standardized" models (OECD,
NIESR, TAYLOR) the money supply becomes the policy variable without
specific reference to the setting of policy instruments to achieve
monetary targets. Alternatively the key short—term interest rate may

8 For an
exposition of the buffer stock approach, see Laidler
(1983), Cuthbertson and Taylor (1987) and Davidson and Ireland (1987).
Milbourne (1987) provides a critical assessment.

9

be determined exogenously, or as the dependent variable in a monetary
policy reaction function.
As capital markets are assumed not to be segmented over the
that expected holding
maturity spectrum, arbitrage conditions ensureare
equalized and a
period yields of assets of varying maturities
representative long term interest rate is derived from a term structure
equation that reflects expectations of future short rates. Risk premia
are typically ignored or subsumed in a constant term.
Long rates, with
or without due consideration for expectations of inflation, then affect
core intertemporal decisions (investment and savings).
The Tobin model (supply price of capital) puts more emphasis on
the effects of monetary policy shocks on the stock market and the
market valuation of real capital assets. Stock market booms favour
investment in capital goods as their market price exceeds their
replacement cost.
The buffer stock approach adds a notion of temporary equilibrium

in its treatment of market clearing in the short run for the money

market. In this approach, holders of money balances are assumed to
in the money supply, without the
very large swings in interest rates that are implied by conventional
money demand equations estimated with lagged response to interest
rates. The buffer—stock model reflects the basic monetarist (Friedman
and Schwartz 1963) interpretation of the transmission of monetary
policy. The nominal money stock is supply determined and controlled by
the monetary authorities. Real balances are demand determined. Excess
supply positions in the money market are liquidated by additional
disequilibrium
purchases of assets and goods such that a money market
term may be included in some aggregate expenditure functions. The
long—run equilibrium between money supply and demand may then be
achieved by some combination of changes in interest rates (Artis and
Lewis 1976), output (Jonson 1976) and the price level (Laidler 1983).
In the short run interest rates are determined in the bond market and
the interest rate response to monetary policy shocks, such as an open
market operation, is weaker than in the conventional Keynesian
approach.

absorb unexpected short—term changes

In the conventional approach, which is adopted in all of the
multicountry models, short—run interest rates may overshoot following a
monetary shock. The interest rate bears all the burden of the
adjustment and overshooting may occur if the short—run interest
elasticity of the demand for money is substantially below its long—run
value.
3. Model Properties: Domestic Financial Sectors

This Section provides a summary overview of the financial sectors
of five multicountry models providing simulation results and analysis
for this conference. They are the Federal Reserve Boards multicountry

10
model, the world model
INTERLINK model of the
National Institute for
Taylor model. With the
all of the models have

of the Japanese Economic Planning Agency, the
OECD, the global economic model of the U.K.
Economic and Social Research (NIESR), and the
exception of INTERLINK, which is semi—annual,
a quarterly frequency.

In the text of this section, we present summary evidence about the
LM curves and term structure relations in each of the models, while the
Appendix gives the underlying evidence about the structure and
estimated equations of the individual models.
Table 3.1 provides estimates of the slopes of the LM curve in the
each of the different models, for each of the G—3 countries. The slope
of the LM curve has implications for crowding out of fiscal policy
actions when money supplies are fixed. Furthermore, as discussed below
in section 5, when combined with a representation of external
equilibrium (a BP curve), the money market equilibrium condition can be
used to make inferences about the exchange rate response to aggregate
demand shocks in the short run.

Inter—model comparisons: Slope at the LM curve.

Table 3.1

(Interest rate response, in basis points, to 1% change in GNP or other
activity variable in the short/long run; for OECD and Taylor, ratio of
income elasticity to interest rate semi—elasticity, multiplied by 100).
MODEL

Country/aggregate
MCM
US
JAPAN
GERMANY

*

with

EPA

OECD

NIESR

Ml
M2

87/71

56/74

51/51

54/70

Ml
M2

36/36

44/40*

106/106

41/60

CEM
Ml
M3

36/36

TAYLOR
18/18
29/29

31/9

46/40
0/13

62/62
89/89

bank debenture rate endogenous; 93/90 if exogenous.

Source: Partial simulations for MCM, EPA and NIESR; results for other
models based on structural parameters, as reported in Appendix tables.
For MCM, the short and long runs refer to the 4th quarters of the first
and sixth years of partial simulations for EPA and NIESR they are
averages over the first and sixth years, respectively.

1].

Exact comparisons between models for all major monetary aggregates
are not possible due either to limitations in the documentation or
model design. Nevertheless, a few observations are warranted. First,
it is apparent that estimates of the respective LX Slopes differ
greatly between models for a similar aggregate and country thus
indicating some uncertainty about the precise magnitudes. Second, when
considering the key aggregate for each country that may be used in
policy simulations, there are no firm conclusions about the relative
steepness of the LX curves in different Countries. For instance, there
is no general consensus that the LM Curve is steeper in the U.S. than
in Japan or Germany.
In Table 3.2 we report estimates of the impact and long—run
response of the representative long—term interest rate to the short—
term money market rate. The OECD and Taylor models impose a long—run
proportional adjustment of long—term rates to changes in short—term
rates, as required by the pure expectations term—structure hypothesis.
Long—run homogeneity -is not imposed in the MCM and EPA models. In the
Taylor model, expected future short—term interest rates are derived
from forward simulations of the model, while in the other models
expected future rates are based on adaptive expectations. Some of them
do include, however, variables that might affect the future course of
interest rates, such as government borrowing requirements (EPA and, for
the United States only, OECD) or net foreign lending (EPA). The
National Institute model has no long—term interest rates, and hence no
term structure.
The estimates of the long—run response of long-term rates- to
short—term rates are derived from the term—structure equations rather
than simulation results. The distinction is especially important for
the Taylor model, where the simulated impact may be much larger, since
expected future short—term rates are influenced even in the first
period. We shall return to this issue in sections 6 and 7, where we
discuss full—model properties.
Term Structure of Interest Rates
Table 3.2
(Impact and long—run responses of long to short rates.)
MODEL
Country

JAPAN
GER

MCM

EPA

OECD

NIESP.
. ..

TAYLOR

.27/1

.l3/.83

.21/.71

.21/1

O/.76

.32/.63

.30/1

.28/1

.30/.60

.09/.l8

.27/1

.36/1

.

12

4. International Integration of Capital Markets

4.1. Asset Substitutability and Portfolio Balance
All multicountry models reviewed in this paper involve some form
of portfolio model of the demand for foreign assets. The different
models are distinguished, in terms of their specification and
properties, by three crucial features:
1. The assumed degree of asset substitutability. Where this is assumed
to be infinite, then the usual demand equation based on rate—of—return
differentials cannot be directly estimated, and interest rates differ
by the expected rate of change of the exchange rate.
2. The assumed process for determining expected future exchange rates.
This is especially important for models assuming a high degree of asset
substitution, since anything that influences the level of the expected
future exchange rate has equivalent effects on the spot exchange rate.
3. In models that assume imperfect asset substitution, the key feature
is the form chosen for estimation of the demand equation for foreign
assets. If the portfolio demand equations are estimated with portfolio
stocks, or changes therein, as the dependent variables (as in EPA),
they generally show much smaller asset substitutability than if the
equations are reriormalized and estimated with the spot exchange rate as
the dependent variable (as in OECD).

We shall first consider these and other specification issues, and
then describe the estimated properties of the capital market linkages
and exchange rate determination in selected multicountry models.9 We
start first with reference to a standard portfolio model. In a
representative two—country model the home—country portfolio consists of
domestic money (M), domestic currency bonds (B), and foreign currency
bonds (F); the home wealth constraint (W) is given by:

WM+B+EF;

(4.1)

where E is the exchange rate defined as the home gurrency price of
foreign currency. Demand functions for the home—country portfolio are
typically of the form:
M =

m(i,

i+

P, y, W(

(4.2)

B =

b(i, i+e

P, y, W)

(4.3)

For a survey of the major theoretical issues relating to
international asset substitutability, and the implications for policy,
especially foreign exchange market intervention, under flexible
exchange rates, see Boothe et al. (1985).

13

EF =

f(i,

i+e,

P, y, W)

(4.4)

i and
where p is the domestic price level and y domestic real income,
and c is
are home and foreign nominal interest rates respectively,
Similar *
the expected rate of depreciation of the home currency.
for foreign mney (N ),
exist
*)
demand
functions
by
foreign
(enoted
(F ). The
domestic currency bonds (B ), and foreign currency bondsdenomination,
differentiated
to
be
only by currency
bonds are assumed
B, could be issued in
although in principle domestic currency bonds,
the home country by both home and forein issuers, as could the foreign
currency bond in the foreign country, F

Under the assumption of less—than—perfect asset substitutability,
"portfolio
models as
balance' models. If we view the capital accounts of theseas
such
for
bonds,
equation
foreign
a
demand
equation
by
represented
about the formation of
4.4, then a renormalization, and assumptions
rate
as a
to write the exchange
exchange rate expectations, allow us
function of relative bond supplies and rates of return. Portfolio of
components
balance models are sometimes estimated directly for all
as in OECD, one of the
capital flows (as in EPA). Alternatively,
and estimated as an
foreign asset demand equations can be renormalized
then determined
exchange rate equation, with capital movements A third alternative is
residually by the balance of payments identity.or
NIESR), which
(GEM,
provided by the National Institute model rate
equation obtained by
estimates a quasi—reduced—form exchange
without explicit measures of
combining a portfolio demand equation (but
a simplified balance—of—
actual or desired portfolio proportions) with
effects of changes in official
payments identity (omitting the possible includes the
current account
reserves), so that the estimated equation
balance as well as the determinants of interest rates and expected
exchange rates.
A second class of models, under the general heading of 'uncovered
in
interest parity' models, is a degenerate form of the portfolio model
which asset substitutability is perfect. They may be viewed as
in the sense that the
degenerate forms of the portfolio balance model
in the form of
estimated
cannot
be
demand
functions
directly
asset
correlation between the
equation 4.4, since there will be perfect
the expected
domestic and foreign interest rates, after adjusting for
MCM and
rate of change of the exchange rate. In these models, of which
TAYLOR are examples, the expected rates of return on assets of
different currency denomination are always equalized:
as
the above equations describe a class of models known

i

=

i

+

s.

(4.5)

on
Since, as described in the previous section, interest rates
are
set
so
as
to
assets
equilibrate
short—term
domestic
representative
the supply and demand for domestic money, equation 4.5 determines the
that assumes
expected rate of change of the exchange rate in any model
uncovered interest parity. For any given value of the expected future

14
exchange rate, equation 4.5 can then be solved for the spot rate, and
net capital movements determined residually from the balance of
payments identity. Thus the uncovered interest parity models are
similar in form to portfolio balance models renormalized as exchange
rate equations. The key difference is that a portfolio balance variable
appears as a determinant of the exchange rate in the portfolio balance
model, with a coefficient that falls as the estimated degree of asset
substitution increases.
In all models, the specification of the expected exchange rate has
important implications for capital movements and the exchange rate.
These expectations may be derived from actual forward simulations of
the model (as in TAYLOR), based on actual or expected purchasing power
parity (as in OECD), or based on recent exchange rate levels and
changes. Exchange rate expectations are of greatest importance in the
models with uncovered interest parity, as in these models any change in
the expected future rate is translated directly into a corresponding
change in the spot exchange rate, since the interest parity condition
uses the interest rate differential and the expected future spot rate
to determine the spot exchange rate.
4.2. Other Specification Issues
While exchange rate determination is not immediately affected by
portfolio proportions in models assuming uncovered interest parity,
this does not necessarily eliminate longer—run feedbacks from the
current account to the exchange rate. This can be seen by adding a
goods market equilibrium condition and a balance of payments condition
to (4.1), (4.2) and (4.5). Although the capital account is passively
determined, as long as there are wealth effects on. consumption or on
money demand then changes in the current account will eventually
influence domestic demand and prices, and hence the equilibrium nominal
A current account surplus will also add to the stock of
exchange rate.
net foreign claims, which will lead to increased interest and dividend
receipts and to eventual appreciation of the real exchange rate. In
models solved with model—consistent expectations for expected future
exchange rates (such as TAYLOR and MULTIMOD), these longer-run effects
show up immediately, in modified form, through their impact on the
expected future exchange rate. In these models, movements in the spot
exchange rate are influenced largely by the longer—run equilibrium
properties of the system.
Aside from the greater modelling flexibility associated with
relaxing the uncovered interest parity assumption, the portfolio
balance approach has specific analytic applications which cannot be
addressed by the monetary models. One implication of imperfect
international asset substitutability is that relative supplies of
domestic and foreign assets can affect their relative expected returns
Sterilized intervention, the exchange of B
through the exchange rate.
for F with M unchanged, can have no exchange rate impact under the
assumption of uncovered interest parity.

15
While the portfolio can be disaggregated so as to alLD; for more
detailed linkage among exchange rates, capital flows and wealth,
Currency substitution,
simplifying assumptions are frequently made.
for example, is typically assumed away, even in models assuming perfect
international substitutabilty of bonds, by not including foreign money
in the domestic portfolio.1
Theoretical models have employed the small—country assumption
for the domestic—
whereby there isno demand by foreign residents
both countries occurs
currency bond (B =0). International borrowing by
An alternative
bond.
of
the
the
issuance
F,
foreign—currency
through
OECD) is that countries borrow only
assumption (used, for example, byabove
In the
example this corresponds to the
in their owncurrencies.
case where B and F represent gross liabilities to foreigners and are
each homogeneous in currency denomination and issuer. These assumptions
the problem of
simplify the accounting of the models by assuming away
but may misrepresent
capital flows denominated in different currencies,
the linkages from the exchange rate to wealth.

-

o

aggregation.
Other assumptions are made regarding the level
The lack of bilateral capital flow data for most countries, for and
flows
example, requires specification in terms of multilateral
effective exchange rates. Two of the three imperfect asset
with capital movements on
substitutability models, OECD and NIESR, dealmultilateral
flows
an aggregate basis, while EPA explains gross
investment and short—term bank
disaggregated into direct and portfolio
and non—bank flows. MOM, a model with perfect asset substitutability,
contains a similar degree of disaggregation, but with net private
short—term capital flows determined residually from the balanceinof
MCM is
equations
payments identity. The purpose of the disaggregated
explaining
to accumulate the asset and liability stocks used in
interest and dividend payments. The Taylor model, which also assumes
net foreign assets and
perfect asset substitutability, does not model
the associated net investment income.
Portfolio models in the form of equations (4.1) through(4.4) are
unstable, under conditions of static expectations and local asset
(Masson
preference, when net foreign asset positions are negative
net debt to
1981). When net foreign assets are negative, and the
a depreciation
foreigners is denominated in the foreign currency,
net
raises the domestic currency value of that indebtedness and lowerslowers
national wealth. The resulting transfer of wealth to foreigners
the demand for the domestic bond and raises the demand for the foreign
bond, requiring a depreciation for asset market equilibrium. This, in
turn, sets up the need for further depreciation and, under static
expectations, long—run instability. Branson and Henderson a(1984) have
unique
demonstrated that under rational expectations there exists
10 Cuddington (1983) presents evidence indicating that the currency
Substitution effects are weak.

16
saddle path solution for the exchange rate which involves a jump
appreciation followed by depreciation sufficient to clear the asset
market.
The potential instability of the net debtor model is not an issue
in existing multinational models, since none has adopted the
assumption
that the exchange rate moves so as to provide immediate portfolio
balance with existing stocks of assets. In models involving
imperfect
substitution of assets, either immediate portfolio balance is
not
or
the
imposed (e.g. EPA)
exchange rate is derived from a renormalized
with
the exchange rate being determined through its role in
equation
defining the expected return on foreign investment (e.g. OECD). The
issue cannot arise in the models assuming perfect asset substitution,
since there is in any event no direct link from portfolio proportions
to the exchange rate.
The more direct link from international payments flows to the
exchange rate in the directly—estimated portfolio balance models than
in the models assuming uncovered interest parity may have other
implications for long—run stability. J—curve effects, for
were noted to lead to destabilizing exchange rate movements example,
in the EPA
and in early versions of MCM. In some cases stability ha
the
use of specific and constraining assumptions about exchangerequired
rate
expectations.
4.3. Interest Rate Linkages
As noted, the portfolio approach provides for a rich menu of
possibilities in modelling different exchange rate regimes and the
alternative intervention rules of different countries. Differential
treatment for specific subgroups within the model, such as the EMS
countries for example, can also be a desirable feature. There is the
potential, however, for more varied interest rate linkages to lead to
unintended asymmetries in international transmission.
The interest rate linkages in models assuming perfect asset
substitutability are straightforward: nominal rates differ bilaterally
by the expected rate of depreciation of the home currency against the
foreign currency. These parity conditions may be specified either in
bilateral or multilateral form (i.e. in terms of some weighted
average
of foreign rates). If the latter form is used,
is assured
for all cross—currency bilateral rates as long consistency
as the weighting
procedure used for constructing the effective exchange rate is the same
as that for constructing the world interest rate.
This result is
independent of the weighting matrix chosen.
In MCM, the combination of perfect asset substitutability with
exchange rate expectations determined by relative price movements
implies that in the long run real interest rates are equalized across
countries, and nominal exchange rates reflect purchasing power parity.
There are four exchange rates in MCM; the bilateral Canada/U.S. rate

17
and weighted average rates for the U.K., Germany and Japan, For the
most part the weighting is symmetric and based on the total world trade
shares of the five countries.11 In order to endogenize the stock of
foreign assets for calculating investment income, some components of
the capital account are modelled. The equations contain a variety of
dissimilar direct interest rate links, but with no consequence for
international transmission since the capital account is passive.
Symmetric treatment of interest rate linkages across countries is

not exclusive to models assuming perfect asset substitutability. OECD

derives effective exchange rates from world capital flows and world
interest rates based on a geographical flows weighting matrix. The EPA
model, which does not presuppose interest parity, has adopted a more
flexible approach to foreign interest rates based on dominant country
assumptions in the capital flow equations of the various country
models. In the capital account equations for Japan, Germany, Italy and
Canada, the U.S. rate is the dominant foreign rate while in the French
model both U.S. and German rates appear, and in the U.K. model the
foreign rate is a weighted average of the U.S., German, Canadian and
Japanese rates.
4.4 The models compared
Table 4.1 records capital account elasticities for EPA, OECD,
NIESR, MCM and TAYLOR. The elasticities for EPA are calculated from
full—model simulation results. For OECD and NIESR they are based on
direct structural evidence from estimated balance—of-payments sectors.
The elasticities are computed as changes in the capital accounts as
ratios to GNP arising from a sustained 100 basis point reduction in
domestic short—term interest rates with fixed spot and expected future
exchange rates. For MCM and TAYLOR, the elasticities are set equal to
infinity, since this is a feature of the assumed specification.
Capital movements are at least ten times more interest—responsive
in OECD, where the portfolio balance equation is renormalized and
estimated as an exchange—rate equation, than in EPA and NIESR. The
small size of the numbers reported in table 4.1, especially when
compared with the infinitely large values reported for the models
assuming perfect asset substitution (TAYLOR and MCM), is a consequence
of reporting them as proportions of GNP, which is done for ease of
international comparisons. A numerical comparison might also be useful.
Each .001 of GNP, for the United States in 1987, represents almost $5
billion, so that in NIESR, which shows the least mobile capital for the
United States, each percentage point increase in U.S. interest rates
brings in about $18 billion of foreign capital in the first year.

The only exception is the slightly different treatment of
expected foreign inflation in the U.K. model compared to the other
country models.

18
Table 4.1: Capital Account Response to 100 Basis Point Reduction
in Short—Term Interest Rates (Proportion of GNP)
U.S.

Japan

Germany

EPA12

—.0038

—.0030

—.0011

OECD12

—.0562

—.0273

—.1489

NIESR-3

— .0036

— .0025

—.0067

MCM
TAYLOR

-

Table 4.2 records estimates of the marginal propensities to import
for the various models, calculated as the income elasticities
multiplied by the 1985 ratio of imports to GNP. These are derived as
closely as possible from directly estimated equations, and represent,
where available, the elasticities with respect to output rather than
final spending, since we combine these data with those for the capital
account to obtain approximate BP curves.
12 These are the combined
1—year (1987) short— and long—term
capital account impacts of 100 basis point reductions in short—term
interest rates with fixed exchange rates (EPA, July 1987 for the United
States and Japan, EPA 1987 for Germany).
12 Derived from the coefficients of renormalized asset demand
equations presented in Table 8 of Holtham (1984), and assuming world
wealth equal to 3.0 times OECD GNP, and treating the GNPs of the United
States, Japan and Germany as being .40, .14, and .08 of total OECD GNP,
as in Bryant, Henderson, et al., eds., (1988, P. 14).
13 The interest rate increase
required to roughly stabilize the
effective exchange rate after a move into current account deficit of $1
billion per quarter is roughly one quarter of a percentage point in the
U.S., one point in Japan and two—thirds of a point in Germany. These
figures were provided for us by Simon Wren—Lewis, and differ from those
reported in Wren—Lewis (1987, p. 59), because the exchange rate
equations have since been revised to embody smaller, and hence more
plausible, cross—country effects in the exchange—rate equations.
Capital account responses to interest rate changes are now somewhat
larger for the United States, and twice as large for Germany, than they
were in the earlier version.

19
Table 4.2: Short—Run Marginal Propensities to Import14
U.S.

Japan

Germany

EPA

.03

.06

.10

OECD

.17

.12

.32

NIESR

.14

.13

.47

.19

.10

.37

.11

.01

.33

TAYLOR

Table 4.3 provides a cross—model comparison of relative slopes of
BP curves, calculated as the import propensities of table 4.2 divided
reported in table 4.1.
by the capital account response coefficients
These numbers show the required increase in short—term interest rates
(measured in basis points( required to maintain balance—of—payments
all prices
equilibrium in the face of a 1% increase in real GNP, with
unchanged.

14
Computed as the short—run income elasticities multiplied by the
1985 ratio of imports to GNP. The EPA elasticities are from EPA (1984,
Table 2); the German elasticity is a weighted average of the
consumption and investment elasticities, with weights corresponding to
final demand shares, and the Japanese elasticity is a weighted average
of the short—term elasticities for mineral fuels, raw materials and
foodstuffs, and manufactured goods. The OECD elasticities are weighted
from
averages for imports of energy, food, materials and manufactures,
OECD (l98b). The MCM income elasticities for the United States are for
Hooper, eds.,
imports excluding oil, as reported in Bryant, Holtham and
(1988, p. 133). The MCN figures for Japan and Germany are
Table 2). The
approximations based on Edison, Marouez and Tryon (1986,
TAYLOR elasticities are from Taylor (1987), and those for NIESR from
NIESR (1988).

20
Table 4.3: Estimates of Slopes of BP
U.S.

Japan

EPA

7.9

20.0

90.9

OECD

3.0

4.4

2.4

NIESR

38.9

52.0

70.1

Germany

MCM

0

0

0

TAYLOR

0

0

0

Finally, to draw together in summary form some of the key
properties of the domestic and financial sectors of the multicountry
models, we show in Table 4.4 the ratios of the estimated slopes of the
8? and LM curves for each of the three countries in each of the five
multicountry models under review. A ratio less than 1.0, indicating B?
flatter than LW, means that the domestic currency would be expected to
appreciate under an expansionary fiscal policy, assuming unchanged
foreign variables and unchanged values for the expected future exchange
rate. The ratio is equal to zero in those cases where international
aeaet substitutability is assumed to be perfect, as in MCM and TAYLOR.
Table 4.4: Ratio of Slopes of B? to Slopes of LW, First Period-5
U.S.

Japan

Germany

EPA

0.14

0.45

OECD

0.06

0.04

0.03

NIESR

0.72

1.08

1.53

MCM

0

0

0

TAYLOR

0

0

0

15 The LW curve slopes are based on the short—run elasticities
reported in table 3.1. Where more than one elasticity is reported, we
use M2 in the United States and Japan, and for CBM in Germany, since
these are the monetary aggregates held fixed in the fiscal expansion
simulations to be discussed in section 5.

21

This completes our summary of the estimated structures of the
domestic monetary sectors and the international financial linkages of
the multicountry models. In the next two sections, we use this
information to help explain some of the differences, both among models
and among countries, in the international transmission of the effects
of domestic fiscal and monetary policies. We shall start with fiscal
policies, since there has been much discussion of the extent to which
monetary policies and exchange rates influence the linkage between
fiscal policies and current account imbalances.
5.

International Transmission of Fiscal Policies

In this section, we use our survey of the Structure and properties
of the financial sectors of the multinational models to shed some light
on some key questions in international macroeconomic policy. What do
multinational models have to say about the role of exchange rate
changes in determining the current account effects of fiscal policies?
To what extent does this role depend on the procedures used for
modelling domestic financial Structures and the determination of
exchange rates? Is the contrast between the United States and the rest
of the OECD (referred to as the ROECO), which is evident in the results
reported in Bryant, Henderson, et al. eds. (1988), also apparent when
U.S. fiscal policy is compared with that in Germany and Japan, the two
biggest national economies in the ROECD? If fiscal policy does have
materially different effects in the three countries, to what extent is
this due to differences in their financial structures, as depicted in
the multicountry models?
,

We shall start first by looking at the exchange—rate effects of
fiscal policy, since these provide a potentially important part of the
process by which fiscal policy changes influence the current account.
Other things equal, the domestic currency will appreciate in response
to domestic fiscal expansion if the domestic LM curve is steeper than
the HP curve. Intuitively, the lower the capital flow elasticities
(i.e. the steeper the BP Curve) the smaller will be the capital inflow
associated with a positive interest differential, and the smaller will
be the expected exchange rate appreciation from a positive fiscal
shock. When the slope of the HP curve exceeds that of the LM curve,
this suggests that the induced capital inflow will be too small at
unchanged exchange rates to balance the deterioration in the current
account, thus inducing a currency depreciation.
However, this analysis assumes unchanged exchange rate expectations
and unchanged foreign interest rates. If an expansionary fiscal policy
raises actual and expected domestic inflation, then this may induce an
expected depreciation (as in OECD) which is greater than the increase
in the domestic interest rate (relative to the foreign rate), so that
the spot exchange rate may depreciate even in a model with a very flat
BP curve.

22
Table 5.1 gives the nominal exchange rate changes in the first
period and on average over the first year (first period/first year) of
a positive fiscal shock equal to 1% of GNP. As expected, based on the
estimates reported in Table 4.4, the models generally show immediate
own—country appreciations in response to fiscal expansion. The
exceptions are the NIESR results for Japan and Germany, where BP curves
are estimated to be steeper than the corresponding LM curves, On
average over the first year, the models show appreciations for all
three countries, except for the OECD model, which shows a first—year
depreciation for the United States, and LINK, which shows a small DM
depreciation in response to German fiscal expansion. For all three
countries, the exchange rate impact is much larger in TAYLOR than in
the other models.

Table 5.1: Nominal Impact and First—Year Exchange Rate Changes
from Increases in Government Purchases Equal to 1% of GNP
(+ve = appreciation of local currency)

(%)

-

U.S.

(FX/$)

(Shock F3)

Japan($/Y)
(Shock Fl)

Germany($/DM)
(Shock F2)

EPA

0.6/1.6

0.5/0.6

LINK

/0.1

/0.0

/—0.1

1.0/0.1

OECD

0.0/—0.l

0.1/0.4

0.2/0.4

MCM

1.5/1.7

1.0/1.1

0.3/1.1

TAYLOR

6.7/6.6

5.2/5.1

4.4/4.3

NIESR

1.6/1.8

—0.4/0.5

—0.4/1.0

We have not been able to examine the partial properties of the LM
and EP curves for the LINK model, but it would appear that the slopes
are generally rather similar for all three countries, as the exchange
rate changes are small in all cases.
One case requiring more explanation is that for U.S. fiscal
expansion in the case of the OECD model. Although the BP curve is
flatter than the LM curve in OECD, the model shows a first—year

23

depreciation of the U.S. dollar in response to fiscal expansion.16 This
occurs for two reasons: first because foreign interest rates rise, and
second because the expected future exchange rate, which is primarily
determined by current and expected future purchasing power parity
(PPP), indicates an expected future depreciation of the U.S. dollar,
since U.S. prices are
more than foreign prices in response
increase9 by
to the U.S. fiscal expansion.1
In earlier papers analyzing asymmetries in the transmission of
fiscal policies (e.g. Bryant, Henderson et al, 1988), it was seen that
multiplier effects were more truncated (i.e. more short—lived) in the
United States than in the ROECD, and that the current account and
foreign GNP effects of U.S. fiscal policies were greater than for ROECD
policies, despite the fact that the ROECD is 50% larger than the United
States. Because interest rates were increased much more in the United
States (in response to U.S. fiscal expansion) than in the ROECD (in
response to ROECD fiscal expansion), it was conjectured that this
asymmetry might be due to a steeper LM curve in the United States than
in the ROECD, and that this result might in turn be due to one—way
effects flowing from U.S. to foreign interest rates. The evidence
prepared for this conference permits a more precise evaluation of this
notion. What do the current results indicate?
First, as shown in Table 3.1, there is no general evidence from
the models that LM curves are steeper in the United States than in
Japan and Germany. The MCM and NIESR models do show steeper LM curves
in the United States than in the other two countries, as does EPA in
the case where the Japanese interest rate RSEC is endogenous. However,
the TAYLOR and OECD models both have LM curves that are flatter in the
United States than in the other two countries. None of the current
evidence relates
the rest of the ROECD countries (which together
account for more than 60% of ROECD output), and the model set is
somewhat smaller in these experiments, so complete reconciliation with
the earlier evidence is not possible. However, it would seem that the
higher interest rates in the United States (in response to U.S. fiscal
expansion) than in other countries (in response to their fiscal

o

16 Although the dollar appreciates very slightly on impact (up by
0.02% in the first semester), it is lower by 0.12% in the second semester.
17 The latter factor is substantially the more important of the
In simulation F3 for the OECD model, for example, foreign interest
rates change by about .6 as much as do U.S. rates. Assuming a foreign
rate response of this proportion, then the capital account sensitivity
of Table 4.1., which was computed under the assumption of foreign rates
unchanged, would decline, causing an upward revision of the estimated
HP slope from 3.0 to 7.6. This is only a fraction of the increase
necessary to achieve slope equality with the 36.0 slope of the LM
curve, implying that the major explanation is in the relatively rapid
price response of the U.S. model and its impact on the expected
exchange rate.
two.

24
expansion) is perhaps more likely to result from the higher prices
induced in the United States, which have the effect of reducing the
real money supply more there than elsewhere.
Second, the current results are less uniform than the earlier ones
in showing fiscal multipliers to be more truncated in the United States
than elsewhere. The panels of figure 5.1 compare the fiscal multipliers
of the United States with those for Japan and Germany for each of the
models reviewed in this paper. There is no systematic appearance of
more multiplier truncation for the United States than for the other
countries, except for the EPA model. Since the models surveyed in this
paper are similar to the versions assessed in the earlier experiments
(as shown in Helliwell 1988), this slight difference probably reflects
primarily the properties of the models for ROECD countries other than
Japan and Germany, or the amplifying effects that might exit when all
ROECD economies undertake fiscal expansion simultaneously.1-°
Third, the evidence from the models assessed at the earlier EPA
conference (EPA, MCM and OECD) indicated that induced nominal exchange
rate changes did not play a very important role in determining the
current account effects of fiscal policies (Helliwell 1988, section 4).
This was seen by comparing results of fiscal policies run with
exogenous and endogenous exchange rates, and seeing that the effects of
the fiscal policies on the current account balance were altered by less
than 10% when nominal exchange rates were made endogenous. This
suggests that the major part of the current account effects flowed
through the changes in income and expenditure, supplemented by the real
exchange rate changes caused by the price—level effects of the fiscal
policy changes. In the discussion in that conference, it was noted that
this result might be altered materially if the model set was expanded
to include models with rational or model—consistent expectations, since
these typically show larger appreciations in response to fiscal
expansions.
The current results confirm that the model with rational
expectations (TAYLOR) does have the largest induced appreciation of the
U.S. dollar in response to U.S. fiscal expansion, but the role of this
18 This hypothesis was assessed and
supported by comparing the
effects of sustained ROECD and own—country fiscal expansions for Japan
and Germany, using the adaptive expectations version of the G-7 model
described in the next footnote. As suggested in the text, the
multicountry nature of the ROECD fiscal expansion produces a less
truncated multiplier. This happens because the cross—country GNP
effects are delayed and less truncated than the own—country effects.
For example the first—year Japanese GNP effects of an ROECD fiscal
expansion are 1.25 times as large as those of a Japanese fiscal
expansion. This ratio grows steadily as time passes, reaching 1.9 in
the fourth year. For Germany, the more open of the two economies, the
corresponding ratio is always larger than for Japan, but shows the same
pattern, rising from 2.0 in the first year to 3.6 in the fourth year.

25
exchange rate flexibility is not directly assessed, nor is it possible
to tell how much of the additional appreciation on the Taylor model is
due to the use of model consistent expectations.
To help cast more light on the role of alternative expectations
for exchange
processes, we compare in figure 5.2 the consequences,
rates, inflation rates, interest rates, real GDP and price levels, of
U.S. fiscal policies under different assumptions about the formation of
rates, and exchange
expectations for future interest rates, inflation
rates. These results are drawn frm simulations of a G7 version of the
recently developed IMF MULTIMOD.1' The results show that the U.S.
dollar appreciates much more sharply in the consistent expectations
version, and then depreciates thereafter, in order to maintain expected
interest arbitrage. The real GNP effects are similar in the two
versions, but inflation is almost twice as great in the consistent
expectations version. With more U.S. inflation and more nominal
appreciation of the U.S. dollar, the consistent expectations version
shows more eal appreciation of the dollar under U.S. fiscal
expansion,2u with the result that the current account effects of the
fiscal policy are larger. However, the differences over the first three
years are not very great, with the consistent expectations version
showing current account effects about 15% larger than the adaptive
expectations version.
6. International Transmission of Monetary Policies

In this section we discuss briefly the effects of monetary
expansions in the United States, Japan and Germany, with emphasis on

19 MULTIMOD is described in Masson, Symansky, Haas and Dooley
It contains separate country blocks for the United States,
Japan, and Germany, with aggregate treatment of the remaining four
members of the G7, of the next largest 11 industrial countries, of
high—income oil exporters, and of developing countries. The G7 version,
known as INTERMOD, has been developed by the Working Group in
International Macroeconomics in Ottawa. It contains separate country
blocks for each of the G7 countries, with the rest of the world handled
exactly as in Masson et al (1988). Version 1.0 of INTERMOD, as
described in Helliwell, Meredith, Durand and Bagnoli (1988) is used for
the results reported in this paper. The fiscal shock reported in figure
5.2 follows Masson et al. in being 1% of GNP in the first year, and
then declining thereafter. We are currently experimenting with fiscal
shocks that are of constant size over six years, and starting in 1987,
to match more closely the experiments done with other models for this
conference.
(1988).

20 Over the first three
years, the real value of the U.S. dollar
is 2.1% higher under model—consistent than under adaptive expectations.

26

the roles of interest rates and exchange rates.2' Figures 6.1 to 6.3
show, in summary form, the domestic and international effects of
monetary expansions in the United States, Japan and Germany,
respectively. The upper four panels of each gure show the domestic
while the bottom four
effects of a 1% increase in the money supply
panels show the effects on interest rates and real incomes in the other
two countries. As much as possible, the scales have been kept the same
in all of the income and interest rate charts, to make comparisons
easier among countries and among models. The figures show annual
averages rather than quarterly values, to better reveal the main trends
of the results.
,

Looking first at the own—country effects of monetary expansion,
the real GNP effects are roughly similar in the three countries, at
about 0.5% increase in the second year, trailing quite rapidly away
after that for all models except MCM, which generally shows the
longest—lasting real effects in all three countries. All models show
domestic currency depreciation as a results of monetary expansion, with
the nominal exchange rate falling by about the same amount as the
increase in the domestic price level, although doing so much more
rapidly. Thus the exchange rate flexibility serves to roughly insulate
the other countries from the direct inflationary effects of monetary
expansion.
The real cross—country effects of monetary expansion are generally
negative. This is the expected result in models, such as these mostly
are, where asset substitutability is high, and the exchange rate
depreciates initially by more than domestic prices are increased. The
size of the negative income effects is quite small, however, with the
exception of the NIESR model, where the initial depreciation is much

21 Our discussion is kept brief, since the international
transmission of monetary policy in these models is the focus of Erayton
and Marguez (1988). Our concentration is on the links between model
structure and simulation results.
22 For most models the chosen aggregate is M2 in the United States
and Japan, and CEM in Germany. The Taylor model uses Ml for all
countries. The OECD model uses M3 for Germany, and the EPA uses Ml for
Germany.

27
higher than in any of the other models.23 The negative cross—country
income effects are largest for U.S. monetary expansion.
By the tire three or four years have passed, most of the models
show fairly small residual real incqme effects of the monetary
expansion, both at home and abroad.'4 Prices are generally higher, for
the country undertaking the monetary expansion, generally by slightly
less than the 1% increase in money supplies. The EPA model tends to
show the smallest increase in prices in each country, ranging from
about .3% in the United States and Japan to next to nothing in Germany.
7. Conclusions and Suggestions

We shall first list some of
in model structures, then assess
and finally suggest what seem to
further experimentation or model

the key similarities and differences
the implications of these differences,
us to be some promising lines for
improvement.

7.1 Similarities and differences:
The multicountry models tend to have fairly simple and domestically
oriented monetary sectors. Even those with substantial disaggregation
of monetary assets in some national blocks, as with EPA, can be
reasonably represented by conventional LM specifications.
Of the five models whose structural detail was analyzed in this

paper., four are quarterly and one semestrial. Three of the quarterly
models (TAYLOR is the exception) use distributed lags in their money

23 The extreme
exchange rate volatility of NIESR, under monetary
shock, tends to make its results the outliers for most domestic and
foreign effects of monetary policy. This required the scales of the
figures to be set so large as to make the results from some of the
other models indistinguishable from zero, and from each other. The
NIESR results appear to flow principally from the quasi—reduced—form
exchange rate equations. The dynamic form of these equations is such
that a temporary shock to interest rates has a permanent effect on the
exchange rate, for a given value of the current account. The exchange—
rate effects of monetary expansion are thus not only much larger on
impact but also more sustained than in the other models.
24 The
principal own—country exception relates to U.S. and
Japanese monetary expansion in MCM, and the initially positive and then
negative effects of Japanese policy in TAYLOR. The principal cross—
country exceptions are the continuing negative effects, on Japanese
GNP, of U.S. monetary expansion in EPA (stemming from falling Japanese
income from foreign investments),and the generally large, and possibly
unstable, cross—country effects in NIESR.

28
of the adjustment to
demand equations. These lags affect the dynamics
do not affect the slopes of the LW
tut
shocks,
generally
monetary
and
equations assume similar lags for both income
curves, since
rates.
interest

mt

The derived slopes of LW curves (Table 3.1) do not reveal any
among the United States, Germany,
systematic evidence of differences
the models in their
and Japan. There tends to be more difference among than there is among
for
a
country
particular
estimates of the LW slope
countries for any given model.
interest
The LW slopes are measured with respect to short-term
on spending operate
rates, while the effects of monetary conditions
In all of the models, a term—
through long—term interest rates.
impact
structure relation is used to link the two rates, with the
responses of long—term
effect being about .3 in most cases. Long—run
short—term rates are
interest rates with respect to changes in
and
in
OECD, and estimated to be
to
be
Taylor
constrained
homogeneous
EPA. Under modelin
MCM
and
less
than
homogeneous
(generally)
long—term interest rates tn
consistent expectations, one would expectshort—term
interest rates.
move to match changes in expected future
models whose
This condition is imposed in the Taylor model, of the five
results are reported here, and also in NULTIWOD (Nasson et ai., 1988).
international
Three quite different procedures are used to model
models assume that uncovered
MCM
and
The
Taylor
linkages.
portfolio
interest parity always holds, so that the exchange rate is determined
abroad, and by the expected
solely by interest rates, at home and estimated
portfolio demand
exchange rate. The EPA model employs demand
renormelized and
a
equation
and
OECD
uses
portfolio
equations,
estimated as an exchange—rate equation. This renormalization apparently
of
has the effect of greatly increasing the implied interest—elasticity
of the BP
international capital movements, so that the derived slope
N. Poole (1987) has suggested that one reason why the data
based on short—term
prefer lagged forms of money demand equations
would
interest rates may be because the more appropriate specification
have money demand respond to current and expected future short—term of
interest rates, with long—term interest rates being the best measure
U.S.
these otherwise unmeasured series. Using a long time series for and
the
are much higher,
velocity, he finds that interest elasticities
interest rates are used instead
equations better—fitting if long—term
of short—term rates. We have assessed the hypothesis with annual data
for 1961—85 for the income velocity of base—money in each of the G7
economies. After correcting for autocorrelation, we find significant
and Canada. For Japan and
supporting evidence for the United States
for
were
the
elasticities
higher
long—term than for short—term
Germany,
interest rates, although not significant in either case. For Italy the
short—term rate. For France
elasticity is correctly signed only for the
and the United Kingdom the elasticities were incorrectly signed for
both long—term and short—term interest rates.
25

29
curve is much flatter for OECD than for EPA. For the EPA model, the
derived slopes of the LM and BP curves are very similar, while for OECD
the HP curve is much flatter. However, the quasi—reduced-form exchange—
rate equations of NIESR produce BP curves more similar to those of EPA
than of OECD.
The models also differ in how they determine and use expected
future exchange rates. The Taylor model applies open parity using
expected future exchange rates obtained from the forward solution of
the model. In OECD and MCM the expected exchange rate also plays a
crucial role, since MCM imposes open parity and the OECD exchange rate
equation implies a unit elasticity of the spot exchange rate with
respect to the expected future rate. In both models the expected
exchange rate is based on adaptive expectations of expected relative
GNP or GDP deflators at home and abroad. Exchange rate expectations are
less important in EPA, since expectations have a less direct role in
determining the spot exchange rate.
7.2 Implications of the model differences
The differences among the models in the estimated properties of
their financial sectors, as represented by the slopes, and the relevant
dynamic properties, of their LM curves, is partly responsible for the
differences in their estimation of the size and international
transmission of the effects of fiscal policies. More detailed
experimentation, involving full—model simulations with alternative
parameters and equation structures, would be required to be much more
precise. In some models, e.g. Taylor and OECD, the estimated
international differences in LM slopes are probably large enough to
influence the nature of the transmission process. Given the finding
that intermodel differences in LM slopes for the same country are large
relative to the estimated international differences, it would seem
desirable to establish more securely the statistical basis for the
international differences before relying too much on the derived
results.
As was shown in figure 5.1, there is no strong evidence that
fiscal multipliers are more truncated in the United States than in the
other two countries. Thus the systematically more sustained fiscal
multipliers reported for the ROECD as a whole, when compared to the
United States, is likely to be due to factors other than differences in
domestic LM curves, or in own—country fiscal multipliers, among the
largest three economies. Assessment of the possibilities will require
more investigation of the extent to which fiscal expansion in the ROECD
countries is mutually reinforcing, and thus possibly sustaining the
ROECD group multiplier at levels above those that would be achieved by
the two largest ROECD countries acting on their own.
The Taylor model's application of model—consistent expectations
for the term structure of interest rates, expected exchange rates, and

30

of results to
expected inflation produces a markedly different pattern
both fiscal and monetary shocks.
Under expansionary fiscal shock, the exchange rate apprecistes
more and faste in the Taylor model. This is not a necessary result of
consistent expectations, which require only that the open parity
condition be maintained throughout the future path of the simulation.
As the OECD results illustrate, if fiscal expansion gives rise to
expected future inflation, or if future de9eciation is expected to be
then the exchange rate
necessary to service the accumulating debt
could appreciate less, or even depreciate, under consistent
expectations.
In circumstances where the short—term interest rate remains above
control for several periods, the Taylor model, or any other model with
model—consistent expectations, produces a larger initial change in the
long—term interest rate, thus tending to increase the effect on real
spending, which generally responds to changes in long—term interest
rates. This truncates slightly the real GNP effects of fiscal policy,
as shown in the figure 5.2 comparisons for consistent and adaptive
expectations versions of a G7 version of MULTIMOD.
,

7.3 Suggestions for further research
Given the volatility of asset prices, and the dependence of those
prices on expectations, an explicit treatment of expectations seems
almost inescapable for any fully satisfactory model of financial
markets and their international linkages. The current crop of
multinational models employ two alternative possibilities in their
treatment of expectations, either making them adapt to recent
experience or be determined by the future simulation paths of the model
being used for analysis. Both procedures are informative, although
neither is fully satisfactory.
To go further, it will be necessary to retain the explicit
forward—locking features of the model—consistent expectations, while
recognizing that market participants are varied in their views, are
either unknowing or unbelieving of the processes depicted by any
particular model of the economy, and are faced by uncertainty about
many factors that are treated as fixed in model simulations. Key among
these are future developments in the structure of financial markets,
and assesaments of credit risks, the likely future paths of policy, and
26 This
possibility, which is central to assessing the
sustainability of current account positions, and hence of exchange
rates (as emphasized by, e.g. Krugman 1967), is not embodied in the
Taylor model, because debt accumulation and foreign debt service
payments, are not modelled. Some of these channels are included in
MULTIMOD, which shows a smaller appreciation under fiscal expansion
(Masson et al. 1988).

31
the likelihood of turmoil in financial markets. All of these
possibilities tend in current models to be subsumed in exogenous
variables and structural parameters, or assumed not to exist.
Models with single—valued paths for future variables, and with
well—articulated and well—understood equilibrium properties, are useful
for many purposes, but they are probably not a very realistic way of
modelling market expectations. To do better will require more explicit
study of learning processes, and of the methods people actually use in
simplifying complex situations to obtain rules for current action.
Since this involves a major and not clearly mapped—out research effort,
it would seem appropriate in the meantime to treat expectations
explicitly, and to use both adaptive and model—consistent processes for
determining these expectations, since they may for some purposes
provide brackets about the behaviour of market participants.
Although consistent expectations models can now be run efficiently
even on quite small computers (see, e.g. Taylor
require 50
1993 they
or 100 times as much computing to obtain a solution
To minimize the
cost of maintaining and running models with model—consistent
expectations, it may be helpful to develop benchmark studies of the key
differences between adaptive and consistent expectations results, and
then use adaptive expectations versions for day—to—day assessments. The
benchmark rules of thumb can then be used to give a preliminary
estimate of how the consistent expectation results would differ.
.

As international financial integration proceeds, it is becoming
more difficult to assume that demands for national money, at any level
of aggregation, depend only on national short—term interest rates. In
particular returns on financial investments in other currencies, which
are heavily influenced by expected changes in exchange rates, are
likely to play increasing roles in international portfolio allocation,
including currency and bank deposits of the types that enter monetary
aggregates.
Even transactions balances are likely to become more international
as globalization proceeds. Thus national income, output, or sales may
all provide insufficient measures of transactions demands for any
particular national money. These demands are likely to depend also on
the size and structure of each country's trade and investment
relations, as well as on the nature of the exchange rate systems in
operation.
Since many of the macroeconomic issues addressed by multicountry
models relate to questions of portfolio balance and the future
building—up and servicing of national and international debts, future
modelling efforts should focus on finding suitable links back from
debts to asset prices and exchange rates. The convenient assumption of
27 See Taylor (1988) for evidence on the times taken for
adaptive
and consistent expectations solutions.

32
uncovered interest rate parity will probably have to be adjusted to
reflect portfolio balance and risk considerations, even if in a rough—
and—ready manner.
Because the future sustainability of current account positions
and the
depends largely on the interaction between portfolio positions
and exchange
expected evolution of prices, incomes, productivity,
issues could most
rates, the extended treatment of portfolio balance for
exchange rates
fruitfully be addressed if expected future values
and interest rates are treated explicitly.
In the meantime, the data and structure of existing multicountry
models could be used more systematically to expose and test the
and possible
significance of apparent international differences Results
of such
convergence in the structure of financial markets.
tests may help to reduce the incidence of implausible model properiles
and international differences that we have found in some of the models
embodying less constrained structure and dynamic responses.
Given the ambitious nature of this shopping list, we should
perhaps add one final suggestion designed to simplify the research
agenda. Our comparison qf models involving different degrees of sectors
disaggregation suggests to us that disaggregation of financial
does not seem to make much difference to the broad pattern of results,
and may therefore be avoided by those who are more interested in
questions of international financial linkages and comparisons.

33

References
Artis, M.J. and M.K. Lewis. (1976), The Demand for Money in
the tJ.K.,1963—73, Manchester School (44), 147—81.
Ball, R.J., ed., (1973), The International Linkage of National
Economic Models. (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
Blundell—Wignall, A., M. Rondini and H. Zeiglelschmidt (1984),
The Demand for Money and Velocity in Major OECD Countries,
Working Paper No. 16, Economics and Statistics Department,
(Paris: OECD).
Boothe, P., K. Clinton and D. Longworth (1985), International
Asset Substitutability: Theory and Evidence for Canada,
(Ottawa: Bank of Canada).
Boughton, J. (1981), Recent Instability in the Demand for Money:
An International Perspective, Southern Economic Journal
(47), 579—97.
Branson, W.H., and D.W. Henderson (1984), The Specification
and Influence of Asset Markets, NBER Working Paper No.
1283.

Brainard, W.C. and J. Tobin (1968), Pitfalls in Financial
Model—Building, American Economic Review, Papers and
Proceedings (58),99-l22.
Brayton, F., and J. Marquez (1988), The Behaviour of Monetary
Sectors and Monetary Policy: Evidence from Multicountry
Models, (Washington: Federal Reserve Board).
Bryant, R., D. Henderson, G. Holtham, P. Hooper and S.
Symansky, eds. (1988), Empirical Macroeconomics for
Interdependent Economies. (Washington: Brookings
Institution).
Bryant, R.C., G. Holtham and P. Hooper, eds. (1988), External
Deficits and the Dollar: The Pit and the Pendulum
(Washington: Brookings Institution).
Christ, C.C. (1971), Econometric Models of the Financial
Sector, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (3), 419—
449.

Cooley, T.F. and S.F. Leroy (1981), Identification and
Estimation of Money Demand, American Economic Review (71)
825—44.

34
(1983), Currency Substitution, Capital
Mobility and Money Demand, Journal of International Money and
Finance (2), 111—133.

Cuddirigton, J.T.

Cuthbertson, K. and M.P. Taylor (1987), Buffer—Stock Money:
an Appraisal, in The Operations and Regulation of
Financial Markets, C.A. Goodhart, D. Currie, D. Llewellen,
eds. (London, Macmillan) 103—124.
Davidson, J. and J. Ireland (1987), Buffer Stock Models of the
Money Sector, National Institute Economic Review, August, 67—
72.

Edison, H.J., J.R.
Structure and
Part I: Model
International
(Washington:

Marquez, and R.W. Tryon (1986), The
Properties of the FEB Multicountry Model,
Description and Simulation Results,
Finance Discussion Paper No. 293
Federal Reserve Board).

Engle, R.F. and T.C. Liu (1972), Effects of Aggregation Over Time
on Dynamic Characteristics of an Econometric Model, in
Economic Models of Cyclical Behaviour, B.H. Hickman (ed),
National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Income and
Wealth Vol. 36, (Columbia University Press: New York).
EPA (1984), EPA World Economic Model, Vol I Model Properties and
Multiplier Analyses, Discussion Paper No. 16.
EPA (1987), EPA World Economic Model - July 1987 Version,
Economic Research Institute, Economic Planning Agency, Tokyo.
Fair, R. and J. Taylor (1983), Solution and Maximum—Liklihood
Estimation of Dynamic Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models,
Econometrica 51: 1169—1185.

Friedman, M. and A. Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United
States 1867—1960, (New York: National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Friedman, B.M. (1978), Crowding Out or Crowding In? Economic
Consequences of Financing Government Deficits, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (3) 593-641.
Friedman, B.M. (1980), How Important is Disaggregation in Structural
Models of Interest Rate Determination?, Review of Economics and
Statistics (62); 271—276.
Helliwell, J.F. (1988) The Effects of Fiscal Policy on International
Imbalances: Japan and the United States, EPA Symposium,
Tokyo, March 15—17.

35

Helliwell, J.F., G. Meredith, 1. Durand and P. Bagnoli (1988),
INTERMOD: A G—7 Version of the IMFs MtJLTIMOD, mimeo.,
(Ottawa: Department of Finance).
Hoitham, G. (1984), Multinational Modelling of Financial Linkages and
Exchange Rates, OECD Economic Studies No. 2.
Horton, G. (1984), Modelling the World Economy, U.K. Treasury Working
Paper No. 33.
Jonson, P. (1976), Money and Economic Activity in the Open Economy:
the U.K.
1880—1970, Journal of Political Economy (84); 979—
1012.
Judd, J.P., and J.L. Scadding (1982), The Search for a Stable Money
Demand Function: A survey of the Post—1973 Literature, Journal
of Economic Literature (20), 983—1023.
Kane,

E.J. (1977), Good Intentions and Unintended Evil, Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking (9), 55-69.

Krugman, P. (1987), Adjustment in the World Economy, NBER Working
Paper No. 2424.
Laidler, D. (1983), The "Buffer Stock" Notion in Monetary Economics
Supplement to Economic Journal (94), 17-34.
Laidler, D. (1985), The Demand for Money: Theories, Evidence and
Problems, 3rd ed., (New York: Harper and Row).
Marquez, J. (1988), The Behavior of Monetary Sectors and Monetary
Policy: MCM Simulation Results, mimeo, January.
Marty, A.L. (1961), Gurley and Shaw on Money in the Theory of
Finance, Journal of Political Economy (69), 56-62.
Masson, P.R. (1981), Dynamic Stability of Portfolio Balance Models of
the Exchange Rate, Journal of International Economics (11), 467
477.

Masson, P.R., and S. Sytnansky, R. Haas, and M. Dooley (1988),
MULTIMOD: A Multi—Region Econometric Model, IMF Working Paper
88—23, (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
McKibbin, W., and J. Sachs (1986) Comparing the Global Performance
of Alternative Exchange Arrangements, NBER Working Paper No.
2024.

Milbourne, R. (1987) Disequilibrium Buffer Stock Models: A Survey,
mimeo, Department of Economics, Queens University, Kingston.

36

Muth, R. (1961) Rational Expectations and the Theory of Price
Movements, Econometrica 29: 315—335.
National Institute of Economic and Social Research (1987), The
Structure of the Institutes Global Econometric Model,
National Institute Economic Review (119), 37-39.
National Institute of Economic and Social Research (1988),
GEM Model Manual, (London, NIESR).
Niehans, J. (1982), Innovation in Monetary Policy, Journal of Banking
and Finance (6), 9—28.
OECD (1988a), The OECD Interlink System (Paris: OECD).
OECD (l988b), EPA International Symposium Supplementary Information
mimec, Economics and Statistics Department, OECD.
Owen, D.P. (1981), Dynamic Models of Portfolio Behaviour: A General
Integrated Model Incorporating Sequencing Effects, American
Economic Review (71), 231—239.
Podoiski, T.M.
(Oxford:

(1986), Financial Innovation and the Money Supply
Basil Blackwell).

Poole, William (1987), Monetary Policy Lessons of Recent Inflation
and Disinflation, NBER Working Paper No. 2300.
urvis, D.D. (1978), Dynamic Models of Portfolio Behaviour: More on
Pitfalls in Financial Model Building, American Economic Review
(68), 403—409.
tichardson, P. (1988), The Structure and Simulation Properties of
OECDs Interlink Model, OECD Economic Studies No.10.
Rose, D.E.

and J.G. Selody (1985), The Structure of the Small
Annual Model, Technical Report No. 40 (Ottawa: Bank of Canada).

Silber, W.L. (1975), Towards a Theory of Financial Innovations, in
Financial Innovation, Lexington Books.
Silber, W.L.(l983), The Process of Financial Innovation, American
Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings (73) 89-95.

37

Taylor, J.B. (1987), The U.S. Trade Deficit, Savings—Investment
Imbalance and Macroeconomic Policy: 1982—1987, paper prepared
for the conference "The U.S. Trade Deficit —— Causes,
Consequences and Cures", Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis,
October 23 and 24.
Taylor, J.B. (1988), The Treatment of Expectations in Large
Multicountry Econometric Models, in Bryant, Henderson, et
al., eds., Empirical Macroeconomics for Interdependent
Economies.
Tobin, i. (1969) A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking (1), 15-29.
Walters, A. (1971) Consistent Expectations, Distributed Lags and th
Quantity Theory, Economic Journal 81: 273—281.
Wei, W.S. (1978) The Effect of Temporal Aggregation on Parameter
Estimation in a Distributed Lag Model, Journal of Econometrics
(8), 237—246
Wojnilower, A.M. (1980), The Central Role of Credit Crunches in Rec
Financial History, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (2),
277—326.
Wren—Lewis, S. (1987), Introducing Exchange—Rate Equations into a
World Econometric Model, National Institute Economic Review
(119),

57—69.

Zeilner, A. and C. Montmarquette (1971), A Study of Some Aspects of
Temporal Aggregation Problems in Econometric Analyses, Review
Economics and Statistics (53), 335-342.

FIG. 5.1 OWN-COUNTRY FISCAL MULTIPLIERS
QEOD

MOM

2

2

US

U.S.
JAPAN

G(RILANY

UERAN1'

1

5

1987

88

89

90

91

92

88

1987

90

89

91

92

EPA

2-

1987

U.S.
JAPAN

88

89

90

G(RI1AN'

91

.

92

89

U.S.
.

GRAN1

JAPAN

90

91

92

51

92

FISCAL MULTIPLIERS FOR U.S.

1.5

1.5

88

89

90

91

92

88

1987

89

90

FISCAL MULTIPLIERS FOR GERMANY

FISCAL MULTIPLIERS FOR JAPAN
2

2

1.5-}'

1.5

1987

88

1987

TAYLOR

1987

.

..

88

89

90

91

92

1987

88

89

90

91

92

FIG. 5.2 U.S. FISCAL: EFFECTS OF EXPECTATIONS
REAl. QDP: U.S. %

CoITCT

GNP PRICE LEVEL

%

4.5

OfTV9 —

4

1.5

3.5
3

2.5
0

1.5
0.5

—0.5
1988

0

89

90

91

93

92

USE INDEX

0.0

2.25

—0.

1.75
1.5
1

1988

88

90

92

91

93

CURRENT ACCOUNT AS % OP GNP

1

cOSTCT

DrvE

—

—0. 2

. 25

—0.3

0.75

0.5

—0 . 4

0.25
0
1988

1.2

—0.5
89

90

91

U.S. SHORT-TERU INTEREET RATSI

S POINTS

0

90

91

92

93

92

93

PIECAL BALA,CE, A8 % OP 3NP

CO$ST

Dpr!t

—

7

89

90

91

92

1988

93

85

90

91

US LOIIG-TERU INTEREST RATE S POINTS

JAPANESE SHORT-TERM INTEREST RATES S POINTS
1

1

0.9
0.80.70.6
0.5-

0 9

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

CO1CT

!TTT
1988

89

—0. 1
—0. 2
—0 .3
—0 .4
—0 . 5
—o . 6
—0 .
—0 .8
—0 .9

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
1958

1988

93

92

89

90

91

92

93

1988

89

90

91

92

93

FIG. 6.1 U.S. MONETARY EXPANSION OF 1%
REAl. GRIP; U.E. %

PA

uC4

-

0 75

GHP PRICE LEVEL %

1.51.25-

YECO

Li.9J_

—
— —
——

R4IESR

0.50 25 -

0.5-

0

0.25

—0,25
.5

—0

90

89

88

1987

91

92

VALUE OF Ue$

0.5—

89

88

1987

90

91

$HORTT!RM NT RATE; U.8. %

0.25-

0-

—2

-

—0.25
—0.5

—0.75-

—4
—5

I4CA

EPA

OECD

TAYLOR

88

1987

90

89

—

8HORT-TERM
0.5 _________

0.25

NT

--

0

.

91

-

-

5

—0.75

OECD
?IESR

—1.25
—1.5
1987

,

88

59

JAPANESEREALGNP

0. 75

92

RATE: JAPAN V. PIE

—0.25
—0

—1.25-

NIESR

—6

90

EHORI-TERU

0.5
0.25

EPA

CECO

TAYLOR

—0.75-

OECD

91

92

89

GERUANREALUIIP

1C

0.75-

—0.25

-0.25
88

88

1987

0.25-

91

92

-0.5-

1987

EPA
TAYLOR

fflESR

—1.25—
5 .L

0.25-

1987

NT RATE: GERMANY V. P18

hCA

TAYLOR

0.5-

90

92

-

0.5-

89

91

-0.5

IEOR

—0.5-

90

0

—0.25

V.

WCA

89

88

1987

QECE
NIESR

\

90

91

%
EPA

TAYLOR

-

//
-.

88

89

90

91

92

FIG. 6.2 JAPANESE MONETARY EXPANSION OF 1%
GNP PRICE LEVEL- JAPAN %

REALGMP:JAPAW%

1.5
I4CW

1
1

EPA

75

1.5

N(5R

-

1

0075

—

TTT
88

1987

90

89

91

—

25

::;

92

:T::c::____AY__-:r:::—-T:

1987

88

89

90

92

91

SHORI-TERU INT RATE- JAPAN %

$IYEN EXCHANGE RATE

2

-

RICh

0.75
0.50.25

—2

—0.25-

—4

5.
—6

-

—7

-

—8
—9

-

.

25 -

0
—0.25
—0

N1

..

0.5-

0(0

.

(p

—0.5
—0.75

TAYLOR

.25
—1.5-

-

—101987

0

-

-

88

89

90

91

.IriA — - -

0.5
0.25 0-

- --

—

i98

92

SHORT-TERM INT RATE: U.S. % PTI

RIESR

88

89

90

92

91

SHORT-TERM HI RATE: GERMANY

—0

%

PTS

.5

—0.75
0(00

(0R

—1

TAYLOR

-1.25

—1

ACU

(PA

0(00

TAYLOR

.25

—1.5
88

89

90

91

92

1987

EPA

0.75

OECD

0.5

0.25

0.25

0

0

—0. 25

—0.25
—0.5
89

0(00
R

NESR

88

ACId

0.75

TAYLOR

0.5

—0.5

89

88

90

91

92

91

92

REAL GHP: GERMANY %

REAL GNP: U.S. %

1987

—
TAYLOR

—0.25

—0.75

1987

0(00

—1

.5

—1.5

--

--

90

91

92

1987

88

EPA
TAYLOR

IESR

89

90

FIG. 6.3
REAL QNP: QIRMANY S
IdC4

EPA

QECO

TAYLOR

1.75

1.5

AIEOR

88

1987

GHP PRICE LEVEL: GERMANY S

2

025.':::
0.75

-

GKMAN MON1ARY EXPANSION OF 1%

1

90

88

89

LUL9.L

0.75
0.5
0.25
1987

92

91

—

.25

0
89

21C2_.

$IQU EXCHANGE RATE

91

92

SHORT-TERM NT RATE: GERMANY S

0.5-

2

90

0.25 0—0.25—0
—5

—6

I
—7

.

EPA

QECO

TAYLOR

5-

.iESR
1

88

89

90

SHORT-TERM NT RATE: U.S. S PIE

0 25

--

0—-

—0.25
—0.5

OECO
NIESR

88

1987

90

91

92

—0.25—0

-5 -

—0.75-

-

ACA

EPA

OECD

TAYLOR

NIESR

—L25—1.588

1987
REAL

NP:

89

90

91

92

—

88

1987

aEAL

U.S. S

GN P:

1

4CU
OCO

0.75

EPA

0.75-

TAYLOR

0.5

0.5-

0.25

0.25-

0

0-

—0.25

—0.25 88

89

89

90

91

92

91

92

JAPAN S

CA

EPA

OECO

TAYLOR

AIESA

NIESR

1987

89

0.25 0-

25

—1.5

—0.5

TAYLOR

SHORT-TERM NT RATE: JAPAN S PT5

0.5-

—

—1 .

EPA

.25

92

91

CU

/

—0.75-

—

—1.5-

—10
1987

0.5

ACA

90

91

92

—0 - 5
1987

88

89

90

38

Appendix
Domestic Financial Sectors in Five Multicountry Models
In this Appendix we provide obrief description of the
domestic financial sectors of each of the models, with special
reference to their treatment of the United States, Japan and
Germany. We also report the basic interest and income
elasticities for the money demand functions, either in terms of
the aggregates or their components.
These parameter estimates
underlie the estimates of the slopes of the LM curves, as
reported in Table 3.1. Since long-term real interest rates
constitute the key link between the financial sector and the
real side of the economy, the interest rate term structure
relationships are described. A comparative evaluation of the LM
curves and of term—structure relationships appears in the main
text of the paper.

A.l The Federal Reserve Model: MCM.

MCM links five country models together: the U.S., Japan,
Germany, the United Kingdom and Canada. The prototype model is
based on the following assumptions: asset markets are
perfectly
competitive, agents are risk neutral, short and long securities
are perfect substitutes, as are foreign and domestic
currency
bonds, expectations are adaptive. There is no equities market in
this model, and with only two domestic assets, money and bonds,
the bond market is redundant (or implicit). The long—term
interest rate is determined by a term structure equation. Since
long— and short—term bonds are assumed to be perfect
substitutes, the long—term rate is a distributed lag function of
short—term rates, based on the assumption of adaptive
expectations.
The structure of the financial sector, outlined in Table
is described by means of a balance sheet
representation of
the domestic financial claims and relevant sectors
in the model.
Endogenous asset (or liability) demands (or supplies) applicable
to all three countries are indicated by the symbol D (or 5) under
the appropriate sector heading. In other cases, a specific
country designation is employed, using a slash followed by the
letters U for the United States, J for Japan, or G for Germany.
The fundamental agents in the economy are
identified by the
column headings while the rows represent the various asset
markets. The relevant sectors include persons (H), firms, both
financial (FF) and non—financial (NFF), the public sector
including the government (G) and the monetary authorities
(CB),and foreign nationals or non—residents (NR). The interest
rate corresponding to each asset market is indicated under the
A.1,

39

column, using the model's mnemonics. The last column
the interest rates either by
designates the method of determining
market equilibrium (ME) equating demand and supply, or via a
reduced—form specification (RF), a particular version of which is
a term—structure relationship (TS). The rate on CDs is
determined by inverting the demand function (DEM). These
conventions apply to our descriptions of all five models.
htrateH

flows in
Although MCM does account for international capital
terms of direct investment and portfolio investments, non—
residents' holdings of domestic securities cannot be
and are therefore
aistinguished by the type of financial claimsof the model is on
not represented in table A.l. The main focus
the demand for money, the decomposition of which reflects
cnsideration of different reserve ratios by deposit type.
MCM: Structure of the financial sector.

Table A.l
Assets/Sectors
Money
Reserves
Currency
Demand D.
Time D.
Savings D.

Fern—held
CDs

H+NFF
D
D
D
D/G

FF

Domestic securities
Conunercial paper
Bank Debentures
Corporate Bonds
Gov.-short
Gov.-long
Mortgages

G

NR

S
D
D/JG

rate

method

RS1*

ME

0
0

RSAV

RF
RF

RCD

DEM

RS/U
RLA/J

RF
TS
TS

RTD
D/G
D/G

D.

D/U

CB

S/ti

RL/tJ

RS1/UG
RLGB/UG TS
RHL/tJJ PF

* 3 month TB rate for U.S. and Germany; call money rate for
Japan.

Short—term interest rates are determined by the equilibrium
the demand and supply of free reserves. Demand for free
reserves depends on the composition of deposits, reserve ratios,
costs and the volatility of reserves. Demand for the various
components of monetary aggregates, which include currency, model
demand, time and savings deposits, is based on a portfolio
which is homogeneous in wealth (defined as cumulated savings).
The German model also includes deposits held by foreigners
(subject to a different deposit ratio), and allows for partial
adjustment of free reserves as a function of rediscount rates.

f

40

The estimated income and interest rate elasticities are reported
in table A.2.
Table A.2

MCM:

Money demand elasticities*
Interest rate
Income

USA

JAP

GER

USA

JAP

GER

Currency

—.13

—.01

—.05

.87

.63

.63

demand dep.

—.04

—.06

—.11

1.03

.43

1.35

—.25

—.19

1.27

1.19

Time dep.

—.19

M2

—.10

—1.73

1.16

*
Long run estimates, from Marquez (1988). The interest
rate semi—elasticity, for comparison with the other models, is
equal to the elasticity divided by the average proportionate
interest rate. For M2, using an average interest rate of .06, the
semi—elasticity is 1.67.

Term—structure equations differ between the major countries
in the model. For Germany, the long—term rate is a distributed
lag function of the short—term rate combined with seasonal
factors; in th9 U.S. model the lagged short rate is supplemented
by adaptive expectations of inflation; in Japan, the conventional
term structure equation is combined with an inverted supply
function of bank debentures. In the long run, long—term interest
rates do not respond proportionately to movements in short—term
rates.

A.2 The EPA World Economic Model.
The EPA model covers nine countries (including the G—7 plus
Korea and Australia) and six other regions. In the U.S., Japanese
and German models, short-term interest rates are determined by
equating he demand and supply of free reserves, with the
discount rate also having a substantial effect in the Japanese
case. The Eurodollar rate (which in turn depends on the US short
rate) also appears in the current version of the
block,
° The
although it is to be dropped in the next version. panese
structure
28 In the U.K. and Italian
models, short—term rates are
determined by the demand for and supply of Ml (U.K.) or M2
(Italy). Policy reaction functions of the monetary authorities
are used to determine short—term interest rates in the

41
of these domestic financial sectors is summarized in Table A.3.
Overall, the approach is quite similar to MCM. Demand and supply
rate
for bank reserves solve out for the key short—term interest
the
other
used
to
determine
is
while a reduced—form approach
interest rates. Transactions in foreign securities, not
model with a
reported in Table A.3, are based on a portfolio
and
both
asset
liability
partial adjustment specification;

between short
positions are identified with some disaggregation
end long—term capital.
Table A.3

EPA: Structure of the financial sector.

Assets/sectors
Money
Reserves
Currency
Demand D.
Time ID.
Savings D.
CDs/U

Hi-NFF

FF

CB

D

S

G

MR

rate

ME
RSTB/U
RSMM/JG

D

0
0

D

RT*

D

D/UG
D

S

Securities
Commercial loans S
Bank Debentures
Corporate bonds
Mortgages
GOv. —short
—long

method

RSAV
RCD/U
RLC/U
RSEC/J
RLCB/U
RMOR/G

RF/UG
EXO/J
RF
DEM
DEM

TS
TS
RF

RSTB/[J

RSEC/G

* Includes rates on small time deposits, money market
passbook savings and time deposit rates at Savings and
Loan companies for U.S.; EXO: exogenous.

funds,

Source:

EPA

(1984, 1987).

Demand for money is based on a components approach in the
framework of a portfolio model. Major explanatory variables
include private net worth (cumulated personal savings) or
financial net worth (c1ams on the government and foreigners),
transactions variables (GNP or domestic absorption), rates of
return on the assets and those of close substitutes. The key
parameter estimates are shown in table A.4.

Canadian and French models.

42

Table

PA.4

EPA: Money demand elasticities.*

Interest Rate
Currency
Demand D.
Time D.
Ml

M2

USA

JAP

—.70
—.88

—.62
—.54

—1.42
—1.22

Income
JAP
GER

GER

USA

—1.22

—3.82

.75
.75

1.02
1.02

.27
.86

—2.67
—2.30

—1.54
—1.84

.68
.68

1.00
1.06

.80
.80

—1.89

0/—l.22

—1.24

0/—1.05

7.59
13.08

1.21
1.12

.55
.46

.28
.40

—1.24
—1.14

—2.16
—1.86

—1.46

.70

—2.60

.70

1.01
1.05

.62
.89

2.31

1.07
1.00

.71
.63

.49
.68

—1.67 —.61/—l.49
—1.18 —.53/—1.28

3.79

Semi—elasticities for interest rates based on simulations of
the financial blocks. The first—year results are shown in the
first line, and the sixth—year results in the second line. For
Japanese time deposits and M2, the first number assumes that the
bank debenture rate is exogenous. Source: EPA model group.
*

Long—term interest rates are determined by a term structure
equation which also takes into consideration market pressure
variables such as government borrowing requirements and net
foreign lending as a proportion of GNP. Expectations of future
inflation are additional factors in the Japanese and German
models. Long—term homogeneity of long—term rates to short—term
rates is not a feature of these models.
A.3

INTERLINK (OECD).

INTERLINK has large blocks for each of the G—7 countries,
smaller blocks for each of the other OECD countries, and for six
non—OECD regions. A standardized representation of the financial
block for the G—7 countries was adopted to enhance the
transparency of the model and to avoid differences in model
properties resulting from different research strategies. Equity
markets are ignored, and the bond market is implicit, so that the
domestic financial block has only three basic components: a money
demand equation, a term structure equation and adaptive

43
interest rates. The structure is
expectations for long—term
shown in table A.5.

Table A.5

OECD: Structure of the financial sector.

Assets/Sectors H+NFF

D
Money
Domestic securities*
Bonds
short
long
Foreign securities* D

FF+CB

G

Rates

NR

ME

RS

S

Method

D
(RS)

TS

RL

D

* Net foreign asset position is modelled as per portfolio
non—dollar assets
model; distinction is made between dollar and
in foreign portfolios.

interest
In previous versions of the OECD model, short—term
In
reaction
function.
a
monetary policy
rates were determined by
or
are
either
set
exogenously
the current version, short rates
a path for
solved from the money market equilibrium by specifying
a
common
share
demand
The
equations
money
the money supply.
and GNP are the sole
specification in that short—term rates
among the countries is
arguments. The only substantial difference
States,
that nominal partial adjustment was used for the United
and
for
was
Japan
preferred
real
while
partial adjustment
The elasticities are reported in table A.6.
Germany.

Table A.6 OECD:
Interest
(iSA

Ml

—.28

M2

—2.8
—.51
—2.1

M3

JAP

Money demand elasticities.*
rate
GER

USA

Income
JAP

GER

.1
1.0
—.47
—1.4

—.33
—1.8

.26

.50

1.07

1.50
.29
1.6

*Semi_elasticities for interest rates. Short and long—run
elasticities are shown in the first and second lines,
respectively. Source: INTERLINK model equations.

44
In the term structure equations, rational lag formulations are
used to link long and short rates. Government borrowing
requirements relative to GNP are also included in the US model.

A.4

NIESR (National Institute).

The quarterly Global Economic Model
of the U.K. National
(GEM includes
Institute for Economic and Social Research
9 countries
and 7 other regions. The financial blocks for the G—7 countries
share a similar structure. The structure of NIESR is broadly that
of the U.K. Treasurys World Economic Prospects model presented
in Horton (1984). In the financial blocks, narrow and broad money
demand equations exist for each country, where real balances
depend on activity (either total final expenditure or GNP),
nominal interest rates and inflation (CPI or UN? deflator), and a
time trend. Dynamics are usually captured by an error correction
process.
Nominal interest rates can be determined in- a number of
different ways. Reaction functions are estimated for the major
countries to capture the recent behaviour of the authorities.
Alternatively, nominal or real interest rates can be fixed.
Finally, interest rates can be varied to keep the money stock on
a predetermined path. Term structure relations do not exist, as
there is only a single interest rate for each country.

Table A.7 NIESR: Money demand eiasticities.*
Interest
Income
USA
JAP
GER
USA
JAP
GER

CBM

—0.18
—2.51

M2

—0.39 —0.17
—1.8 —1.65

0.0

1.05
0.21
1.21

0.0
1.0

Semi—elasticitiesfor interest rates; short—run and long—run
values on first and second lines, respectively; CEM: central bank
money; Ml is M1B for the United States.
Source: NIESR Model Version GEM33.F.
*

29 The model is described in National
Institute (1987 and
and Wren—Lewis (1987).

1988),

45

A.5 The Taylor Model.
for each of
The Taylor model adopts a standardized framework a
model is
side
of
the
financial
The
G—7
economies.
the
to
version of the Mundell—Fleming approach

disaggregated
international capital markets with perfect assetin the model
by
rates are determined
substitutability. Interest
The partial
in
each
country.
is
exogenous
assuming money supply
in each country are inverted to
adjustment money demand equations rates. The financial structure
determine the short—term interest
and A.9,
and money demand elasticities are shown in tables A.8
respectively.
Table A.8 Taylor: Structure of the financial sector.
Rates
NP.
CB+FF
G
Assets/Sectors H+NFF
Money (Ml)
Bonds
—short
-long

S

-RS

ME

(RS)
RL

TS

Taylor: Money demand elasticities.*

Table A.9

USA
Ml

D

Method

—.22
—4.73

Interest
GER
JAP
—.48
—.65
—1.91
—2.13

Income
USA
.04
.85

JAP
.14
.55

GER
.40
1.30

interest rates; short—run and long—run
second
lines, respectively.
on
first
and
7alues
*

Semi—elasticitiesfor

The term—structure equation is forward—looking and
Rational expectations
incorporates model—consistent expectations.
of future variables appear throughout the model: expectations of
future prices and incomes appear in the consumption equation,
in the investment
expectations of future output and prices appear
in the
equations, expectations of future exchange rates appear
exchange rate equations and expectations of future wages, prices
and output appear in the wage equations. The solution method is
the Fair—Taylor (1983) algorithm.

