NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BUSINESS REOPENING DECISIONS AND DEMAND FORECASTS DURING THE
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
Dylan Balla-Elliott
Zoë B. Cullen
Edward L. Glaeser
Michael Luca
Christopher T. Stanton
Working Paper 27362
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27362

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020

We thank the founders of Alignable for sharing data. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27362.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Dylan Balla-Elliott, Zoë B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, and
Christopher T. Stanton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Business Reopening Decisions and Demand Forecasts During the COVID-19 Pandemic
Dylan Balla-Elliott, Zoë B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, and Christopher T.
Stanton
NBER Working Paper No. 27362
June 2020
JEL No. D22,E32,I15,L23
ABSTRACT
How quickly will American businesses reopen after COVID-19 lockdowns end? We use a
nationwide survey of small businesses to measure firms’ expectations about their re-opening and
future demand. A plurality of firms in our sample expect to reopen within days of the end of legal
restrictions, but a sizable minority expect to delay their reopening. While health-related variables,
such as COVID-19 case rates and physical proximity of workers, do explain the prevalence and
expected duration of regulated lockdown, these variables have little or no correlation with postlockdown reopening intentions. Instead, almost one half of closed or partially open businesses
said that their reopening would depend on the reopening of related businesses, including
customers and suppliers. Owners expect demand to be one-third lower than before the crisis
through autumn. Firms with more pessimistic expectations about demand predict a later
reopening. Using an instrumental variables strategy, we estimate the relationship between
demand expectations and reopening. These estimates suggest that post-lockdown delays in
reopening can be explained by low levels of expected demand.
Dylan Balla-Elliott
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
USA
dballaelliott@hbs.edu
Zoë B. Cullen
Rock Center 210
Harvard Business School
60 N. Harvard
Boston, MA 02163
zcullen@hbs.edu
Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Michael Luca
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mluca@hbs.edu
Christopher T. Stanton
210 Rock Center
Harvard University
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
christopher.t.stanton@gmail.com

Business Reopening Decisions and Demand Forecasts During
the COVID-19 Pandemic
Dylan Balla-Elliott, Zoe Cullen, Ed Glaeser, Michael Luca, and Christopher Stanton

Abstract
How quickly will American businesses reopen after COVID-19 lockdowns end? We use a nationwide survey of small businesses to measure firms’ expectations about their re-opening and future
demand. A plurality of firms in our sample expect to reopen within days of the end of legal
restrictions, but a sizable minority expect to delay their reopening. While health-related variables,
such as COVID-19 case rates and physical proximity of workers, do explain the prevalence and
expected duration of regulated lockdown, these variables have little or no correlation with postlockdown reopening intentions. Instead, almost one half of closed or partially open businesses said
that their reopening would depend on the reopening of related businesses, including customers and
suppliers. Owners expect demand to be one-third lower than before the crisis through autumn.
Firms with more pessimistic expectations about demand predict a later reopening. Using an
instrumental variables strategy, we estimate the relationship between demand expectations and
reopening. These estimates suggest that post-lockdown delays in reopening can be explained by
low levels of expected demand.

I. Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has led to economic disruptions that have not been seen since the great
depression (Barker et al 2020, Bartik et al 2020, Khan et al 2020). Government-imposed restrictions
or lockdowns, including regulations on what businesses may operate, have forced millions of
businesses throughout the United States to temporarily shut down. Among policy makers, there is
some optimism for a speedy recovery. For example, President Trump tweeted that if we “reopen
our country” then businesses will rapidly come back online because “our people want to return to
work.” At the same time, even after restrictions are lifted, there may be important barriers to
reopening.
First, business owners might have concerns about their own health risks, as reopening may expose
them to COVID. Thus a business that can reopen in principle may choose to delay. Second, the

1

enormous dislocation associated with the pandemic may create coordination problems up and down
the supply chain – which might make it difficult for businesses to reopen. Third, even before any
government policies were imposed, many households began self-isolating to reduce the risk of
transmission of COVID (Couture et al., 2020; Sears et al 2020, Gupta et al 2020). More broadly,
businesses faced significant demand reductions that predated the lockdowns. Businesses might
expect that demand will not return immediately after restrictions are lifted. This may also keep
firms from reopening.
In this paper, we investigate businesses’ decisions about reopening, focusing on two questions: First,
as restrictions are relaxed, how quickly should we expect businesses to reopen? Second, to what
extent are these different barriers driving decisions to reopen? To explore businesses’ expectations
about the end of regulatory restrictions on operations, future demand and reopening decisions, we
use responses from a survey-experiment of tens of thousands of small businesses conducted by the
small business network Alignable. Embedded in the survey is an information provision experiment
on customer demand projections. We merge the survey-experiment results with input-output data
from the BEA, O-NET data on workplace conditions, and crowdsourced data on industry attributes
to shed further light on these questions.
We begin by documenting the current landscape of business closures and reopenings. Between late
March and mid-May, the share of businesses in the Alignable surveys that were temporarily closed
fell from 41 percent to 24 percent. However, the likelihood of being open varies considerably across
different types of businesses. Businesses deemed essential (a classification that is dictated by
regulatory guidelines) are 16 percent less likely to be temporarily closed. If a business’s work
involves physical proximity to other people, then the firm is also much more likely to be closed.
Firms with older customers are less likely to be fully open, and more likely to be partially open.
At the county level, COVID case prevalence also predicts temporary closure.
We also find that Republican vote share is a particularly powerful predictor of firms being fully
open, even holding COVID case prevalence constant. This correlation remains after controls for
regulations and local disease prevalence. This result is also consistent with separate but
independent work by Alcott et al (2020), who find that areas with more Republicans are less likely
to engage in social distancing, related to areas with more Democrats.
We then turn to expectations about reopening behavior and the end of legal restrictions on business
operations. For the modal firm, regulations seem to be a binding constraint that prevents opening
or reopening. The modal firm will open immediately or with a short delay upon legally being able
to do so. The median firm believes that it will be closed for about two weeks after it is legal to
open. However, there is a significant tail of firms that forecast longer delays. Eighteen percent of
firms report delays in reopening of at least one month after the end of restrictions on their
operations, and this estimate is likely a lower bound. Hence, while restrictions bind many firms,
2

there is also a meaningful share of business owners who intend to delay opening even after
restrictions are lifted.
Why do these businesses expect additional delay? As mentioned above, there are three leading
potential factors - health risks (for owners and employees), supply chain disruptions and challenges
created by other firms being closed, and concerns about reduced demand. We explore each of these
in turn.
First, we find that health concerns are generally not driving business decisions about when to
reopen. We find that businesses in counties with higher levels of COVID cases expect that they
will take more time to reopen. However, after controlling for the business’s expectations of when
legal restrictions will be fully lifted, this effect dissipates. We also find that worker proximity
predicts the time until reopening. However, this also operates almost entirely through expectations
about when regulations will end. Neither owner age nor customer age predict a longer time delay
before reopening, once we control for owners’ expected time until the end of restrictions. And, if
anything, firms with older customers expect to reopen sooner. Moreover, none of these variables
that capture health risks have a larger effect in areas where COVID rates have been higher.
Second, concerns that upstream firms might be closed plays only a minor role in delayed openings.
Only 5% of firms that were not fully open at the time of the survey cited supply concerns as a
barrier that would prevent reopening. Although 25% of fully open firms respond that a supplier
closing would impact their ability to remain open, the fact that these supply-vulnerable businesses
were operational suggests that the supply chain largely held up throughout the first few months of
the crisis.
Downstream firms play a larger role in reopening decisions. When asked whether the closure of
firms that are linked to them “would affect their ability to remain open”, forty-eight percent cited
their vulnerability to the closing of downstream firms, either because these firms are customers or
refer customers. While most temporarily closed (or partially open) businesses were not waiting for
other firms to fully open, among those who were waiting on other firms, five times as many cited
downstream firms than upstream firms as a consideration in fully opening. This suggests that
demand is the main channel driving reopening decisions. While these firms seem to have the ability
to source materials and services, they often depend on a narrow range of customers for their sales.
Third, we find that expectations of limited demand play an important and causal role in explaining
delayed openings. Overall, the demand projections are grim. The average firm in our sample expects
that demand for their services will be 35.3 percent lower in September relative to pre-crisis levels.1
Only 20.3 percent of firms in our sample expect that demand, by September, will have declined by
less than 10 percent relative to the start of the crisis. All sectors are hard hit, but the drop in
Unfortunately, we do not have price data, unlike Jaravel and O’Connell (2020), so we focus on the share
of customers returning relative to before the crisis.
1

3

demand is expected to be most severe in three sectors: educational services, food and
accommodation and arts, and entertainment and recreation. The expected drop in demand is lower
for essential businesses, for businesses with older customers, and for businesses whose service cannot
be provided online. We also find that political preferences seem to play a role: the Republican vote
share strongly and positively predicts higher levels of projected future demand.
These demand reductions will lead to delayed openings, as firms expecting demand to be higher in
the future are more likely to open quickly. To reinforce our causal interpretation, we implement
two different instrumental variables approaches to estimate the link between future demand and
the probability of being open. One approach uses experimental information provision, included in
the survey, which changes respondents’ beliefs about demand. The aggregation and presentation
of information regarding demand from similar businesses shifts beliefs, as this information may be
hard to ascertain for owners unilaterally. Optimistic owners shift beliefs downward, while
pessimistic owners have rosier forecasts after receiving the information treatment. We compare
firms with similar initial beliefs, but who were assigned to different information treatments or not
provided with other owners’ projections at all. A second approach instruments demand projections
in businesses that sell to other businesses using the share of downstream customers that are in
essential sectors. Both instruments yield similar conclusions and support a causal interpretation
for the relationship between demand projections and reopening decisions. Over the longer-term,
consumer demand is correlated with the firm's expected probability of being open in December.
Overall, our results contribute to understanding of the impact of the COVID pandemic on small
businesses, and the barriers to reopening. Even though demand had already dropped before the
lockdowns were in place, our results highlight that legal restrictions on business operations were
binding - and that health concerns are generally not preventing businesses from reopening. Instead,
we that demand from consumers and downstream firms plays an important role. Businesses expect
demand to continue to be much lower than pre-crisis levels, and these demand reductions are
causing businesses to stay closed longer. Many of these firms will delay reopening and perhaps close
permanently as a result. This tremendous disruption to our economic system seems likely to create
echoes that will reverberate for many years, and our estimates begin to provide long-term
projections from the perspective of these business owners.

II. Data Sources
The Small Business Owner data used and referenced in this work was collected through surveys
conducted by Alignable, Inc. Alignable <https://www.alignable.com> is the largest network and
community of Small Business Owners in North America. We combine the survey data with business
profile data from Alignable, historical revenues at the industry level from the Census, O-NET data
to understand physical proximity of working conditions at the industry level, input-output data
4

from the Bureau of Economic Analysis to understand interconnectedness of businesses and the
composition of upstream and downstream businesses, and data on geographic variation of COVID19 cases obtained from the New York Times. Together, these data help to shed light on the factors
driving business decisions about whether to reopen.
In this section, we describe the Alignable survey, its representativeness compared to Census data,
and detail the other data sources used in the analysis.
About Alignable and the Alignable Small Business Survey
The Alignable platform has approximately 5 million registered small businesses across North
America. Each week, Alignable distributes a survey link through email to their members. The link
allows them to merge the individual responses of participants to data from their user profiles.
Our primary sample comes from one wave of Alignable surveys that focused on business reopening,
with the link emailed out to users on May 9, 2020. This survey received 35,069 total responses to
at least one question. 27,263 respondents completed all core questions that form the bulk of the
analysis. The core questions contained several modules. The first module collected information
about the current operational status of the business (fully open, partially open, temporarily closed,
permanently closed) and any potential dependencies with other businesses that may affect their
decision to fully open or their ability to remain fully open. The second module asked about future
expectations about the return of customers to their business should they be fully open on a specified
date that was randomized over different points in the future. Additional questions also asked about
the expected reopening of other businesses. Respondents were also asked about when they expected
legal restrictions impacting their business to be lifted, and when they are most likely to re-open
fully if they were not already. A final question asked about the likelihood that the business will be
operational come December 2020.2
In the middle of the survey, before questions regarding expected demand and expected reopening
and survival, a subset of respondents were shown information about how prior survey respondents
had projected demand. The message read “based on your profile, location, and concerns, our polls
show that similar businesses anticipate [X%] of customers will return by [date]. The variable X was
calculated using data from the first 16,038 respondents. One third of respondents after the first
batch received this message.3 The complete survey tool is available in the Appendix.

A module tracking responses to CARES Act PPP status came prior to the final question about long-term
business operations prospects, causing drop-off to 17,098 completed responses for this last question.
3
One third of respondents saw a different message, but its mapping to a concept like demand is less clear.
2

5

Table 1 Panel A provides more detail about the data and the measures collected from the main
May 9 survey.
We supplement this survey wave with questions from other survey waves. From earlier and later
survey waves, we are able to construct a time series of business operational status using responses
from 117,672 unique business owners from March 28 to mid-May, 2020. We merge in demographic
details about the owner’s age and industry details collected by Alignable in later surveys. We also
include data on industry classification that comes from respondents entering their industry using
a JavaScript predictive text entry box. Available options were the text of 4 and 6 digit NAICS
industry descriptions. We also use a question, delivered toward the end of May in an external
survey conducted by Harvard Business School, to assess how participants would evaluate tradeoffs
between cash and health considerations. We presented users with a hypothetical grant, in amounts
we randomized between $2,500 and $50,000. The grant could be one of two types: either the grant
stipulated that the business would have to remain closed for two weeks to receive the grant, or the
grant did not have conditions for receipt. We then asked users whether they would remain closed
over the next two weeks under their particular hypothetical grant condition.
Comparison of Survey Responses with US Census Data
One challenge in conducting surveys of businesses is the potential for selection bias. This sample
is selected in two ways: (1) they are firms that have chosen to join Alignable, (2) they are Alignable
firms that have chosen to stay actively engaged taking surveys. Bartik et al (2020) provide a variety
of diagnostic checks for a survey of Alignable businesses conducted in late March / early April to
assess its representativeness, and shed light on sample selection. The sample provides broad
coverage across the United States, across industries, and across business size (within small
businesses). Roughly speaking, the sample matches Census data reasonably well along the
dimensions of industry and geography, but the sample skews toward smaller businesses relative to
the full set of US small businesses. A cross-validation against a phone survey suggests that these
surveys provide reasonable estimates of business closure, though the random phone survey
suggested the survey might over represent closed businesses.4 This is consistent with the

As a test of selection into taking surveys, Bartik et al (2020) reports the results of randomly calling 400
business owners using the contact information collected by Alignable at registration. The current status of
these 400 business owners, open or closed, matches the ratio of open versus closed in a prior survey wave.
This suggests that the survey responses are unlikely to understate the degree of businesses being
permanently closed, at least conditional on having registered with Alignable.
4

6

expectations of Alignable executives who believed user engagement from businesses might be higher
when they are looking for information about new opportunities.
Validation exercises of the May 9 survey wave reach similar conclusions to those in Bartik et al
(2020). Figure 1 plots survey responses by firm size and compares the distribution to 2017 US
Census data on businesses, derived from the County Business Patterns. Firm size in the survey is
based on January 2020 employment, as reported by the respondent. The match is quite good along
the firm size distribution. Figure 2 plots the geographic distribution of survey responses in the 10
large states in the survey and the Census; despite some minor sampling differences across states,
the country is well represented.
Other Data Sources
Table 1 Panel B provides details about outside data sources that we merged with the Alignable
data. We supplement the survey data with detailed characteristics about the industries of
businesses at the 4-digit NAICS level. We determine the extent that each industry is able to serve
online customers, and the likely age distribution of those customers, by posting a description of
each industry on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, and asking a series of questions related to the nature
of the industry and its customers. The first question asked is, “how easy or common would it be
for this business to provide services or goods online?” The second question asked is, “how likely is
it for customers of this business to fall in each age bracket (listed below)?” We offer answers that
correspond with 0-10 percent, 10-25 percent, 25-75 percent and greater than 75 percent. Five unique
individual Mechanical Turk responses were collected for each industry code and description. We
average responses from these individuals at the industry level. The Table presents the raw
responses, while later analysis uses Z-Scores for these variables to ease interpretation.
We collect information at the occupational level about the proximity of employees with each other
and with customers the O-NET proximity variable “To what extent does this job require the
worker to perform job tasks in close physical proximity to other people?” The underlying encoding
of the proximity measure ranges from “I don’t work near other people (beyond 100 ft)” as the
lowest category to “Very close (near touching)” as the highest category. We follow Mongey and
Weinberg (2020) by merging the O-NET version 24 proximity variable to the Occupational
Employment Statistics (OES) data collected by the BLS. The OES data provides a mapping
between occupation codes and NAICS industries. We take the employment weighted average of
proximity by 4 digit NAICS code. We merge in input-output accounts data at the 3-digit NAICS
industry level. We use the most recent data available at this level of granularity, which was
collected in 2012. These data shed light on the industry composition of upstream and downstream
7

businesses for survey respondents.5 Data about coronavirus cases at the county level were collected
by The New York Times. While coverage is extensive, some counties were grouped together.6
III. The Evolution of Business Closures and Reopenings
In this section, we provide an overview of the evolution of business closures and reopenings, as well
as expectations of future reopenings. Overall, we find that many businesses have already begun to
reopen. Out of businesses that were already open, some are starting to transition from partly to
fully open. The data suggest that most businesses plan to open as soon as lockdowns are lifted.
However, a sizable block plan to delay their openings even after lockdowns are lifted.
Business closures and reopenings over time
Figure 3 shows the time trend in closures in the Alignable Surveys. At the end of March, when
surveys began, forty-two percent of the businesses in our sample were temporarily closed. The
share has steadily trended downward, as businesses have begun to reopen. By the beginning of
May, more than two-thirds of businesses were open and that share increased to over three-quarters
by the middle of May. The share of permanently closed businesses in our sample changes from
1.75% percent around April 1 to 2.3% around May 9.
While the share of temporarily closed firms in our sample is definitely declining, re-opening can
mean many different things to different firms. Starting in the first week of May, the survey
questions asked firms that were open about whether they were completely open or partially open.
Thirty-four percent of our firms were only partially open in the first May survey. By the middle of
the month, that share had fallen to under 28 percent, meaning that almost one-half of our sample
was fully open by the middle of May.
American businesses have been reopening, but they have not been reopening everywhere at the
same rate. Figure 4 shows a map of America with the share of businesses that are temporarily
closed by state. In the Northeast, where the COVID death rates have been highest and regulatory
responses strictest, the closure rates are also highest. In New York, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts
and Maine, more than 37 percent of businesses were temporarily closed in early May. Closure rates
The data are available at https://www.bea.gov/industry/input-output-accounts-data. We use the
Industry by Industry matrix (total inputs by industry required (directly and indirectly) in order to deliver
one dollar of industry output to final users) to identify downstream industries in the construction of the
essential downstream businesses measure. Since this series captures production linkages and does not
capture private consumption, we use the use tables to measure the share of industry output that goes to
household consumption (rather than production) to categorize industries as consumer facing (B2C) or
business-to-business (B2B).
5

For example, a single value for New York City is reported, comprising New York, Kings, Queens, Bronx
and Richmond Counties. The data are available at https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data
6

8

were also over one-third in New Jersey, Connecticut and other COVID hot spots away from New
York, such as Michigan (where Detroit experienced a major outbreak) and Louisiana.
By contrast, closure rates are less than 20% in the states of the far west and Deep South with
relative low disease prevalence. Alabama, Arkansas, Mississippi and Oklahoma make up one
contiguous block of low closure rate states. Montana, the Dakotas, Wyoming and Utah represent
another such block. COVID rates have been low in those states, and their typically Republican
voters generally oppose government regulation. The other states lie between these two extremes.
Figure 5 plots closures against the county level unemployment rate, indicating that the impact is
not being felt equally nationwide. Additionally, this figure helps to validate that the Alignable
measures on business operations are correlated with administrative data on labor market
performance. The striking correlations suggest the Alignable measures are accurately picking up
economic activity at a granular level. Of course, as mentioned above, part of the county differences
are driven by differences in regulations.
The current state of regulations is correlated both with expected delays until reopening and
expectations about the time it will take to have no restrictions. In Table 2, we separate states that
had stay at home orders in place as of the middle of May from states that did not have such orders.
We classified 24 states as having stay at home orders in place on or after May 9, 2020. 7
Twenty-seven percent of businesses in states without stay at home orders were temporarily closed.
In states with stay at home orders, thirty six percent of businesses were closed. There is no
difference between the two classes of states in the share of businesses that were partially open. The
difference between the two types of states showed up primarily on the share of businesses that
were fully open.
The stay at home orders also correlate both with the expected number of months until fully open
and months until there are no restrictions. In states with stay at home orders, respondents expected
that it would take 1.44 months until the restrictions were fully lifted and 1.7 months until they
reopened. In states without stay at home orders, respondents thought that it would take 1.1 months
until the restrictions were lifted and 1.38 months until they were fully open.
Figure 6 divides the businesses into four categories based on their operational status and shows the
mean level of different firm attributes across those categories.

The categories are fully open,

partially open, temporarily closed and permanently closed. Our first variable is the O-NET
occupation proximity score for the businesses’ industry. From the data in Figure 5 alone, we cannot
determine whether the link between this variable and business closure is because of direct fear of

7

https://www.usatoday.com/storytelling/coronavirus-reopening-america-map/

9

contagion by the business owners and workers or because of regulation meant to stop high
proximity behavior. Later we separately analyze the relationship in a regression framework.
Regardless of whether it is supply, demand, or regulation, high levels of proximity make it easier
for diseases to spread, and unsurprisingly firms are more likely to be closed if they are in industries
that involve high levels of physical proximity either between workers or between workers and
customers. On average, 37 percent of the fully open firms are in above-median proximity industries.
One half of the partially open firms are in above-median proximity industries. That number jumps
to 65% for temporarily closed firms. Fifty-eight percent of firms that are permanently closed are
in high proximity industries, which suggests that while proximity does make permanent closure
more likely, other factors must also be driving the shuttering of particular enterprises.
The next variable is the population density of the county in which the business primarily operates.
Density is correlated with both COVID cases and COVID deaths across U.S. counties, as of May
2020 (Glaeser, 2020). There is a slight positive relationship between density and the probability of
being either partially open or temporarily closed, but the correlation between closure and local
density is weaker than between closure and high proximity occupations.
The next variable is the ability of the business to sell their goods or services exclusively online,
constructed at the 4-digit industry level with our survey data on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Some
examples of industries identified as easily accessing customers online include, software publishers,
cable and other subscription programming, investment pools and funds, professional scientific and
technical services. We hypothesized that firms with high levels of online presence would be
particularly likely to be partially open, as these firms could still partially serve customers without
a physical presence or storefront. Somewhat surprisingly, we found no correlation between online
sales and the probability of being partially open or temporarily closed. The result is largely
explained by the physical proximity measure. The correlation between the ease of online sales and
physical proximity is -0.46.
The health risks associated with COVID-19 increase sharply with age. For example, as of May 31,
2020, there had been 6,439 deaths associated with COVID-19 in Massachusetts among people over
the age of 60, and 329 deaths associated with COVID-19 among people under the age of 60.
Consequently, we hypothesized that the age of customers and owners would predict temporary
closures, but there is almost no correlation between age and business status. For example, 26
percent of the owners of businesses that are completely open are over the age of 65 and 26 percent
of the owners of the businesses that are temporarily closed are over the age of 65. Similarly, an
older customer base does not seem to predict temporary closure.
The age of owner does however predict permanent closure. Thirty-four percent of owners of
permanently closed businesses are over the age of 65. This correlation might reflect health concerns,

10

but just as plausibly, it could reflect the decision by people close to retirement to stop trying to
make their business go amidst a maelstrom of pandemic and business closure.
The final variable shown in this figure is the vote share of the Republican Party at the county level
in the 2016 election. There is a modest negative relationship, where the open businesses tend to be
in counties with more Republican voters. This variable could reflect a lower level of regulation in
more Republican areas or greater Republican optimism about either the level of economic
dislocation or the risks of the disease.
As high proximity occupations were a particularly powerful predictor of business status, Figure 7
examines the time path of high and low proximity industries. We first split our sample into two
parts based on whether the industry of the enterprise is above or below the median proximity level
in our sample. We then look at the share of businesses that were temporarily closed at different
dates in the two groups.
In the first survey wave at the end of March, over fifty percent of the high proximity industries
were closed and less than thirty percent of the low proximity industries were closed. The share of
both groups that were temporarily closed gently trended down in parallel through the beginning
of May. In that wave, forty percent of the high proximity industry firms were closed and twentytwo percent of the low proximity industry firms were closed. In the most recent wave, the
temporary closure numbers dropped significantly, especially for the high proximity industries. At
our end point, slightly more than thirty percent of high proximity industry firms are closed, and
about fifteen percent of low proximity industry firms are closed.
High proximity industries may be regulated by lockdown rules and those regulations may have
eased over time. To examine the impact of regulations, Figure 7 also compares closure rates for
essential and non-essential industries, using the classification described in Section II.
The closure rates for non-essential industries essentially tracks the closure rates for high proximity
industries. Slightly more than one-half of the non-essential industries in our sample were closed at
the end of March. By mid-May, the share of non-essential industries that were closed had fallen to
about thirty percent.
A bit more than 30 percent of essential businesses were closed at the end of March, even though
they were typically not regulated. That fact also suggests that businesses may well remain closed
after the lockdowns end. By mid-May, the share of essential businesses that were closed had fallen
below 20 percent, which is comparable to the closure rate for low proximity businesses.
Table 3 summarizes the correlates of current operational status of businesses in multiple regression
form using the data from the May 9 survey. The table shows coefficients from four linear probability
models. The four outcomes are mutually exclusive and so the coefficients must sum to zero. We
have clustered the regressions at the county level.
11

The first row shows the coefficient on employee physical proximity. This variable has been
transformed into a z-score, and so the coefficient -.105 implies that a one standard deviation
increase in the level of physical proximity is associated with a 10.5 percentage point reduction in
the probability of remaining fully open. This reduction in the probability of being open is countered
primarily by an increase in the probability of being temporarily closed. A one standard deviation
in the proximity measure leads to an 11.7 percentage point increase in temporary closure. Proximity
of workers also has a small positive impact on permanent closure and a small negative impact on
being partially being open.
The second row shows the coefficient on the owner’s age, entered linearly. Given the strong
correlation between age and mortality from COVID-19, we expected to find a significant link
between age and temporary closure. The regressions show no such link. The only significant impact
of age in the table is shown in the fourth regression. We find that older owners are more likely to
permanently close their businesses, which may reflect a retirement decision for many of these
owners. A 70 year old owner is 1.3 percentage points more likely to permanently close their business
than a 40 year old.
The third row shows the impact of customer age. This variable has also been transformed into a
z-score, which means that a one standard deviation increase in the share of customers over the age
of 65 is associated with a .83 percentage point reduction in the probability of being fully open.
While the sign of this coefficient is as predicted, we were surprised by the small size of the
coefficient. The reduction in the probability of being fully open is offset by an increase in the
probability of being partially open.

A one standard deviation increase in the share of

customers that are over the age of 65 is associated with a 1.3 percentage point rise in the probability
of being partially open. There is no significant link between customer age and either the probability
of being temporarily closed or of being permanently closed.
The fourth row shows the impact of being an essential business (at least as classified by both
Delaware and Minnesota). Essential businesses are 12 percent more likely to be fully open and 4.3
percent more likely to be partially open. These businesses are 15.9 percent less likely to be
temporarily closed and .4 percent less likely to be completely closed. The correlation between
essential businesses and staying open could reflect both regulation and the level of demand, which
presumably remained higher for essential businesses. We will later test whether essential businesses
are also more or less likely to reopen when their respective states end lockdown regulations.
The fifth row shows the ease of operating online, as measured at the 4-digit NAICS industry level
by the Mechanical Turk collection tool. Again this variable is a z-score. A one standard deviation
increase in the ease of operating online is associated with a 1.6 percentage point reduction in the
probability of being partially open and a .8 percentage point reduction in the probability of being
fully open. The third regression shows that a one standard deviation increase in the ease of
operating online is associated with a 2.4 percentage point increase in the probability of being
12

temporarily closed. We were somewhat surprised by these relationships, as we expected that
businesses that can operate online would be more likely to stay open and operate online.
The sixth, seventh and eighth rows show three county-level correlates of current business status.
In row six, we show the correlates of the logarithm of the number of COVID cases (plus one) per
capita. We will interpret this variable as a semi-elasticity, so that a 10 percent increase in the
number of COVID cases is associated with a .32 percentage point decrease in the probability of
being fully open and a .26 percentage point increase in the probability of being temporarily closed.
The number of COVID cases has a very small positive relationship with the probability of being
partially open and a very small and insignificant negative correlation with the probability of being
permanently closed.
We hypothesized that there might be more closures in denser environments because population
density can make it easier for contagious diseases to spread. But the seventh row shows that density
is positively associated with being fully open, holding fixed disease prevalence. A ten percent
increase in population density is associated with a .15 percentage point increase in the probability
of being open. A ten percent increase in density is linked to a .1 percentage point decrease the
probability of being temporarily closed. The added customers associated with density appears to
offset any downsides of disease spreading more rapidly in a dense environment.
Finally, in row eight we look at the Republican vote share in the 2016 presidential election. We
interpret it as a measure both of political attitudes towards regulation, perhaps proxying for the
actual regulations on the ground, and possibly of beliefs about the risks from the disease. We find
that the Republican vote share is strongly associated with the probability of being open. A ten
percentage point increase in the share of votes that went for the Republican presidential candidate
is associated with a 3.2 percentage point increase in the probability of being fully open and a 2.3
percentage point decrease in the probability of being temporarily closed. The Republican vote share
also generates a lower probability of being partially open, but has no correlation with the
probability of being permanently closed.
While these results on essential businesses remind us that lockdowns do not completely determine
closure rates, we now turn to the lockdown regulations and firms’ expectations about those
regulations.
How Long Do Businesses Think It Will Take For Lockdowns To End?
Our primary question about lockdown expectations is “If there are legal restrictions on fully
reopening your business, when do you expect them to be lifted?” We turned categorical responses
to this question into a number of months. We also included an option to respond with “there are
no legal restrictions”, and in that case we coded the number of months to deregulation
automatically as a zero.

13

Figure 8 shows that expectations about when lockdown regulations will end differ sharply across
U.S. states. The map strongly echoes the map of current businesses closures, which in turn echoes
a map of COVID prevalence and deaths as of mid-May 2020. In the Northeast, the average business
expected another 1.5 to 2 months of lockdown. In the mountain states, lockdowns were expected
to last for 20 days or less. These responses likely reflect a combination of state and local industryspecific regulations, so there is no easy way to corroborate the accuracy of the expectations, but
they correspond roughly with our expectations that the Northeastern states have high restrictions
relative to most of the rest of the country.
Figure 9 shows that high and low proximity industries believe that they will face different
regulatory hurdles. Each point represents the cumulative share of firms in a given industry that
expects that it will be able to open fully on or before a given date. The two most prominent lines
show the average across high and low proximity industries. About sixty percent of firms in low
proximity industries say that they are legally allowed to open at the start of May. That share
exceeds 90 percent by July.
The share of firms in high proximity industries facing regulation is much larger initially.
Approximately forty-five percent of these firms say that they will legally be able to open in early
May. By mid-June three quarters of the high proximity firms say that they can be fully open, as
the series begin to converge. Businesses overwhelmingly expect that the regulations restricting their
operations will be over by the middle of June. We now turn to their expectations about whether
they will reopen after the regulations cease.
How Long Do Businesses Believe That They Will Remain Closed After Lockdowns End?
Figure 10 shows the distribution of firm expectations about when all lockdown regulations will end
(x-axis) and when they expect to fully reopen their businesses (y-axis). We present the results as
a matrix. The share of firms along the diagonal gives us the share of firms that say that they will
reopen fully at the moment that they are legally allowed to reopen fully. The entries above the
diagonal represent those firms that expect to take longer to reopen.
Somewhat surprisingly, there are also firms that expect to be fully open before the restrictions on
fully opening end. We believe that this reflects the gray area around the words “restrictions” and
“fully.” For example, a state order that mandated social distancing in retail establishments can be
interpreted as a limitation on the ability to fully open. Yet the same firm that expected that
limitation to persist through July might choose to think of itself as being fully open at the time of
the survey or at some other point before July.
The share of firms along the diagonal is quite striking. Forty-five percent of firms that expect the
restrictions to end in July also expect to be open in July. Fifty-four percent of firms that expect
the regulations to be over by early June expect to be open then as well. There is a particularly
large share (60 percent) of firms that are on the diagonal among those firms that expect the
14

regulations to last until September or later. Since that category has no end date, we cannot infer
what share of these firms expect to reopen when the regulations end and what share expect to
remain closed for weeks or months longer.
For all survey respondents that listed August or earlier as their expected date of deregulation, at
least 23 percent expected to take some time before reopening. Fifteen percent of firms that expected
the restrictions to end by early June also expected to remain at least partially closed until July.
Thirty-one percent of firms that expect lockdowns to end in late June expected that they would
remain closed until July. This gap between the expected end of the lockdowns and the expected
time of reopening is the primary concern of the remainder of this paper.
To further investigate the size of the gap, Figure 11 shows the gap between expected duration of
the lockdown and the expected length of closure across states. Firms that are fully opened at the
time of the survey are classified as zero time until full reopening. The distance between each dot
and the forty-five degree line shows the average delay between the end of lockdown and businesses’
projected reopening.
As we showed in Figure 8, there is considerable heterogeneity across states in the expected length
of the lockdowns. High COVID level northeastern states expect the lockdowns to last far longer
than low COVID Sunbelt states. Yet for almost every state there is an average gap between
reopening and the end of lockdown that last between one and two weeks. This average gap sums
together the significant share of businesses that expect to fully reopen exactly when the lockdown
ends and the tail of businesses that expect to take weeks or months to reopen.
Table 4 shows that there is also considerable heterogeneity across industries in the expected gap
or lag time between deregulation and reopening.8 Accommodation and food service work is the
lowest average gap industry (among businesses that are not fully open), but their two week average
lag is largely the byproduct of having extensive regulations that prevent reopening. Together with
arts and entertainment (another industry with a relatively short lag), many businesses are likely
on the edge of survival, and a speedy reopening may provide the only possibility of continued
existence. Construction has a slightly higher average lag, of about 3 weeks, but these firms
anticipate shorter regulatory restrictions, as much construction work occurs outside and so risks of
contagion may be lower.
For many large industries, the overall delay is split approximately fifty-fifty between expected
regulatory delay and post-regulatory delay. Retail trade, educational services and health care all
fit into this category. These industries expected significant delays overall that are explained by
both regulation and other factors.
Note that Table 4 excludes fully open businesses, so these summary statistics will not match those for the
pooled sample that includes all responses.
8

15

Professional services firms and those in information have relatively high average lags, as most of
these services can be delivered online relatively easily and these firms are likely to continue offering
their services remotely rather than returning to fully in-person offerings. The overall delay for
finance reopening is relatively short too, but all of that delay is attributable to firms’ choices rather
than regulation.
These cross industry differences show that in all industries there is an expected time gap between
the end of regulations and the reopening of businesses. The patterns do not suggest any consistent
explanation for what types of industries have the longest delays, as we see short delays in customer
facing business (like restaurants) and in businesses that do not have face-to-face interactions with
the customers (like construction). We will explore these patterns more systematically in the tables
that are to come.
Just as there is a clear political pattern to the expectations about the end of lockdown, there is
also a similar pattern to expectations about time spent closed after lockdowns end. Figure 12 shows
a series of correlations between the 2016 Republican vote share at the county level and our
expectation variables. The upper left hand graph shows the strong correlation across counties
between Republican vote share and expected time to reopening. Businesses in counties with the
lowest Republican vote shares expected to be closed for about two weeks longer than businesses in
counties with the highest Republican vote shares. This overall correlation could reflect either
expectations about regulations or about firm behavior when the regulations end.
The upper right hand side of Figure 12 shows the relationship between Republican vote share and
expected number of months until the regulations end. Businesses in the highly Republican counties
expect that the regulations will end about .3 months more quickly than businesses in the highly
Democratic counties. Consequently, expectations about the future of lockdown regulations can
explain some but not all of the gap in expectations about reopening dates. The lower left hand side
of the figure shows that the expected time between the end of lockdown regulations and reopening
also falls with the Republican vote share. Not only do more Republican areas expect the regulations
to end more quickly, they also expect to reopen more quickly once the regulations end.
The lower right hand side shows the share of businesses that expect to reopen during the same
time period when regulations end. This share also increases with the Republican vote share. But
the shares of firms that will not immediately reopen is everywhere significant. This delayed
reopening will shape the post-COVID recovery. We now turn to the reasons why firms might take
long to recover and then test these reasons.
To shed light on the quantitative tradeoffs of remaining closed for an additional two weeks, we
asked owners whether they would choose to open or close over two weeks if they received a grant.
We randomized the size of the grant, and whether or not the grant included a conditional for
receipt: to remain closed. We show the results graphically in Figure 16. Around three-quarters of
16

businesses chose to open with any sized grant when there was no condition to accepting the grant.
When the grant was conditional on closing, half of small businesses would remain closed for an
additional two weeks in exchange for a modest sum of $2,500, but a quarter of firms would reject
$25,000 to reopen immediately. This indicates that for about a quarter of businesses, opening as
soon as possible is of extreme value. For the majority of firms, the benefits or reopening for two
weeks is limited but of higher value than being closed.

IV. Why Won’t Businesses Re-Open After Lockdown?
We have documented that a sizable number of firms expect that they will remain closed after the
lockdown ends. In some cases, the delay before reopening is projected to last for months. We now
detail three different hypotheses about why firms may remain closed after lockdowns. We focus on
the decision to open for firms that anticipate opening eventually.9
Our first hypothesis is that firms will delay reopening because they anticipate that demand will be
limited. Limited demand could be due to either rising health costs of consumption or because
customers’ incomes have declined. The impact of reduced consumer demand will have a direct
impact on firms that sell directly to consumers. Reduced demand will also indirectly impact firms
that sell to other businesses if the downstream demand for those other businesses has faltered.
The survey directly asks owners about their future demand projections. If low demand is driving
delays, then future demand should be lower for firms that anticipate more time to open after legal
restrictions are lifted. Yet it is possible that firms that expect to delay reopening are merely
justifying their behavior with statements about reduced revenues, which would lead to a spurious
correlation between projected demand and reopening. We address this using two instruments for
future demand. First, we use experimentally induced variation in information about future demand,
which should shift owners’ beliefs. A helpful feature of the survey is that as survey respondents
were provided with information about projected demand from those who previously took the
survey. We then test whether the information-induced shifts in demand expectations translate into
changes in expectations about opening. Second, we focus on exogenous differences across industries
in the level of demand. We use the BEA input-output tables to calculate the share of downstream
businesses (i.e. business customers) that are in essential industries. We estimate separately the
effect of this measure on future demand projections for businesses that sell mainly to businesses,
and businesses that sell to consumers. For businesses that sell mainly to businesses, the share of
downstream businesses that are essential increases demand projections.
Our second hypothesis focuses on the health risks to owners and employees, rather than demand.
Both the entrepreneur and her workers may loath to reopen because of the risks of catching
We acknowledge that the same forces that would induce firms to delay opening may also lead them to
close altogether. Asking firms when they anticipate reopening was not done in the survey if owners
responded they intended to permanently close their business.
9

17

COVID-19, either from fellow workers or from customers. The importance of health concerns in
the owner’s decision to reopen will differ across firms because of (i) local prevalence of COVID-19
in the general population (ii) physical proximity to co-workers and customers (iii) owner age and
(iv) customer age. We test whether proxies for these different factors also predict a later reopening
date.
We proxy for COVID-19 prevalence in the outside population with COVID-19 cases per capita in
the county in which the business is located. We jointly address exposure to co-workers and
customers by using a measure of workers’ physical proximity to others, based on O-NET data. For
some firms in our sample, the owner’s age is available in Alignable’s administrative data. Finally,
we proxy for customer age via the MTurk survey instrument.
Typically, epidemiological predictions suggest that health risk increases with the interaction of
these variables. For example, proximity to other workers will be particularly dangerous -- and
demand from older customers may be particularly low -- based on the prevalence of COVID-19 in
the local area. We test whether delays are particularly prevalent in firms that have high levels of
risk along multiple dimensions.
Our third hypothesis is that firms will fail to reopen because of problems further back in their
supply chain. The complex lattice of business interactions and the complementarities across firms
creates the possibility of a significant coordination failure. Upstream firms don’t open because they
anticipate that their downstream firm customers will stay closed. Downstream firms don’t open
because they don’t expect to receive inputs from their upstream suppliers.
To test this hypothesis, we use responses to questions that directly ask whether respondents
anticipate supply problems or problems with downstream businesses and whether those problems
will delay their reopening. We then use the Bureau of Economic Analysis input-output account
data to predict timing of when downstream businesses open as a function of their classification as
an essential or inessential business. We test whether firms that are in industries that primarily
supply inessential businesses are themselves slower to open compared to firms in industries
primarily supplying essential businesses.

V. Will Health Fears Deter Reopening?
Will continuing fears of COVID-19 slow the expected speed of business reopening? We now look
at the correlation between reopening speed and health related variables, including the level of
COVID-19 cases, employee proximity and owner and customer age.

Table 5 provides our

core results, looking at firm expectations about reopening, future restrictions and reopening
conditional upon restrictions being lifted.
In regressions (1) and (4), we look at the expected time, in months, to fully reopen. Regressions
(2) and (5) focus on expectations about how many months it will take for restrictions on fully
18

reopening to be lifted. Regressions (3) and (6) estimate the impact of health-related variables on
reopening, controlling for the expected number of months until the full lifting of restrictions.
Regressions (1)-(3) include our entire sample of firms. Regressions (4)-(6) include only those firms
that are not currently open. Both samples have benefits and disadvantages. Using the entire sample
for a table that is focused on barriers to reopening includes many zeros, as those firms have already
either reopened or never been closed. But using the closed subsample is also problematic, because
the sample of firms that are closed looks quite different in low and high COVID counties.
Our primary specification is simply to use ordinary least squares regressions. We then check the
sensitivity to using OLS on censored outcomes.10 In the first column of Table 5, we look at the
overall correlates of time to reopening. The specification includes firms that are already open and
does not control for expectations about the lifting of current restrictions. The first row shows that
businesses expect to be closed longer in counties where the number of COVID cases is higher. A
100 percent increase in the number of cases per capita is associated with about .08 months, or 2.5
days, longer until reopening. This correlation is statistically strong, but it is modest in magnitude.
Using population-weighted statistics, the 90th and 10th percentile difference in log per capita
deaths is 2.85, implying an opening delay of about 7 days between hard-hit and less affected
counties.
The next two rows show the impact of worker proximity alone and then the interaction between
worker proximity and COVID-19 prevalence in the county. Employee proximity is a significant
predictor of delayed reopening. A one standard deviation increase in this variable is associated with
a .26 month, or 8 day, delay in reopening. Perhaps more surprisingly, there is no interaction
between COVID-19 prevalence and employee proximity. We hypothesized that employee proximity
would be more problematic in high COVID environments, but there is little evidence that this
interaction enters into firms’ expectations about reopening. Figure 13 repeats the exercise in Figure
9, using distribution functions of total time to reopening by industry rather than time to restrictions
being lifted. Patterns look very similar to the patterns regarding restrictions, with low proximity
industries opening sooner.
The fourth and fifth rows look at owner age and the interaction with COVID prevalence. We
expected that reopening would be less attractive to older owners who face greater mortality risk
from COVID and that this effect would be larger in high COVID environments. But older owners

For open firms, the time to reopening is censored from below at zero. For the closed firms, the time to
reopening is censored above because the latest date for reopening they could report was September or later.
To address censoring, Appendix Table A2 presents results using a Tobit regression. The results are similar
in sign, but the Tobit coefficients when including all businesses are often larger in magnitude.
10

19

do not seem to expect to delay reopening and there is no significant interaction between age and
the prevalence of the pandemic.
The sixth and seventh rows look at customer age and interactions with COVID prevalence. We
expected to find that firms with older customers would be more likely to delay their opening, either
because of reduced demand from skittish customers or out of concern for customers or legal liability.
The coefficient goes in the opposite direction, where firms that serve older customers expect that
they are more likely to open sooner. One possible explanation for this fact is that firms who serve
older customers specialize in products, including health services, which are more likely to face
robust demand. We also do not find a positive interaction between customer age and the COVID
rate in the county.
The eighth row shows that essential businesses expect that they will open .3 months (or nine days)
sooner than non-essential businesses. The ninth row shows the ease of operating online. This
variable does predict an earlier reopening, but the effect is relatively small.
The last two rows show the impact of our two other county level variables: density and the
Republican vote share in 2016. Density is negatively associated with time to reopening, either
because of health-related concerns or because of regulation. Republican vote share is even more
strongly negatively related to time to reopening.
The second column attempts to separate expectations about regulation alone from other firm beliefs
about their own decisions. The outcome variable in this column is the number of months until all
restrictions on business for this firm are lifted. Somewhat remarkably, almost all of the coefficients
are quite close to the coefficients estimated in the first column. For example, a 100 percent increase
in the number of COVID cases per capita is associated with a .08 month increase in the amount
of time until all restrictions are lifted. The similarity of slopes with respect to health concerns and
other factors suggests that a constant offset between lifting restrictions and reopening fits the data
quite well. For example, a one standard deviation increase in physical proximity is associated with
a one-third month increase in the expected time until restrictions are lifted. The coefficient is
slightly larger but similar to Column 1.
One modest difference between the two columns is that owner age is negatively associated with
the expected time until restrictions are lifted. That effect withstands county fixed effects, which is
shown in Appendix Table A3, so it does not reflect any spatial correlation between owner age and
local regulatory regimes. Older owners may be in industries that are less subject to local regulation,
or they may just be more optimistic.
Overall, the second regression shows that our proxies for health concerns, when they matter for
delays at all, seem to matter just as much for prognostications about the end of regulation.
20

Consequently, health fears may play little direct role in deterring firms’ reopening patterns. To
test this hypothesis, the third column looks at expectations about reopening, controlling for the
expected time until restrictions are expected to be lifted. The coefficients in this column can be
interpreted as telling us whether particular variables predict delays after reopening becomes legally
feasible.
If firms were going to delay reopening because of health fears for either their workers or customers,
then we would expect many of these coefficients to be significant both statistically and in
magnitude. Yet we find that almost none of them are sizable. Both the COVID case and physical
proximity coefficients retain statistical significance, but they are much smaller in size. The COVID
cases coefficient drops by about 75 percent between regressions (1) and (3). The coefficient on
employee proximity drops by over 80 percent. Figure 14 shows the gap in post-lockdown reopening
between high and low proximity industries. There is no visible difference in time to reopening after
lockdowns end. As we have already seen, this fact does not imply that there is no delay after the
restrictions end. There is a delay, but the average delay seems to be essentially independent of the
duration of the restrictions and is only loosely related with the health-related factors that we have
explored. Instead, regulations appear to explain most of the variation in reopening times.
Regression (4) considers an indicator for a reopening time greater than 1 month from the lifting of
restrictions. At the mean, 17.7% of the sample reports their planned date of fully reopening will
occur at least 4 weeks after the date they believe restrictions will end. This estimate is likely a
lower bound because we cannot calculate this lag for firms that believe restrictions will end after
August. Over 80 percent of firms anticipate reopening within a month of being able to do so, but
a significant share anticipate drawn out delays before fully reopening. There are only two significant
variables, essential business and Republican vote share, suggesting that much of the variation in
long delays is unrelated to health concerns.
Regression (5)-(8) repeat these regressions looking only at those firms that are currently closed or
partially open. These firms are a selected sample, and the selection depends on COVID cases at
the county level. A larger share of businesses are not fully open in counties with high levels of
COVID. Figure 15 shows the relationship between the share of businesses that are now open and
the level of COVID at the county level across counties with more than 110 businesses in our sample.
Over forty percent of firms are fully open in the counties with low COVID rates. Less than twenty
percent of firms are open in the counties near New York City that have the highest COVID rates.
This selection may explain why the level of COVID cases does not predict time to reopening in
the fourth regression among firms that are closed. In the high COVID counties, most firms are
closed and many of these closed firms have attributes that would make it easy for them to reopen.
In the low COVID counties, the firms that are well suited for being open are already open and
consequently only the most vulnerable firms are closed. Those firms may not expect to be open
21

soon. This selection problem makes it difficult to interpret all of the county level variables in this
later sample.
Only a few variables are significant in regression (5). Firms with older customers expect that they
will open sooner. Firms in essential industries expect that they will open sooner. Firms in counties
with a higher Republican vote share also expect that they will open sooner.
The sixth regression again looks at beliefs about when regulations will end. Those same coefficients
again predict expectations about deregulation Essential businesses expect regulations to end more
quickly. Firms in more Republican counties expect that regulations will end sooner. Firms with
older customers also expect that their regulations will end more quickly.
In the seventh regression, we look at the correlates of post-regulatory delay among the sample of
firms that are currently closed. The patterns in this regression are broadly similar to those before,
except physical proximity and the measure of local pandemic severity become insignificant for
explaining the lag among these businesses. These patterns continue to hold in column 8, where
28% of the businesses that were not fully open anticipated having delays in reopening greater than
1 month. The primary difference between this and other columns is that the sign on COVID cases
becomes negative, underscoring that the set of businesses in this regression are selected based on
differences in county characteristics.
This table and the related figures tell a clear story that health concerns matter greatly for
regulation, but not for firms’ behavior post-regulation. Firms with older customers expect to reopen
sooner rather than later. Greater COVID-19 prevalence predicts expected regulatory delay, but
does not predict economically significant differences in firm behavior post-regulation. We interpret
this as suggesting that firms opening behavior might suggest there are health concerns, but digging
deeper suggests these patterns arise because of regulations.
Another piece of evidence that supports this view is shown in Figure 16. We gave respondents a
hypothetical question about whether they would be willing to remain closed if they received either
an unconditional grant or a grant that is conditional upon remaining closed. We randomly varied
the size of the hypothetical grant. If owners wanted to remain at home because of health fears,
then we would expect the unconditional grant to have a large impact that increases with the size
of the grant, as larger grants would allow owners to consume or pay their bills without the need
to access cash flows generated from the business. Reopening decisions were invariant to the size of
the cash grant, which we interpret to suggest that owners are not trading off liquidity concerns
with worries about well-being.11

These findings contrast with other work that shows commuting often slowed dramatically before
lockdown regulations were put into place, suggesting that some firms stopped in-person work before they
11

22

This suggests there is substantial residual variation in reopening times that is not captured by
average health risk, conditions on the ground (cases, density), industry characteristics (proximity,
essential), or attitudes (GOP vote share). While regulation explains a substantial portion of the
reopening variability, much remains. We explore two additional hypotheses in the next section:
coordination with other businesses in the ecosystem and reductions in (or uncertainty about)
demand.

VI. Reopening and Coordination between Customers and Suppliers
The COVID-19 shock shut down wide swaths of the American economy. The decision to reopen a
business is not an independent decision by a solitary entrepreneur. That entrepreneur’s decision
will surely hinge on the presence of customers and suppliers. Upstream suppliers may have closed.
Consumers may have far less demand for a particular company’s products, either because of
COVID fears or because of reduced income. Downstream business demand may also have vanished,
either because of closure or because of other disruptions throughout the lattice of business
relationships.
Coordination problems may make reopening the American economy particularly rocky. If each
business waits for the other one to start work again, then that could add months to the delay
before full economic recovery. In this section, we estimate firm’s expectations about future demand
and whether those expectations can explain the time gap between the end of restrictions and fully
reopening.
Figure 17 illustrates the complementary nature of businesses throughout the U.S. The top panel
asks those businesses that are currently open “Although you are currently open, if these other
businesses closed, would it affect your ability to remain open? (Select the category that matters
most.)” Thirty six percent of open businesses said their ability to remain open would be impacted
if their business customers closed. A business’ survival is naturally contingent on the presence of
demand for its services or products.
Twenty-seven percent of businesses said that the closure of other businesses would not impact their
own survival. While this represents the second most common answer to this question, there were
still more than 70 percent of respondents who did not say that other businesses were irrelevant.
We interpret that fact as confirming the interdependent nature of business survival.
Almost as many firms noted that if their suppliers closed, then this would also affect their survival.
Suppliers mattered less than customers among this group, but both were important. A smaller
were forced to do so. On the reopening question, our analysis would point to more firms reopening quickly,
but it is possible that our analysis is putting more weight on small firms that had lower capacity for
telecommuting or were less exposed to potential health-related lawsuits.

23

share also cited the importance of businesses that refer them customers. If we add together the
businesses that refer and the business customers, we find that almost fifty percent of firms
emphasized downstream linkages. That share is almost double the 25 percent of firms that
highlighted upstream linkages.
This difference between upstream and downstream connections is also shown in the bottom panel
of Figure 17. This panel shows the responses to a question that was asked only of firms that were
temporarily closed or partially open: “are you waiting on other businesses to open before fully
opening yourself?” Somewhat surprisingly, more than one-half of our small businesses said no. A
majority of currently closed businesses do not require any coordination with other businesses. Sixtyfive percent of respondents to this question are in consumer-facing businesses, helping to explain
these results. For the business-to-business respondents presented with this question, it is likely that
their business customers were already open at the time of the survey.
Nonetheless, almost one-half of businesses did note that they were waiting on other businesses. The
largest category in this group was firms waiting on business customers. Together, more than 20
percent of respondents said that they were waiting for either customers or businesses that refer
customers to them. This represents more than 40 percent of the dependency in this sample. Later,
as we analyze how demand affects reopening, we examine this issue in more detail with data from
the BEA input/output tables.
Another 20 percent said that they were waiting on businesses that were similar to themselves to
open. While we might usually think that the reopening of other competing businesses would depress
demand for a particular enterprise, the respondents seemed to take the opening of their competitors
as a signal that demand has returned. There may also be some advantage to waiting and learning
from the reopening experience of similar firms.
Only five percent of respondents cited the need to wait until suppliers reopen. This share does not
mean that suppliers are important. The top panel confirmed that if supply relationships end, then
this can shut down a business. Instead, this means that currently closed firms are not worried as
much about supply, presumably because upstream firms are more likely to be open, or because
global supply chains allow them to source inputs from somewhere else. If upstream suppliers are
producing goods in lower density factories, then it was likely easier for them to remain operational
than downstream businesses.
These results confirm the importance of linkages for reopening, but also suggest that slightly more
than one-half of currently closed firms can reopen without any other firm reopening as well. The
results suggest that downstream linkages seem likely to be a more important challenge for reopening
than upstream linkages. For that reason, we now turn to the firm’s forecasts about future demand
and the impact of future demand on projected reopening behavior.
24

Forecasting Post-Crisis Demand
We start with the firm’s forecast about future demand. The survey asked owners to predict what
share of their pre-COVID demand would return in the future. The future date was one of six
randomized dates ranging from early May to September. The exact wording was: “If you are fully
open in [date], what share of your customers do you expect at that time, compared to before the
crisis? Please provide your best guess.” Response options were top-coded at “greater than 90
percent”.12
On average, across all industries, demand is expected to return to 65% of its pre-COVID level by
September. Table 6 reports both the share of firms that expected their demand to fully return (90
percent or more of their pre-crisis levels) and also reports the mean level of demand predicted,
again relative to pre-crisis levels.13
The first row shows that only seven percent of respondents in “arts, entertainment and recreation”
expected demand to exceed ninety percent of pre-crisis levels in May. That share only rises to 11
percent in September. Consequently, ninety percent of these firms expect to experience a decline
in demand of ten percent or more through the fall. The mean level of projected demand in this
industry begins at 37 percent of pre-crisis levels and reaches 55 percent of pre-crisis levels by
September. Firms in the arts expected a truly massive decline in demand for the near future.
Whereas the arts appear to be the more vulnerable sector, finance and insurance appears to be the
sector with the smallest reductions in demand. Even in May, the financial firms believe that they
will have two-thirds of their pre-crisis demand. That forecast rises to seventy percent by September.
Still only twenty-seven percent of all financial services firms project that their demand will be
ninety percent of pre-crisis demand or more by September.
The other face-to-face sectors, including educational services, retail trade and restaurants and
accommodation, all expect large decreases in demand through September. Accommodation and
food service providers expect their demand to be 58 percent of its pre-crisis level in September.
Eighty-seven percent of firms in educational services expect a ten percent or greater drop in demand
in September.
Industries that deliver information-intensive products are the most optimistic about future demand.
Professional and technical service providers predict that their demand will return to two-thirds

It is possible that our estimates miss some reallocation of demand because of top-coding of survey
responses (Barrero, Bloom, and Davis 2020). Table 6 allows an assessment by examining the share of
responses indicating demand would exceed 90% of its pre-pandemic level.
13
Appendix Table A4 shows a more granular industry breakdown.
12

25

crisis levels by September. Information service providers predict that their demand will be at 65
percent of pre-crisis levels by the same date.
These businesses expect a quite significant reduction in demand, and there is considerable
heterogeneity across industries in the expected drop in demand. Before we examine whether these
drops in demand can explain slow rates of re-opening, we turn to a more systematic exploration of
the correlates of predicted drops in demand.
Table 7 shows predictors of demand for all businesses (column 1) and businesses that are not fully
open (column 2). The regressions pool results for projected demand across future months, and
include a control for the reference month that was contained in the survey question. To separate
the impact of regulations from other factors, we control for the months until reopening restrictions
are lifted. In both columns, the length of delay until the lifting of restrictions is associated with
lower levels of demand. One more month of restrictions is associated with 17.4 percent lower
demand in the entire sample and a 13 percent reduction in demand in the sample that is currently
not fully open.
One interpretation of the correlation between the expected length of restrictions and the reduction
in demand could be that firms anticipate that consumers will switch to alternative suppliers and
alternative products if the delay lasts longer. In this case, the lost demand might be recouped
across different sectors of the economy, even though this specific firm has lost customers. An
alternative interpretation is that restrictions are correlated with reduced demand because both
reflect omitted factors, such as aspects of the health crisis that are not captured by our COVID
case measure.
With the exception of employee proximity, most of our health related variables are not correlated
with projected demand. The level of COVID cases itself is unrelated to the expected drop in
demand. Owner age is uncorrelated with projected future demand, while customer age is positively
correlated. Presumably, this reflects the tendency of older customers to have more stable
consumption patterns and to purchase services, like health care, that they are still likely to need
going forward.
A notable exception is businesses where employee proximity is higher. A standard deviation
increase in proximity reduces demand forecasts by between 7 to 9 percent across specifications,
and there is also a negative interaction effect with COVID cases, and magnitudes are larger for
businesses that are not fully open. Comparing these magnitudes for demand reductions in high
proximity businesses to these businesses’ reopening plans suggests that despite the potential for
demand to decline, owners will likely reopen high proximity businesses to serve a smaller customer
base. These workplaces appear able to operate at a smaller scale than their pre-pandemic levels,

26

possibly because the opportunity cost of operating (a service provider’s outside option) has
deteriorated.
Two other industry-specific variables also predict demand. Projected demand is about 11 percent
higher, in almost all specifications, for essential businesses than for non-essential businesses. This
supports the view that essential businesses are less volatile. If demand were not top-coded at
“greater than 90 percent” we might have detected an even larger boost in demand for essential
businesses.
There is also a greater drop in demand for businesses than can be performed online. One
interpretation for this fact is that the businesses in our sample expect that they will lose their
customers to online competitors. An alternative view is that ease of online delivery captures
relatively non-essential services.
Two place-based variables predict expected future demand. Future demand is generally higher in
more dense areas, possibly because these larger markets will make it easier for the businesses to
find a new set of customers. Future demand is strongly related to the share of Republican voters
in 2016.
The Impact of Demand on Re-opening
We now turn to the impact that projected demand will have on future reopening. Figure 18 splits
businesses based on their expectations about the share of businesses like them that will be open.
In this way, we can group firms based on their expectations for their sector, not just their own
firm. We then show the evolution of beliefs about customer demand based on beliefs about
reopening.
The top line shows those firms with the most optimistic projections about reopening also have the
most optimistic beliefs about future demand. The group that expects that ninety percent or more
of firms like themselves will be open also believes that they will have seventy percent of their precrisis demand in May, which rises to 75 percent by August. Firms that believed that 75 to 90
percent of firms like them will reopen expect demand to be slightly above 60 percent of pre-crisis
demand in May and closer to 70 percent of pre-crisis demand in August.
By contrast, the most pessimistic firms have very low expectations about market demand. Those
firms that project that 90 percent or more of firms like them will be closed estimate that demand
will have dropped by 75 percent in May relative to before the crisis. This group expects demand
to increase by August, but still to remain well below one-half of pre-crisis demand. Those firms
that expect that between eighty and ninety percent of firms like them will be closed also predict a
demand drop of more than fifty percent in August relative to the pre-crisis period. These relative
27

differences between groups suggest that demand and reopening decisions are likely closely linked
despite the potential for top coding in the survey to understate the extent of future demand.
However, the between projected demand and projected firm closure does not imply that demand
drops are causing firm closure or delayed reopening. Equally possible is that some respondents are
pessimistic overall and expect bad things to happen along every dimension. To address this issue,
we have two ways of estimating the causal relationship between demand and firm closures.
Our first source of exogenous variation is an information treatment within the survey itself. The
survey first asked people about expectations related to future demand. The survey then revealed,
to a randomly selected subset of respondents, the predicted changes in demand by other members
of the same business type (serving business customers or consumers), who expressed the same
concern about business dependencies, are in the same region of the U.S., and who were asked about
the same date in the future. The precise wording of the message was: “Based on your profile,
location, and concerns, our polls show that similar businesses anticipate [X] % of customers will
return by [date].” Date in this case is the same date used for subsequent questions about expected
demand. The survey then asked about their own beliefs about demand and finally about their
predicted behavior around re-opening. For individuals whose initial beliefs were below those in the
industry, the revelation pushes beliefs upward. For those with more pessimistic beliefs, the
revelation pushes beliefs downward. We use the gap between the aggregated information displayed
and the initial beliefs as our instrument. Initial beliefs are elicited through a related set of questions
at the beginning of the survey before the information is shared. Because these earlier questions
allow us to infer demand expectations (but do not ask about them directly), we combine the
questions that precede the information treatment in a linear model, estimated with ordinary least
squares, to predict beliefs for the exact question about return customers. The prediction model is
estimated only using an early batch of respondents that did not receive any information and who
are excluded from the remaining analysis. We refer to this prediction as the prior beliefs about
customer demand in Table 8.
Table 8 Panel B displays the first stage regression. The instrument, which is the interaction
between receiving information in the survey and the difference in the logarithm of the signal and
the constructed prior belief, has a strong positive impact on predicted demand. A 10 percent larger
gap between the signal and prior, or a 0.1 log point increase, leads to a roughly 2 percent increase
in the owner’s projected demand. This shows the posterior beliefs move in the direction of the
signal. Note that throughout this table, we present results with a standard set of controls germane
to the instrumental variable specification in particular. We also add columns with an additional
set of controls from the more expansive OLS specification in Table 5. Results are stable across
these two alternative specifications.

28

Columns 3- 10 show reduced form estimates, where the various outcomes (lags to reopening, lags
to reopening with restriction date fixed effects, indicators for long lags, and indicators for long-run
prospects) are regressed directly upon the instrument. These results are again stable across
specifications. The reduced form coefficients show the importance of the instrument, presumably
through the demand channel, on these outcomes.
Panel A presents the two-stage least squares estimates of the causal effect of changes in projected
demand. In column 1, we estimate that a 10 percent increase in projected demand decreases the
time to reopen by 0.088 months or roughly 2.7 days. This point estimate is stable when we include
additional controls for a range of industry (proximity, ease of conducting business online, etc.) and
geography (COVID cases, population density, GOP vote share, etc.). However, when we include
fixed effects for the projected date that restrictions will be lifted, the coefficient falls to 0.53,
meaning that a 10 percent demand increase will reduce time to open by about 1.6 days.
The estimates in columns 1-4 reflect changes in the average time to reopen caused by shifts in
demand projections. However, these means necessarily obscure differences across various margins.
Columns 5-6 look at long-lags of greater than 1 month. Here a 10 percent increase in demand
reduces the probability of a long delay in reopening by about 1.6 percentage points, or an 8 percent
reduction relative to the mean. This highlights the long-tail of reopening times, and suggests that
pessimistic owners are influenced by changes in their demand projections.
In column (7), we look at the probability of being operational by the end of 2020 as our dependent
variable. A 0.1 log point increase in the gap between the signal and the prior increases the expected
probability of survival by 3.1 percentage points. In other words, a twenty percent increase in
demand is predicted to increase the survival probability by six percentage points. Given that the
mean failure rate is twenty percent, a drop from twenty to fourteen percent is economically highly
significant.
What do these estimates imply for the delay in reopening? On average firms predicted that their
revenues will fall by 38 percent. Using the coefficient of -.168 in Panel A Column (5), this implies
that the drop in revenues (relative to pre-COVID levels) will cause an additional 6.4 percent of
firms to wait at least one month from when restrictions lift to when they choose to reopen. Since
less than 20% of the sample estimate a delay of one month or more once restrictions are lifted, the
drop in demand appears responsible for increasing the share of business with this kind of significant
delay by roughly 34 percent.
We also conduct another test of the demand that comes from the importance of downstream
relationships, based on interlinkages among businesses (Baqaee and Farhi, 2020). For every 3 digit
NAICS industry, we calculate the share of downstream businesses that were either essential or
inessential using the Bureau of Economic Analysis Input-Output Tables.
29

Figure 19 (red line) shows the relationship between time to open for consumer facing business and
the share of downstream firms that are essential, which we take as a reduced form for downstream
demand. Because downstream demand for consumer-facing businesses is mostly made up of
households, while this measure is about downstream sales to firms, we expect the relationship to
be weak, as confirmed by the red line in Figure 19. By contract, the blue line shows a much stronger
relationship between business-facing-businesses and the share of downstream businesses that are
essential. For business-facing firms, having 100% essential downstream sales compared to 0%
increases reopening speed by nearly 6 weeks. A test of the similarity of the reduced form coefficients
in this relationship is presented at the top of the figure.
Table 9 estimates the IV regression analog of the relationship between reopening and demand,
using the downstream share of customers in essential industries as an instrument. This exercise is
similar to that of Table 8, but instead we instrument with downstream industry characteristics.
While this has the benefits of introducing variation based on current conditions rather than future
projections, it has limitations due to the fact that 3 digit NAICS industries only provide a relatively
small number of observations with independent variation (we can match 75 industries to the BEA
data).
The final regression includes both the uninteracted share of downstream essential businesses (from
Figure 19) and the business-to-business indicator as controls. The instrument itself is defined as
the interaction of the downstream essential business share and the business-to-business indicator.
All specifications control for whether the owner’s own industry is essential, to account for the
possibility that suppliers of essential businesses may also be considered essential.
Our results look similar qualitatively to those in Table 8, although effect sizes are larger than those
documented previously. To provide context, we focus on delays that extend beyond one month, as
displayed in columns 5 and 6. According to these estimates, a 10 percent increase in demand
reduces the propensity for long delays by about 4 percentage points, or an approximately 20 percent
reduction relative to the mean. By contrast, the results in Table 8 imply a reduction in the
propensity for long delays by about 8.5 percent relative to the mean. The differences in estimates
likely reflect differences in the source of variation: with demand as currently realized based on
restrictions on inessential businesses contributing to realized changes for everyone. On the other
hand, the first stage relationship is weaker, which may give rise to additional imprecision in the
estimates. Both sources of variation, however, point to an important role for reduced demand (or
demand expectations) that hinder reopening.
The Impact of Demand and Other Variables on Survival
One of the most important questions about the COVID related lockdown is whether a temporary
period of firm closure will lead to permanent elimination of thousands or millions of American
30

businesses. Consequently, we now look at whether any of our variables predict survival until
December of 2020. We have already estimated the impact of demand on survival in the last two
columns of Tables 8 and 9, but we have not linked this survival rate with any of our other variables.
In both exercises, demand is positively related with long-run survival rates, often substantially so.
In Table 10, we build in the correlation between our core set of additional variables and the
probability of survival until December. The first two rows look at the impact of projected demand
and months until the end of restrictions. Projected demand positively predicts survival, but the
estimated coefficient is smaller than in all of the two stage least squares estimations.
The most striking and important fact is that the length of expected restrictions is strongly
negatively associated with the probability of survival. As the expected restriction duration increases
by 1 month, the probability of survival drops by 2.6 percentage points. This fact does not mean
that restrictions are wrong, but it does suggest that the economic cost of longer lockdowns,
especially as experienced by small entrepreneurs, is likely to be large. 14
Three other variables are significant in every specification. Essential businesses are between 1.2
and 2.1 percentage points more likely to survive. This gap could reflect the advantage of being able
to continue in business throughout the crisis, or it could reflect more stable demand for essential
businesses.
Firms with higher worker proximity are less likely to survive. A one standard deviation increase in
worker proximity is associated with more than a 1.5 percentage point decrease in the probability
of survival. This may reflect the expected difficulty of operating in a high contact work environment
over the coming months. Finally, businesses with older customers are more likely to survive,
possibly because this customer base is more stable. None of the other variables have reliable
correlations with the probability of survival.

VII. Conclusion
The Alignable Survey of Small Business Owners provides a snapshot of small business behavior
and expectations during the unprecedented COVID-19 crisis. Firms are gradually reopening, but
some places are reopening faster than others. Places with high Republican vote shares have both
eased restrictions more quickly and expect to see faster rates of business reopening.
Although restrictions are an important determinant of the reopening decision, many businesses
expect to delay reopening when the restrictions lift. The average business in our sample expects

Past work, since at least Hamilton (2000), suggests that many small businesses are likely to be fragile
even in good times. Related work studies how business owners respond to shocks over their careers (Dillon
and Stanton, 2017; Hincapie, 2020; Catherine, 2019).
14

31

to be closed two weeks longer than the restrictions last, although some businesses expect to be
closed for months after they are legally allowed to reopen. Policy-makers should not expect that
when the restrictions end that everyone will immediately rebound.
The delay in reopening does not appear to be related to health concerns, at least for the small
businesses in the survey. The lag between the predicted end of restrictions on operations and the
predicted time for reopening is not correlated with any of our measures of health risk. Neither
older customers nor an older owner predicts a longer delay after the end of restrictions. And while
COVID case prevalence predicts the presence of restrictions on operations into the future, COVID
cases per capita do not predict delays in opening after restrictions on operations are lifted. These
facts suggest that small firms’ reopenings are driven more by their economic needs to survive than
by their worries about public health.
Several other findings underscore the importance of demand projections and interdependencies
among businesses for owners’ reopening decisions. We use two different instruments for projected
demand that yield similar results, suggesting that the reopening decision is closely tied to
expectations about future demand. If downstream businesses don’t open, then this will reverberate
up through the network of firms.15 Adding to the headwinds businesses face, this crisis is both a
health crisis and an economic crisis. Businesses expect that the level of demand for their services
will be greatly depressed for many months to come.

15

See Akbarpour et al. (2020) for a discussion of other aspects of networks related to reopening policy.

32

References
Akbarpour, Mohammad, Cody Cook, Aude Marzuoli, Simon Mongey, Abhishek Nagaraj, Matteo
Saccarolak, Pietro Tebaldi, Shoshana Vasserman, Hanbin Yang (2020). “Socioeconomic
Network Heterogeneity and Pandemic Policy Response.” Manuscript.
Allcott, Hunt, et al. (2020). "Economic and health impacts of social distancing policies during the
coronavirus pandemic." Available at SSRN 3610422.
Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, Steven J. Davis, Kyle J. Kost, Marco C. Sammon, and Tasaneeya
Viratyosin (2020). “The unprecedented stock market impact of COVID-19.” No. w26945.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Baqaee, David, and Emmanuel Farhi (2020). “Nonlinear Production Networks with an Application
to the COVID-19 Crisis.”
Barrero, Jose Maria, Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis (2020). “Covid-19 is also a reallocation
shock.” No. w27137. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bartik, Alexander W., Marianne Bertrand, Zoë B. Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca, and
Christopher T. Stanton (Forthcoming). “The Impact of COVID-19 on Small Business
Outcomes and Expectations.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
Catherine, Sylvain (2019). "Keeping Options Open: What Motivates Entrepreneurs?." Available at
SSRN 3274879.
Dillon, Eleanor, and Christopher Stanton (2017) Self-employment Dynamics and the Returns to
Entrepreneurship. Working Paper 23168, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gupta, Sumedha, Thuy D. Nguyen, Felipe Lozano Rojas, Shyam Raman, Byungkyu Lee, Ana
Bento, Kosali I. Simon, Coady Wing (2020). “Tracking public and private response to the
COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence from State and Local Government Actions.” No. w27027.
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hincapié, Andrés (2020). "Entrepreneurship over the life cycle: Where are the young
entrepreneurs?." International Economic Review 61.2: 617-681.
Jaravel, Xavier and Martin O’Connell (2020). “Inflation Spike and Falling Productivity During
the Great Lockdown.”
Kahn, Lisa B., Fabian Lange, and David G. Wiczer (2020). Labor Demand in the time of COVID19: Evidence from vacancy postings and UI claims. No. w27061. National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Mongey, Simon, and Alex Weinberg (2020). "Characteristics of workers in low work-from-home
and high personal-proximity occupations." Becker Friedman Institute for Economic White
Paper.

33

Sears, James, J. Miguel Villas-Boas, Vasco Villas-Boas, and Sofia Berto Villas-Boas (2020). "Are
We# StayingHome to Flatten the Curve?"

34

Tables and Figures

Census
Survey

Share of Total Firms

.6

.4

.2

0

<5

5-9

19
10-

99

20-

9
-49
0
0
1

Figure 1: Firm Size in the Survey and Census
This figure plots the share of firms in each employment category for the 2017 Census of US Businesses and the
survey respondents. The sample size is 22,492 responses from May 9th survey wave with non-missing employment
data.

35

Share of Total Firms

.15

Census Share
Survey Share

.1

.05

0

C

ia

orn
alif

rk

Ne

o
wY

a
rid
Flo

xas

Te

ois

n
Illi

Pen

a

ani

lv
nsy

sey

Ne

er
wJ

io

Oh

gia

or
Ge

No

aro
hC

a

lin

rt

Figure 2: Firm Locations in the Census and Survey
This figure plots the share of firms in each state for the 2017 Census of U.S. Businesses and the survey respondents
for May 9, 2020. The sample size is 34,941 responses from May 9th survey wave with non-missing state data.

36

0.45

Share of Businesses

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

March 25

Temporarily Closed
Partially Open
April 8

April 22

May 9

May 20

Date

Figure 3: Shares of businesses with limited or no operations over time
This figure plots the share of firms by their operational status across waves of Alignable’s data collection. Prior
to the survey conducted on May 9, 2020 (the vertical line), partially open and fully open businesses were grouped
together. Temporarily closed businesses are tracked consistently throughout different surveys. N=117,672 across
different waves.

37

Share Temporarily Closed (May 9)

0.386 − 0.464
0.335 − 0.386
0.290 − 0.335
0.248 − 0.290
0.200 − 0.248
0.071 − 0.200
Figure 4: Shares of businesses temporarily closed by state in the May 9, 2020 survey
This figure plots the share of firms that are temporarily closed businesses as of the May 9th survey wave. N=33,001.

38

Share Temporarily Closed (May 9)

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25
0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

April Unemploment Rate

Figure 5: Shares of businesses temporarily closed and in each county and the county-level
unemployment rate
This figure plots the share of firms that are temporarily closed businesses as of the May 9th survey wave against
the county-level unemployment rate. N=32,763.

39

.8

Share High Proximity

.6

Above Median Population Density
Share Online Sales/Services
Share Customers Over 65
Share Owners Over 65
GOP Vote Share, County Level

0.65
0.58

0.50
0.46
0.43

.4

0.42

0.41

0.37
0.33

.2

0

0.25
0.21

0.23

0.26

Fully Open

0.23 0.24

0.25

0.26

0.23

Partially Open

0.24 0.25

0.26

Temporarily Closed

0.23 0.25 0.23

Permanently Closed

Figure 6: Characteristics of Businesses by Operational Status as of May 9, 2020
This figure plots characteristics of different businesses based on their industry characteristics, location characteristics,
or owner characteristics. Bars represent means and data are grouped by the operational status of the business as
reported in the May 9, 2020 survey. Please refer to Section 2 of the corresponding paper for detailed definitions of
each data source represented in this graph.

40

Share Temporarily Closed in May 9 Survey

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2
Low Proximity Industries
High Proximity Industries

0.1
March 25

Essential Businesses
Non-Essential Businesses
April 8

April 22

May 9

May 20

Date

Figure 7: Shares of Businesses that are Temporarily Closed based on Above and Below
Median Proximity and Essential and Non-Essential Industry Classifications
This figure plots the share of firms that are temporarily closed across waves of Alignable’s data collection, split
by whether the business is in an above or below median proximity industry. Proximity is defined by the O-NET
Physical Proximity measure “To what extent does this job require the worker to perform job tasks in close physical
proximity to other people?” We merge the proximity measure to the OES data based on occupation and then take
an employment-weighted average by industry. We thank Simon Mongey and Alex Weinberg for publicly sharing
this measure. Industries are classified as essential if they are on the list of essential NAICS codes in both Delaware
and Minnesota, two states that have done this classification based on NAICS industries.

41

Months until Restrictions are Lifted

1.52 − 1.98
1.36 − 1.52
1.11 − 1.36
0.96 − 1.11
0.83 − 0.96
0.49 − 0.83
Figure 8: Average of Respondent’s Perceived Months Until Restrictions Lifted, by State
This figure plots the average of respondents’ perceived number of months until legal restrictions on businesses’
ability to fully reopen will be lifted. Fully open businesses are included and take a value of 0.

42

100%

Share of Businesses Legally Able to Open

Low Proximity
High Proximity

75%

50%

25%

0%
May

June

July

Augu

st

Figure 9: Average Share of Businesses Expecting to be Legally Able to Reopen by Different Dates
This figure plots the distribution function by industry of respondents’ perceived number of months until legal
restrictions on businesses’ ability to fully reopen will be lifted. Fully open businesses are included and take a value
of 0. High proximity businesses, in yellow, are those above the median according to the proximity score. Green
indicates low proximity businesses.

43

4

5

8

12

23

60

t

6

2

3

6

12

41

7

ly

11

5

8

17

45

13

9

ne

13

10

16

43

13

9

9

ne

18

20

54

17

10

9

8

ay

17

52

11

8

6

3

6

ay

19

6

3

2

2

2

2

ug
us

be

Se

pt

em

be

ro

A

rl

ug

at

us

er

t

ly
Ju

ne

Ea
r

ly

La
te

Ju

Ju

ne

ay
M
La
te

Ea
r

ly

M
ay

Ea

rly

M

La
te

M

Ea

rly

Ju

La

te

Ju

Ju

A

pt
em
Se

When will you reopen?

ro

rl

at
er

16

When Will Restrictions Be Lifted?
The percent of respondents in each cell is displayed, normalized within columns. Due to rounding, columns may not sum to 100.

Figure 10: Patterns in regulation and reopening at the individual business level
This figure displays when each business owner expects easing of legal restrictions around “fully reopening” (x-axis)
and the expected date when they will “fully reopen” (y-axis). The x-axis is derived from the question “If there are
legal restrictions on fully reopening your business, when do you expect them to be lifted?”. Response possibilities
ranged from “There are no legal restrictions.” to “September or later”. The y-axis is derived from the question
”When will your business be fully open? Please provide your best guess.” Responses possibilities ranged from “Early
May” to “September or later”. Businesses that were fully open were not asked the question and are coded as 0.
Numbers in each cell are percent of responses within column.

44

2

District Of Columbia

New York

Months Until Reopen

Massachusetts
1.5

California
Illinois
Minnesota
Florida

Colorado

East North Central

Texas
1

East South Central
Mid Atlantic

Tennessee

Mountain
New England
Pacific
South Atlantic
.5

West North Central
West South Central

Wyoming
.5

1

1.5

2

Perceived Months Until Restrictions Lifted

Figure 11: Average Months Until Restrictions To Open Are Lifted and Expected Months
Until Fully Open
This figure plots averages of respondents’ estimated months to fully reopen (y-axis) against the state-level averages
of respondents’ perceived number of months before legal restrictions preventing “fully reopening” are lifted (x-axis).
The y-axis is derived from the question ”When will your business be fully open? Please provide your best guess.”
Responses possibilities ranged from “Early May” to “September or later”. Businesses that were fully open were not
asked the question and are coded as 0. The x-axis is derived from the question “If there are legal restrictions on
fully reopening your business, when do you expect them to be lifted?”. Response possibilities ranged from “There
are no legal restrictions” to “September or later”.

45

Panel A: Months until Reopening

Panel B: Months until Restrictions Lifted
1.3

1.7

Months Until Restrictions are Lifted

Months Until Reopening

1.6

1.5

1.4

1.3

1.2

1.2

1.1

1

.9

1.1
.2

.3

.4

.5

.2

.6

.3

Panel C: Months | Restrictions Lifted

.5

.6

Panel D: Share Opening with No Lag
0.78

P(Open as Soon as Restrictions are Lifted)

0.5

0.4

Months Until Reopening

.4

2016 County-Level GOP Vote Share

2016 County-Level GOP Vote Share

0.3

0.2

0.76

0.74

0.72

0.70

0.68

0.66

0.1
.2

.3

.4

.5

.2

.6

.3

.4

.5

.6

2016 County-Level GOP Vote Share

2016 County-Level GOP Vote Share

Figure 12: Effect of 2016 GOP Vote Share on Projected Time to Reopen and Time until
Restrictions Lifted
The x-axis in every panel is the county-level GOP vote share in the 2016 Presidential election. Panel A plots the
projected months until the business reopens. Panel B plots the projected months until restrictions are lifted. Panel
C replicates Panel A, but nets out fixed effects for projected months until restrictions are lifted. Panel D plots
the share of respondents who selected the same period for projected reopening date and the projected date by
which restrictions will be lifted. All plots contain state and 4-digit NAICS fixed effects, and control for population,
population density and COVID cases (all control variables have been transformed by the natural logarithm).

46

100%

Share of Businesses Fully Open

Low Proximity
75%

High Proximity

50%

25%

0%
May

June

July

August

Figure 13: Average Share of Businesses Projected to Be Fully Open in Each Industry by
Date
This figure plots the average share of businesses fully open or projected to be fully open at future dates. Each line
represents a 4-digit NAICS code and is constructed using the cumulative distribution of individual responses to
the question “When will your business be fully open? Please provide your best guess.” Line colors correspond to
whether the industry is above or below the median of the proximity measure, with high (yellow) and low (green).
Industries graphed have more than 20 observations. The average graphed includes all observation.

47

Share of Businesses Fully Open

100%

High Proximity

75%

Low Proximity

50%

25%

0%
0

5

10

15

20

Weeks since Restrictions Lifted

Figure 14: Average Share of Businesses Reopening in Each Industry, Represented as
Elapsed Weeks after Restrictions are Lifted
This figure plots the lag time in reopening between when respondents plan to reopen and when they are legally
allowed to do so. This is calculated as the difference between respondents’ projected reopening date and their
perceived date by which legal restrictions on operations will be lifted. Businesses that are fully open are included
at 0.

48

Share of Businesses Fully Open in May 9 Survey

.5

East North Central

Sarasota County, FL

East South Central
Mid Atlantic
Mountain

.4

Maricopa County, AZ

New England
Pacific

Clark County, NV

South Atlantic
West North Central
West South Central

Orange County, CA

.3

Middlesex County, MA
.2
Philadelphia County, PA Westchester County, NY

.1
-7

-6

-5

-4

ln(COVID Cases per Capita)

Figure 15: Share of Small Businesses Open and COVID Cases, by county
Each point is a county-level average; counties with fewer than 110 observations are excluded.

49

-3

1.0

Conditional Grant
Unconditional Grant

Probability of Being Closed

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000

50,000

Grant Size

Figure 16: Estimates of how cash on hand and conditional cash on hand change the decision
to remain closed
This figure plots how answers to a question about willingness to stay closed over the next 2 weeks changes as a
function of different hypothetical amounts of cash on hand. This is captured by “grant size” on the x-axis, which
comes from two parallel questions. Half of respondents (Unconditional Grant) were asked “Suppose we could extend
you a cash grant of [Grant Size]. Would you choose to open over the next two weeks?” The other half of respondents
(Conditional Grant) were asked “Suppose we could extend you a cash grant of [Grant Size] but only on the condition
that you remained closed for the next two weeks. Would you choose to open over the next two weeks instead of
taking the cash grant?” The sample for this figure comes from the first wave of a panel survey of Alignable users
conducted through Harvard Business School between May 20, 2020 and May 28, 2020 (N=780).

50

Panel A: Businesses that Are Fully Open in May 9 Survey
If these other businesses closed, would it affect your ability to remain open?
tome
s Cus
s
e
n
i
Bus

vant

Irrele

if O

Ope
thers

rs

36

se
n/Clo

Supp

27

liers

25

12

ers

stom
er Cu
f
e
R
t
ss tha
usine

B

]

p

Simil

[Com
iness
r Bus

1

mers
Custo
r
o
f
ete

0

a

10

20

30

40

Panel B: Businesses that Are Partially Open or Temporarily Closed in May 9 Survey
Are you waiting on other businesses to open before fully opening yourself ?

vant

Irrele

if O

sines

s [Co

S

52

17

tom
s Cus
sines

ers]
stom
u
C
r
e fo
mpet

iness

s
ar Bu
Simil

ess th

Busin

se
n/Clo
ers

Bu

r Bu
imila

Ope
thers

at

al De
[Sign
Cus
Refer

11

]

9

mand

6

rs
tome

Supp

liers

5

0

10

20

30

40

50

Percent of Respondants

Figure 17: Reopening decisions as a function of other businesses’ actions
This figure displays patterns of business dependency. Partially open or temporarily closed were asked “Are you
waiting on other businesses to open before fully opening yourself? (Select the category that matters most.).” Fully
open businesses were asked “Although you are currently open, if these other businesses closed, would it affect your
ability to remain open? (Select the category that matters most.)”.

51

Share of Pre-COVID Customers Returning

100%

Estimated Share of Similar Business Open
>90%

25%-50%

75%-90%

10%-20%

50%-75%

<10%

75%

50%

25%

0%
Early

May

Late

May arly June ate June
L
E

July

er
or lat
Sept.

Figure 18: Reopening patterns and customer demand
This figure plots estimated shares of customers relative to pre-covid customers across different dates, split out by
the respondents’ estimated share of similar businesses open. Each respondent was asked about the share of their
own customers and the expected share of similar businesses to their own that would be open by a particular date in
the future (x-axis). Respondents were asked about different dates at random to trace out patterns of demand over
time. Each dot represents the aggregation after between subject randomization of dates.

52

2.5

Consumer Facing βB2C = -0.094 (0.207)
Business-to-Business βB2B = -1.433 (0.710)
βB2B - βB2C = -1.340, p-value : 0.064

Months to Reopen

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

N: 16,430
B2B: 10,858
B2C: 5,572
0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Share of Business Customers in Essential Industries

Figure 19: Time to Reopen and Share of Business Buyers Classified as Essential
This figure combines the BEA Input/Output Supply table with essential business classifications from Minnesota
and Delaware to identify the share of downstream businesses for each NAICS code that are in industries categorized
as essential (x-axis). The y-axis is the projected months until the small business can fully reopen. The series are
split by taking the shares of industry output that goes to business buyers as intermediate good and to private
household consumption. Industries at the 33th percentile or lower (≤ 30% B2B output) are coded as consumer
facing. Coefficients are estimated in regressions with an indicator for whether the business itself is in an essential
industry, and standard errors are clustered at the 3-digit NAICS level, which is the level at which the BEA data are
available.

53

Table 1: Summary Statistics on Data from Survey and Additional Sources

Mo. until Reopen
Mo. until No Restrictions
Lag ≥ 4wks
Share Returning Customers
N. Employees (Jan, 2020)
Fully Open in May 9 Survey
Partially Open in May 9 Survey
Temporarily Closed in May 9 Survey
Permanently Closed in May 9 Survey
P(Open in December)

Mean
1.3245
1.0616
0.1772
54.0190
10.6323
0.3158
0.3401
0.3218
0.0223
0.7844

Panel A: Data from Alignable Survey
Std. Dev. 25th P’tile 75th P’tile
min/max
1.4882
0
1.75
0–4.5
1.4159
0
1.75
0–4.5
0.3819
0
0
0–1
29.4187
37.5
82.5
5–95
32.7679
1
7
0–500
0.4649
0
1
0–1
0.4737
0
1
0–1
0.4672
0
1
0–1
0.1477
0
0
0–1
0.1955
.609
.94
.133–.94

Obs.
28,981
28,443
28,220
27,263
20,492
33,001
33,001
33,001
33,001
17,098

Panel B: Data from Additional Sources

54

COVID Cases per cap.
Emp. Physical Proximity
Likelihood Customers Over 65
Ease Operating Online
Essential Business (DE & MN)
GOP Vote Share (County)
Share Output → Intermed. Input
Share Business Buyers in Essential Ind.

Mean
0.0045
3.4792
24.2701
24.4718
0.5305
0.4357
0.5342
0.5492

Std. Dev.
0.0058
0.4363
13.9077
14.9936
0.4991
0.1557
0.3519
0.3006

25th P’tile
0.0011
3.0806
12.5000
10.0000
0.0000
0.3331
0.1470
0.3250

75th P’tile
0.0053
3.8303
30.5000
37.0000
1.0000
0.5463
0.9067
0.7319

min/max
0.0000–0.0715
2.1565–4.4185
5.0000–87.5000
5.0000–65.0000
0.0000–1.0000
0.0412–0.8985
0.0002–1.0000
0.0000–1.0000

Obs.
32,079
19,058
22,728
22,728
22,755
32,763
18,124
20,872

Note: Panel A presents summary statistics for survey responses. “Mo. until Reopen” and “Mo. until No Restrictions” are the perceived
months until the business will be fully open, and the perceived months until it is legal to fully open, respectively. These figures are
relative to the survey date of May 9. Responses were topcoded at “September or Later”, which we top code at 4.5 months from early
May. “N. Employees (Jan, 2020)” is the self reported number of employees, including the respondent, in January 2020. The four
indicator variables regarding current status as of the May 9 survey correspond to the four options of the first question asked to
respondents. For this reason, these variables have the most observations. “P(Open in December)” is the numeric probability that a
businesses remains open in December, 2020. We code these probabilities from a multiple choice question shown to respondents. This is
the last question in the survey, which accounts for the fact that this variable has the fewest responses.text provides more detail about
survey completion rates. par Panel B presents summary statistics for data taken from outside sources. “COVID Cases per cap.” is the
county-level number of COVID cases per capita. “Emp. Physical Proximity” is the the weighted average of a 5 point occupational
proximity scale over the industry-level (4-digit NAICS) distribution of occupations. “Likelihood Customers Over 65” and “Ease
Operating Online” are derived from MTurk answers at the 4-digit NAICS level. (See appendix for the MTurk data collection tool.)
“Essential Business (DE & MN)” is an indicator variable that indicates if a businesses was considered essential in the guidelines made
available in Deleware and Minnesota. “GOP Vote Share (County)” is the share of votes for the Republican Presidential candidate in
2016. “Share Output → Intermed. Input” is derived from the BEA 2012 Use table and is the share of total 3-digit industry output that
used as intermediate inputs. “Share Business Buyers in Essential Ind.” is derived from the same BEA series, as well as the “Essential
Business (DE & MN)” measure. This is the share of output that is used as an input by industries we identify as essential divided by the
total output that is used as intermediate inputs.

Table 2: Summary Statistics by States with Stay at Home Orders in Place as-of May 9

No Stay at Home
Stay at Home

Temporarily
Closed
0.272
0.360

Partially
Open
0.338
0.340

55

Months Until
Reopen
1.384
1.700

Months Until
No Restrictions
1.083
1.435

Table 3: Factors Contributing to Differences in Operational Status
(1)
Fully Open

(2)
Partially Open

(3)
Temp. Closed

(4)
Perm. Closed

-0.1047∗∗∗
(0.0039)

-0.0159∗∗∗
(0.0043)

0.1170∗∗∗
(0.0041)

0.0036∗∗∗
(0.0013)

0.0011∗
(0.0006)

-0.0010∗
(0.0006)

-0.0006
(0.0006)

0.0004∗∗
(0.0002)

Customers Over 65

-0.0085∗∗∗
(0.0033)

0.0132∗∗∗
(0.0035)

-0.0028
(0.0033)

-0.0019∗
(0.0010)

Essential Business

0.1193∗∗∗
(0.0063)

0.0434∗∗∗
(0.0068)

-0.1587∗∗∗
(0.0070)

-0.0040∗
(0.0023)

Ease Operating Online

-0.0157∗∗∗
(0.0039)

-0.0085∗∗
(0.0039)

0.0235∗∗∗
(0.0040)

0.0007
(0.0010)

ln(COVID cases per cap.)

-0.0317∗∗∗
(0.0044)

0.0059∗∗
(0.0028)

0.0260∗∗∗
(0.0047)

-0.0002
(0.0008)

ln(Pop. Density)

0.0147∗∗∗
(0.0039)

-0.0042
(0.0026)

-0.0103∗∗∗
(0.0038)

-0.0002
(0.0007)

GOP Vote Share (County)

0.3222∗∗∗
(0.0287)

-0.0822∗∗∗
(0.0247)

-0.2303∗∗∗
(0.0337)

-0.0097
(0.0066)

0.317
0.465
0.451
0.0596
32,763

0.340
0.474
0.472
0.0059
32,763

0.321
0.467
0.450
0.0708
32,763

0.022
0.147
0.147
0.0024
32,763

Emp. Physical Proximity
Owner Age

DV Mean
DV SD
Residual SD
R2
N

Note: These columns correspond to answers to the question “Are you currently open?”. These options are collectively
exhaustive and mutually exclusive. Employee Physical Proximity, Customers Over 65, and Ease Operating Online are
converted to z-scores. Standard errors are clustered at the county level. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

56

Table 4: Time to Reopen by Industry (2-digit NAICS) for firms that are not fully open

Accommodation and Food Services
Other Services, Except Public Administration
Management of Companies and Enterprises
Retail Trade
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation
Finance and Insurance
Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
Construction
Educational Services
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting
Manufacturing
Health Care and Social Assistance
Public Administration
Utilities
Administrative and Waste Services
Wholesale Trade
Professional and Technical Services
Information
Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction
Transportation and Warehousing

57

Reopen

Lag

Lag ≥ 4 weeks

2.241
1.828
0.750
1.755
2.647
1.783
1.928
1.747
2.482
2.034
2.008
1.986
2.519
1.938
2.388
1.870
2.154
2.698
1.884
2.376

0.461
0.496
0.500
0.534
0.585
0.589
0.611
0.625
0.706
0.711
0.740
0.762
0.776
0.793
0.835
0.845
0.872
0.954
1.019
1.027

0.204
0.217
0.000
0.228
0.241
0.277
0.275
0.278
0.271
0.311
0.305
0.317
0.333
0.348
0.337
0.331
0.356
0.381
0.308
0.416

Table 5: OLS: Contribution of Various Factors to the Small Business Reopen Decision
(1)
Reopen

(2)
(3)
Restrictions
Lag
All Businesses

(4)
Lag ≥ 4wk

(5)
Reopen

(6)
(7)
(8)
Restrictions
Lag
Lag ≥ 4wk
Excluding Fully Open Businesses

ln(COVID cases per cap.)

0.0813∗∗∗
(0.0125)

0.0812∗∗∗
(0.0127)

0.0219∗∗∗
(0.0077)

0.0055∗
(0.0030)

0.0211∗
(0.0111)

0.0444∗∗∗
(0.0128)

0.0101
(0.0098)

-0.0003
(0.0037)

Emp. Physical Proximity

0.2556∗∗∗
(0.0542)

0.3068∗∗∗
(0.0654)

0.0457∗
(0.0273)

0.0128
(0.0109)

0.0195
(0.0486)

0.1177∗
(0.0621)

-0.0189
(0.0353)

-0.0060
(0.0106)

0.0034
(0.0089)

0.0015
(0.0106)

0.0037
(0.0047)

0.0006
(0.0018)

0.0072
(0.0082)

-0.0049
(0.0103)

0.0066
(0.0061)

0.0023
(0.0018)

-0.0014
(0.0026)

-0.0063∗∗∗
(0.0024)

0.0031
(0.0022)

0.0007
(0.0007)

0.0009
(0.0028)

-0.0068∗∗
(0.0030)

0.0028
(0.0025)

0.0004
(0.0008)

0.0002
(0.0002)

-0.0002
(0.0003)

0.0003
(0.0002)

0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0002
(0.0002)

-0.0003
(0.0003)

0.0002
(0.0002)

0.0000
(0.0001)

-0.1135∗∗∗
(0.0377)

-0.0908
(0.0566)

-0.0498
(0.0316)

-0.0073
(0.0100)

-0.0709∗
(0.0405)

-0.0462
(0.0678)

-0.0722∗∗
(0.0313)

-0.0139
(0.0124)

-0.0124∗∗
(0.0063)

-0.0068
(0.0091)

-0.0075
(0.0051)

-0.0021
(0.0016)

-0.0012
(0.0070)

0.0063
(0.0111)

-0.0068
(0.0053)

-0.0021
(0.0022)

Essential Business

-0.3010∗∗∗
(0.0226)

-0.3267∗∗∗
(0.0232)

-0.0720∗∗∗
(0.0170)

-0.0265∗∗∗
(0.0056)

-0.1222∗∗∗
(0.0277)

-0.2291∗∗∗
(0.0304)

-0.0488∗∗
(0.0216)

-0.0186∗∗∗
(0.0067)

Ease Operating Online

0.0451∗∗∗
(0.0128)

0.0275∗∗
(0.0119)

0.0252∗∗
(0.0107)

0.0048
(0.0034)

0.0226
(0.0151)

0.0068
(0.0158)

0.0256∗
(0.0132)

0.0031
(0.0042)

ln(Pop. Density)

-0.0430∗∗∗
(0.0106)

-0.0471∗∗∗
(0.0113)

-0.0100
(0.0062)

-0.0024
(0.0021)

-0.0180∗
(0.0102)

-0.0358∗∗∗
(0.0118)

-0.0071
(0.0088)

-0.0006
(0.0029)

GOP Vote Share (County)

-1.3072∗∗∗
(0.0847)

-1.0771∗∗∗
(0.0940)

-0.5805∗∗∗
(0.0600)

-0.1707∗∗∗
(0.0211)

-0.9999∗∗∗
(0.0893)

-0.8412∗∗∗
(0.1063)

-0.6130∗∗∗
(0.0791)

-0.1573∗∗∗
(0.0264)

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

1.306
1.487
1.451
0.0484
28,034

1.051
1.408
1.368
0.0567
28,034

1.306
1.487
1.116
0.4366
28,034

0.177
0.381
0.375
0.0329
28,034

2.073
1.386
1.372
0.0194
17,659

1.669
1.455
1.439
0.0227
17,659

2.073
1.386
1.160
0.2993
17,659

0.280
0.449
0.379
0.2884
17,659

× ln(COVID cases p.c.)
Owner Age
× ln(COVID cases p.c.)
Customers Over 65
× ln(COVID cases p.c.)

58
Restriction FE
DV Mean
DV SD
Residual SD
R2
N

Note: Reopen is the expected months to reopen. Restriction is the estimated months until restrictions are lifted. Lag takes the same
outcome as Reopen, but adds a fixed effect for Restriction. Lag ≥ 4wk is a indicator variable that evaluates to 1 if the firm’s estimated
reopening date is at least one month/four weeks after the estimated date restrictions are lifted. Businesses that were permanently closed
at the time of the survey are excluded from these regressions; businesses that were fully open at the time of the survey are excluded from
columns 5 − 8. Employee Physical Proximity, Customers Over 65, and Ease Operating Online are converted to z-scores. Standard errors
in parentheses, clustered at county level. Note that the survey questions in which reopening and restriction beliefs are elicited is mid-way
through the survey, thus in some columns we are able to have more observations than we have complete survey responses. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗
p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table 6: Expected Demand By Industry (NAICS 2-DIGIT)

Industry
Share Expecting
Arts, Entertainment, & Recreation
Educational Services
Accommodation & Food Services
Retail Trade
Admin. and Waste Services
Real Estate & Leasing
Information
Manufacturing
Health Care & Social Assistance
Professional & Technical Services
Other Services, Except Public Admin.
Construction
Finance and Insurance

May
>90% Mean
0.07
0.37
0.08
0.47
0.02
0.42
0.10
0.51
0.14
0.47
0.14
0.54
0.15
0.53
0.12
0.56
0.07
0.55
0.18
0.54
0.12
0.54
0.17
0.59
0.19
0.66

June
>90% Mean
0.07
0.43
0.07
0.47
0.05
0.48
0.13
0.55
0.13
0.48
0.16
0.57
0.19
0.57
0.14
0.60
0.13
0.58
0.18
0.58
0.15
0.58
0.18
0.60
0.28
0.66

July
>90% Mean
0.07
0.44
0.11
0.53
0.06
0.50
0.15
0.57
0.18
0.51
0.20
0.60
0.22
0.59
0.13
0.59
0.15
0.61
0.19
0.62
0.16
0.60
0.19
0.63
0.26
0.65

September
>90% Mean
0.11
0.55
0.13
0.60
0.14
0.58
0.17
0.64
0.18
0.60
0.20
0.61
0.20
0.65
0.21
0.67
0.22
0.70
0.24
0.67
0.24
0.68
0.25
0.69
0.27
0.70

N
1851
832
1452
3057
1085
2162
586
1744
2331
3985
2322
1998
1629

59

Notes. This table reports answers to a question about the expected share of customers returning by a certain randomly chosen
date in the future. Each cell reports a share of customers relative to pre-COVID customers conditional on being able to classify
industries. Columns are the share of respondents who report having greater than 90% of pre-COVID customers (the highest
category) and then mean share of pre-COVID customers using the mid-point of categorical answers.

Table 7: Contribution of Various Factors to Projected ln(Share Returning Customers)
(1)
All Businesses

(2)
Excluding Fully Open Businesses

Mo. until No Restrictions

-0.1739∗∗∗
(0.0044)

-0.1296∗∗∗
(0.0051)

ln(COVID cases per cap.)

-0.0063
(0.0065)

-0.0016
(0.0080)

Emp. Physical Proximity

-0.0785∗∗∗
(0.0238)

-0.0840∗∗∗
(0.0233)

-0.0114∗∗∗
(0.0039)

-0.0175∗∗∗
(0.0040)

0.0001
(0.0014)

-0.0007
(0.0018)

-0.0001
(0.0001)

-0.0001
(0.0002)

0.0628∗∗
(0.0270)

0.0530∗
(0.0281)

0.0069
(0.0044)

0.0033
(0.0048)

Essential Business

0.1217∗∗∗
(0.0118)

0.1110∗∗∗
(0.0150)

ln(Pop. Density)

0.0150∗∗
(0.0059)

0.0178∗∗
(0.0076)

Ease Operating Online

-0.0382∗∗∗
(0.0069)

-0.0409∗∗∗
(0.0089)

GOP Vote Share (County)

0.4473∗∗∗
(0.0482)

0.4952∗∗∗
(0.0608)

3.727
0.876
0.798
0.1694
26,784

3.557
0.921
0.844
0.1608
17,880

× ln(COVID cases p.c.)
Owner Age
× ln(COVID cases p.c.)
Customers Over 65
× ln(COVID cases p.c.)

DV Mean
DV SD
Residual SD
R2
N

Note: The outcome in all columns is the logarithm of projected demand, measured as the answer to the question “If you are
fully open by randomized date, what share of your customers do you expect at that time, compared to before the crisis?
Please provide your best guess”. Employee Physical Proximity, Customers Over 65, and Ease Operating Online are
converted to z-scores. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at county level. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

60

Table 8: Instrumenting Expected Customer Demand: Information Treatment
Panel A: 2SLS
(1)
Reopen

(2)
Reopen†

(3)
Lag

(4)
Lag†

(5)
Lag ≥ 4wk

(6)
Lag ≥ 4wk†

(7)
Open Dec.

(8)
Open Dec.†

-0.881∗∗∗
(0.187)

-0.860∗∗∗
(0.194)

-0.531∗∗
(0.217)

-0.533∗∗
(0.211)

-0.168∗∗
(0.084)

-0.155∗
(0.083)

0.318∗∗∗
(0.043)

0.333∗∗∗
(0.044)

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Additional Controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Kleibergen-Paap F stat

8.3

9.4

8.3

9.3

8.3

9.3

9.0

10.2

1.38
1.49
0.70
16,275

1.38
1.49
0.70
16,275

0.19
0.39
0.79
16,183

1.37
1.49
0.79
16,183

0.19
0.39
0.46
16,183

0.19
0.39
0.47
16,183

0.79
0.18
0.90
13,391

0.79
0.18
0.90
13,391

ln(Share Customers Returning)
Restriction FE

Mean Dep. Var.
Std. Dev. Dep. Var.
R2
Observations

Panel B: First-Stage and Reduced Form
First Stage

ln(Signal/Prior) × Shown Info

Reduced Form

61

(1)
Demand

(2)
Demand†

(3)
Reopen

(4)
Reopen†

(5)
Lag

(6)
Lag†

(7)
Lag ≥ 4wk

(8)
Lag ≥ 4wk†

(9)
Open Dec.

(10)
Open Dec.†

0.190∗∗∗
(0.045)

0.188∗∗∗
(0.042)

-0.237∗∗∗
(0.049)

-0.234∗∗∗
(0.045)

-0.144∗∗
(0.055)

-0.145∗∗∗
(0.050)

-0.042∗
(0.023)

-0.039∗
(0.021)

0.083∗∗∗
(0.006)

0.085∗∗∗
(0.005)

Restriction FE

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Additional Controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Mean Dep. Var.
Std. Dev. Dep. Var.
R2
Observations

3.72
0.87
0.34
16,275

3.72
0.87
0.34
16,275

1.38
1.49
0.52
16,275

1.38
1.49
0.52
16,275

1.37
1.49
0.63
16,183

1.37
1.49
0.63
16,183

0.19
0.39
0.39
16,183

0.19
0.39
0.39
16,183

0.79
0.18
0.10
13,391

0.79
0.18
0.10
13,391

Note: In Panel A, the dependent variable in Col. (1,2) Reopen is the expected months to reopen. The dependent variable in Col. (3,4)
Lag is the same outcome (that is, months until reopening), but includes a fixed effect for the date restrictions are lifted. In Col. (5,6) Lag
≥ 4wk is a indicator variable that evaluates to 1 if the firm’s estimated reopening date is at least one month/four weeks after the
estimated date restrictions are lifted. In Col. (7,8) the dependent variable Open Dec. is the self-reported probability of being operational
by December 31st, 2020. Controls across all regressions include the prior and the gap between the signal and the prior (log units), date
fixed effects, the current status of business, the essential classification. In Panel B, the dependent variable in Col. (1) is the log expected
demand, the response to the question “If you are fully open by randomized date, what share of your customers do you expect at that
time, compared to before the crisis? Please provide your best guess.” The instrument for expected demand is an information instrument
is shown to a random subset of participants before we elicit demand expectations. The message received is “Before continuing, we want
to share some interesting information. Based on your profile, location, and concerns, our polls show that similar businesses anticipate
[rolling mean] % of customers will return by [future date].” †: Columns with additional controls contain the additional controls from the
main OLS specification in Table 5, namely the natural logarithm of (1+COVID cases per capita), physical proximity, owner age,
likelihood of having customers over 65, ease of conducting business online, the natural logarithm of population density, and the
county-level share of the vote that went to the Republican candidate in the 2016 presidential election. Standard errors are clustered at
the region × business type level, which is the level at which the information treatment is assigned. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table 9: Instrumenting Expected Customer Demand: Essential Downstream Businesses
Panel A: 2SLS
(1)
Reopen

(2)
Reopen†

(3)
Lag

(4)
Lag†

(5)
Lag ≥ 4wk

(6)
Lag ≥ 4wk†

(7)
Open Dec.

(8)
Open Dec.†

-2.446∗∗∗
(0.365)

-2.464∗∗∗
(0.490)

-1.766∗∗∗
(0.515)

-2.081∗∗∗
(0.556)

-0.363∗∗∗
(0.117)

-0.411∗∗∗
(0.118)

0.129∗∗∗
(0.049)

0.087∗
(0.046)

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Additional Controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Kleibergen-Paap F stat

3.4

3.5

3.8

4.2

3.8

4.2

2.8

2.4

1.43
1.52
0.08
15,859

1.43
1.52
0.07
15,859

1.43
1.52
0.45
15,777

1.43
1.52
0.31
15,777

0.19
0.40
0.04
15,777

0.19
0.40
-0.05
15,777

0.80
0.18
0.95
13,213

0.80
0.18
0.96
13,213

ln(Share Cust. Returning)
Restriction FE

Mean Dep. Var.
Std. Dev. Dep. Var.
R2
Observations

Panel B: First-Stage and Reduced Form
First Stage

Share Essential Buyers × B2B

Reduced Form

62

(1)
Demand

(2)
Demand†

(3)
Reopen

(4)
Reopen†

(5)
Lag

(6)
Lag†

(7)
Lag ≥ 4wk

(8)
Lag ≥ 4wk†

(9)
Open Dec.

(10)
Open Dec.†

0.528∗
(0.286)

0.465∗
(0.250)

-1.292∗
(0.713)

-1.147∗
(0.628)

-0.638∗
(0.359)

-0.781∗∗
(0.366)

-0.131
(0.080)

-0.155∗
(0.081)

0.064∗
(0.036)

0.034
(0.029)

Restriction FE

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Additional Controls

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

Mean Dep. Var.
Std. Dev. Dep. Var.
R2
Observations

3.72
0.88
0.09
15859.00

3.72
0.88
0.11
15859.00

1.43
1.52
0.05
15859.00

1.43
1.52
0.08
15859.00

1.43
1.52
0.42
15777.00

1.43
1.52
0.43
15777.00

0.19
0.40
0.04
15777.00

0.19
0.40
0.05
15777.00

0.80
0.18
0.02
13213.00

0.80
0.18
0.03
13213.00

Note: In Panel A, the dependent variable in Col. (1,2) Reopen is the expected months to reopen. The dependent variable in Col. (3,4)
Lag is the same outcome (that is, months until reopening), but includes a fixed effect for the date restrictions are lifted. In Col. (5,6) Lag
≥ 4wk is a indicator variable that evaluates to 1 if the firm’s estimated reopening date is at least one month/four weeks after the
estimated date restrictions are lifted. In Col. (7,8) the dependent variable Open Dec. is the self-reported probability of being operational
by December 31st, 2020. In Panel B, the dependent variable in Col. (1,2) is the log expected demand, the response to the question “If
you are fully open by randomized date, what share of your customers do you expect at that time, compared to before the crisis? Please
provide your best guess.” The instrument for expected demand is the share of downstream business buyers that are in essential industries
interacted with an indicator for whether the business is in a B2B industry; see Section II for further discussion of the BEA data used to
construct this measure. All specifications include controls for the date at which demand beliefs are elicited, the (uninteracted) share of
downstream business buyers that are in essential industries, an indictor for whether the business is in a B2B industry, and an indicator
for whether the business is in an essential industry. †: Columns with additional controls contain the additional controls from the main
OLS specification in Table 5, namely the natural logarithm of (1+COVID cases per capita), physical proximity, owner age, likelihood of
having customers over 65, ease of conducting business online, the natural logarithm of population density, and the county-level share of
the vote that went to the Republican candidate in the 2016 presidential election. Standard errors are clustered at the industry level. ∗
p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table 10: Factors Contributing to the Probability of Being Open in December, 2020
(1)
Mo. until No Restrictions

(2)

-0.0256∗∗∗
(0.0011)

ln(Share Returning Customers)

(3)
-0.0164∗∗∗
(0.0011)

0.0637∗∗∗
(0.0018)

0.0567∗∗∗
(0.0019)

ln(COVID cases per cap.)

0.0014
(0.0015)

-0.0001
(0.0015)

0.0011
(0.0015)

Emp. Physical Proximity

-0.0213∗∗∗
(0.0050)

-0.0213∗∗∗
(0.0058)

-0.0168∗∗∗
(0.0052)

-0.0017∗
(0.0009)

-0.0009
(0.0010)

-0.0010
(0.0009)

0.0000
(0.0004)

0.0001
(0.0004)

0.0000
(0.0004)

-0.0001∗
(0.0000)

-0.0001
(0.0000)

-0.0001∗
(0.0000)

0.0154∗∗∗
(0.0055)

0.0116∗∗
(0.0049)

0.0110∗∗
(0.0046)

0.0009
(0.0009)

0.0004
(0.0008)

0.0004
(0.0008)

Essential Business

0.0212∗∗∗
(0.0031)

0.0172∗∗∗
(0.0030)

0.0128∗∗∗
(0.0030)

ln(Pop. Density)

-0.0002
(0.0014)

-0.0000
(0.0013)

-0.0006
(0.0013)

Ease Operating Online

-0.0012
(0.0017)

0.0007
(0.0016)

0.0009
(0.0016)

GOP Vote Share (County)

0.0165
(0.0123)

0.0042
(0.0114)

-0.0077
(0.0114)

0.792
0.185
0.180
0.0594
16,677

0.792
0.185
0.175
0.1087
16,677

0.792
0.185
0.174
0.1225
16,677

× ln(COVID cases p.c.)
Owner Age
× ln(COVID cases p.c.)
Customers Over 65
× ln(COVID cases p.c.)

DV Mean
DV SD
Residual SD
R2
N

Note: The outcome in all columns is the answer to the question “What is the likelihood of your business remaining
operational by Dec. 31, 2020? Please provide your best guess.”. Businesses that were permanently closed at the time of the
survey are excluded from these regressions. Employee Physical Proximity, Customers Over 65, and Ease Operating Online
are converted to z-scores. Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at county level. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

63

A

Appendix: Additional Tables
Table A1: Census Industry versus Survey Industry Breakdown
Industry
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting
Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction
Utilities
Construction
Manufacturing
Wholesale and Retail Trade
Transportation and Warehousing
Information
Finance and Insurance
Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services
Management of Companies and Enterprises
Administrative and Support and Waste Remediation Svcs
Educational Services
Health Care and Social Assistance
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation
Accommodation and Food Services
Other Services (except Public Administration)

Census Percentage
0.4
0.3
0.1
11.7
4.1
15.7
3.1
1.3
4.0
5.2
13.5
0.3
5.8
1.5
10.9
2.2
9.0
11.6

Survey Percentage
1.1
0.3
0.3
7.6
6.0
13.1
1.2
2.1
6.8
8.8
14.6
0.0
3.8
3.3
8.8
6.9
5.2
9.2

Notes. This table reports results of Census and Survey shares by industry for firms with fewer than 500 employees.
Survey response shares are conditional on being able to classify industries, with unavailable or “Other” industry
classifications omitted from the denominator. We combine wholesale and retail trade.

64

Table A2: Tobit: Contribution of Various Factors to the Small Business Reopen Decision
(1)
Reopen

(2)
(3)
Restrictions
Lag
All Businesses

(4)
Lag ≥ 4wk

(5)
Reopen

(6)
(7)
(8)
Restrictions
Lag
Lag ≥ 4wk
Excluding Fully Open Businesses

ln(COVID cases per cap.)

0.1764∗∗∗
(0.0250)

0.1679∗∗∗
(0.0239)

0.0506∗∗∗
(0.0143)

0.0055∗
(0.0030)

0.0239∗
(0.0134)

0.0468∗∗∗
(0.0146)

0.0133
(0.0117)

-0.0003
(0.0037)

Emp. Physical Proximity

0.4474∗∗∗
(0.0879)

0.5168∗∗∗
(0.0930)

0.0603
(0.0469)

0.0128
(0.0109)

0.0136
(0.0612)

0.1480∗∗
(0.0734)

-0.0398
(0.0444)

-0.0060
(0.0106)

-0.0135
(0.0146)

-0.0132
(0.0154)

-0.0039
(0.0081)

0.0006
(0.0018)

0.0074
(0.0102)

-0.0025
(0.0121)

0.0053
(0.0076)

0.0023
(0.0018)

-0.0033
(0.0046)

-0.0098∗∗
(0.0040)

0.0056
(0.0039)

0.0007
(0.0007)

0.0013
(0.0035)

-0.0077∗∗
(0.0036)

0.0035
(0.0030)

0.0004
(0.0008)

0.0002
(0.0004)

-0.0002
(0.0004)

0.0005
(0.0004)

0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0002
(0.0003)

-0.0003
(0.0004)

0.0002
(0.0003)

0.0000
(0.0001)

-0.2057∗∗∗
(0.0652)

-0.1552∗
(0.0812)

-0.0701
(0.0617)

-0.0073
(0.0100)

-0.0983∗∗
(0.0474)

-0.0622
(0.0750)

-0.0940∗∗
(0.0380)

-0.0139
(0.0124)

-0.0252∗∗
(0.0110)

-0.0151
(0.0132)

-0.0133
(0.0100)

-0.0021
(0.0016)

-0.0032
(0.0082)

0.0058
(0.0123)

-0.0092
(0.0064)

-0.0021
(0.0022)

Essential Business

-0.6093∗∗∗
(0.0404)

-0.6167∗∗∗
(0.0385)

-0.1445∗∗∗
(0.0308)

-0.0265∗∗∗
(0.0056)

-0.1499∗∗∗
(0.0336)

-0.2614∗∗∗
(0.0358)

-0.0627∗∗
(0.0262)

-0.0186∗∗∗
(0.0067)

Ease Operating Online

0.0962∗∗∗
(0.0242)

0.0660∗∗∗
(0.0210)

0.0502∗∗
(0.0200)

0.0048
(0.0034)

0.0287
(0.0183)

0.0069
(0.0183)

0.0334∗∗
(0.0159)

0.0031
(0.0042)

ln(Pop. Density)

-0.0881∗∗∗
(0.0217)

-0.0919∗∗∗
(0.0216)

-0.0204∗
(0.0115)

-0.0024
(0.0021)

-0.0203∗
(0.0122)

-0.0411∗∗∗
(0.0135)

-0.0077
(0.0105)

-0.0006
(0.0029)

GOP Vote Share (County)

-2.4602∗∗∗
(0.1699)

-2.0610∗∗∗
(0.1717)

-1.0669∗∗∗
(0.1115)

-0.1707∗∗∗
(0.0211)

-1.1861∗∗∗
(0.1080)

-0.9779∗∗∗
(0.1218)

-0.7219∗∗∗
(0.0944)

-0.1573∗∗∗
(0.0264)

No

No

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes

Yes

1.306
1.487
0.0249
28,034

1.051
1.408
0.0288
28,034

1.306
1.487
0.1800
28,034

0.177
0.381
0.0458
28,034

2.073
1.386
0.0130
17,659

1.669
1.455
0.0135
17,659

2.073
1.386
0.1066
17,659

0.280
0.449
0.2813
17,659

× ln(COVID cases p.c.)
Owner Age
× ln(COVID cases p.c.)
Customers Over 65
× ln(COVID cases p.c.)

65

Restriction FE
DV Mean
DV SD
Psuedo R2
N

Note: Reopen is the expected months to reopen. Restriction is the estimated months until restrictions are lifted. Lag takes the same
outcome as Reopen, but adds a fixed effect for Restriction. Lag ≥ 4wk is a indicator variable that evaluates to 1 if the firm’s estimated
reopening date is at least one month/four weeks after the estimated date restrictions are lifted. Businesses that were permanently closed
at the time of the survey are excluded from these regressions; businesses that were fully open at the time of the survey are excluded from
columns 5 − 8. Employee Physical Proximity, Customers Over 65, and Ease Operating Online are converted to z-scores. Standard errors
in parentheses, clustered at county level. Note that the survey questions in which reopening and restriction beliefs are elicited is mid-way
through the survey, thus in some columns we are able to have more observations than we have complete survey responses. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗
p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table A3: Contribution of Various Factors to the Small Business Reopen Decision, County Fixed
Effects
(1)
Reopen

(2)
(3)
Restrictions
Lag
All Businesses

(4)
Lag ≥ 4wk

(5)
Reopen

(6)
(7)
(8)
Restrictions
Lag
Lag ≥ 4wk
Excluding Fully Open Businesses

0.333∗∗∗
(0.0629)

0.412∗∗∗
(0.0681)

0.0487
(0.0494)

0.000176
(0.0164)

0.0632
(0.0709)

0.215∗∗∗
(0.0818)

-0.00528
(0.0638)

-0.0228
(0.0192)

0.0160
(0.0103)

0.0186∗
(0.0111)

0.00458
(0.00822)

-0.00126
(0.00272)

0.0135
(0.0118)

0.0111
(0.0136)

0.00813
(0.0108)

-0.000494
(0.00328)

-0.000917
(0.00321)

-0.00779∗∗∗
(0.00277)

0.00460∗
(0.00264)

0.00107
(0.000809)

0.00169
(0.00360)

-0.00868∗∗
(0.00353)

0.00422
(0.00308)

0.000744
(0.000949)

0.000229
(0.000339)

-0.000286
(0.000350)

0.000454
(0.000307)

0.000122
(0.0000939)

0.000322
(0.000394)

-0.000314
(0.000470)

0.000378
(0.000362)

0.0000788
(0.000119)

-0.163∗∗∗
(0.0602)

-0.164∗∗
(0.0680)

-0.0427
(0.0465)

-0.00834
(0.0171)

-0.110
(0.0710)

-0.115
(0.0864)

-0.0964
(0.0603)

-0.0304
(0.0201)

-0.0201∗∗
(0.00983)

-0.0181∗
(0.0107)

-0.00646
(0.00753)

-0.00220
(0.00278)

-0.00745
(0.0119)

-0.00472
(0.0139)

-0.0111
(0.00996)

-0.00496
(0.00343)

Essential Business

-0.303∗∗∗
(0.0241)

-0.333∗∗∗
(0.0245)

-0.0683∗∗∗
(0.0180)

-0.0254∗∗∗
(0.00587)

-0.121∗∗∗
(0.0307)

-0.240∗∗∗
(0.0329)

-0.0452∗
(0.0235)

-0.0172∗∗
(0.00707)

Ease Operating Online

0.0514∗∗∗
(0.0136)

0.0366∗∗∗
(0.0125)

0.0242∗∗
(0.0115)

0.00432
(0.00368)

0.0295∗
(0.0165)

0.0187
(0.0171)

0.0280∗
(0.0146)

0.00208
(0.00451)

No
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

No
Yes

No
Yes

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

1.300
1.485
1.412
.0957
26,957

1.045
1.404
1.320
.116
26,957

1.300
1.485
1.090
.461
26,957

0.177
0.382
0.366
.0808
26,957

2.073
1.385
1.330
.0782
16,695

1.668
1.453
1.385
.0919
16,695

2.073
1.385
1.125
.34
16,695

0.282
0.450
0.366
.337
16,695

Emp. Physical Proximity
× ln(COVID cases p.c.)
Owner Age
× ln(COVID cases p.c.)
Customers Over 65
× ln(COVID cases p.c.)

66

Restriction FE
County FE
DV Mean
DV SD
Residual SD
R2
N

Note: Reopen is the expected months to reopen. Restriction is the estimated months until restrictions are lifted. Lag takes the same
outcome as Reopen, but adds a fixed effect for Restriction. Lag ≥ 4wk is a indicator variable that evaluates to 1 if the firm’s estimated
reopening date is at least one month/four weeks after the estimated date restrictions are lifted. Businesses that were permanently closed
at the time of the survey are excluded from these regressions; businesses that were fully open at the time of the survey are excluded from
columns 5 − 8. Employee Physical Proximity, Customers Over 65, and Ease Operating Online are converted to z-scores. Standard errors
in parentheses, clustered at county level. Note that the survey questions in which reopening and restriction beliefs are elicited is mid-way
through the survey, thus in some columns we are able to have more observations than we have complete survey responses. ∗ p < 0.1, ∗∗
p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01

Table A4: Expected Demand By Industry (NAICS 3-DIGIT)

67

NAICS-2 digit

NAICS-3 digit

Arts, Entertainment, Rec.
Arts, Entertainment, Rec.
Educational Services
Accommodation & Food Srvcs
Accommodation & Food Srvcs
Retail Trade
Retail Trade
Retail Trade
Administrative and Waste Srvcs
Real Estate, Rental & Leasing
Information
Manufacturing
Manufacturing
Manufacturing
Health Care & Social Assistance
Health Care & Social Assistance
Professional & Technical Srvcs
Other Services, Except Pub Admin
Other Services, Except Pub Admin
Other Services, Except Pub Admin
Construction
Construction
Finance & Insurance
Finance & Insurance
Finance & Insurance
Finance & Insurance
Wholesale Trade

Performing Arts, Sports
Amusement, Gambling, & Rec.
Educational Services
Food Srvcs & Drinking Places
Accommodation
Food & Beverage Stores
Miscellaneous Store Retailers
Health and Personal Care Stores
Administrative & Support Srvcs
Real Estate
Other Information Services
Printing & Support Activities
Miscellaneous Manufacturing
Food Manufacturing
Ambulatory Health Care Srvcs
Social Assistance
Professional, Scientific, & Tech Svcs
Repair & Maintenance
Religious, Grantmaking, Civic, Prof Orgs
Personal & Laundry Services
Construction of Buildings
Specialty Trade Contractors
Insurance Carriers
Securities, Commodity Contracts
Credit Intermediation
Funds, Trusts, & Financial Vehicles
Merchant Wholesalers, Durable Goods

Early
May

Early
June

Late
May

Late
June

July

August
Sept

N

0.06
0.03
0.10
0.03
0.00
0.18
0.14
0.13
0.08
0.09
0.30
0.00
0.00
0.06
0.10
0.09
0.11
0.09
0.05
0.03
0.11
0.15
0.06
0.30
0.03
0.26
0.06

0.08
0.07
0.12
0.03
0.00
0.17
0.10
0.14
0.12
0.15
0.30
0.14
0.07
0.07
0.09
0.00
0.14
0.07
0.13
0.17
0.17
0.21
0.38
0.36
0.24
0.05
0.14

0.09
0.03
0.07
0.03
0.00
0.22
0.10
0.00
0.08
0.12
0.24
0.17
0.04
0.33
0.03
0.09
0.18
0.19
0.11
0.19
0.18
0.13
0.15
0.22
0.15
0.24
0.17

0.19
0.19
0.07
0.06
0.04
0.20
0.08
0.29
0.14
0.16
0.38
0.07
0.25
0.06
0.14
0.17
0.17
0.17
0.21
0.09
0.14
0.17
0.24
0.40
0.22
0.29
0.16

0.11
0.08
0.14
0.07
0.04
0.17
0.05
0.22
0.17
0.19
0.14
0.03
0.13
0.19
0.18
0.12
0.18
0.25
0.20
0.08
0.17
0.16
0.35
0.31
0.16
0.27
0.40

0.11
0.17
0.14
0.18
0.08
0.20
0.16
0.25
0.18
0.20
0.27
0.06
0.31
0.27
0.24
0.07
0.25
0.32
0.40
0.36
0.22
0.26
0.29
0.35
0.11
0.38
0.19

197
195
477
535
112
88
250
117
723
1226
128
140
135
95
851
137
1931
422
94
218
521
417
167
123
241
121
129

Notes. This table reports to the question about expected share of customers returning by month. Survey response shares are
conditional on being able to classify industries, with unavailable or “Other” industry classifications omitted from the denominator.
We combine wholesale and retail trade. Responses are organized according to NAICS-2 digit share expecting greater than 90%
of their customers to return by September, from low to high.

Appendix 1: Amazon Mechanical Turk Survey

How easy/common would it be for this business to provide services or goods online?
Rare/challenging to do online only, 0-10%
Possibly online only, 10-25%
Commonly online only, 25-75%
Very frequently online only, >75%

How likely is it for customers of this business to fall in each age bracket?

0-24 years old

Never or very rarely in this age bracket, 0-10%
Occasionally in this age bracket, 10-25%
Commonly in this age bracket, 25-75%
Very frequently in this age bracket, >75%

68

25-44 years old

Never or very rarely in this age bracket, 0-10%
Occasionally in this age bracket, 10-25%
Commonly in this age bracket, 25-75%
Very frequently in this age bracket, >75%

45-64 years old

Never or very rarely in this age bracket,0-10%
Occasionally in this age bracket, 10-25%
Commonly in this age bracket, 25-75%
Very frequently in this age bracket, >75%

65 years old or older

Never or very rarely in this age bracket, 0-10%
Occasionally in this age bracket, 10-25%
Commonly in this age bracket, 25-75%
Very frequently in this age bracket, >75%

69

Appendix 2: Text of Alignable Survey Questions

Are you currently open? Fully open with the same products and services as before, Open but with
fewer or different products or services, Temporarily closed but plan to reopen, Permanently closed
Are you waiting on other businesses to open before fully opening yourself? (Select the category
that matters most.)Yes, supplier(s), Yes, business(es) that refer customers to our business, Yes,
business(es) that are our customers, Yes, I am waiting for similar businesses to fully open to see if
customers return, Yes, I will fully open if similar businesses open to prevent loss of customers, No,
what other businesses do is not relevant
Although you are currently open, if these other businesses closed, would it affect your ability to
remain open? (Select the category that matters most.)
When will enough of your suppliers be available for you to fully open?
When will enough businesses that you rely on for customers be open for you to fully open?
What share of business customers do you think will be fully open by [future date]?
What share of competing businesses do you think will be fully open by [future date]?
What share of similar businesses in your industry and location do you think will be fully open by

[future date]?
Before continuing, we want to share some interesting information. Based on your profile, location,
and concerns, our polls show that similar businesses anticipate [rolling mean] % of customers will
return by [future date].
When disruptions are over, will you be in a better or worse position relative to your competition?
When will your business be fully open? Please provide your best guess.
If you are fully open in [future date], what share of your customers do you expect at that time,
compared to before the crisis? Please provide your best guess.
If there are legal restrictions on fully reopening your business, when do you expect them to be
lifted?

70

What is the likelihood of your business remaining operational by Dec. 31, 2020? Please provide
your best guess.
Suppose we could extend you a cash grant of [grant amount]. Would you choose to open over the
next two weeks?
Suppose we could extend you a cash grant of [grant amount] but only on the condition that you
remain closed for the next two week. Would you choose to open over the next two weeks instead
of taking the cash grant?

71

