                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      SOCIO-DEMOGRAPHIC FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH SELF-PROTECTING
                BEHAVIOR DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC

                                    Nicholas W. Papageorge
                                        Matthew V. Zahn
                                          Michèle Belot
                                 Eline van den Broek-Altenburg
                                          Syngjoo Choi
                                        Julian C. Jamison
                                          Egon Tripodi

                                       Working Paper 27378
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27378


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




We are grateful for helpful comments from Stefanie DeLuca, Barton Hamilton and Emma Kalish.
Regarding author ordering, Papageorge and Zahn led this particular effort and are thus listed first.
The remaining authors contributed equally and are listed in alphabetical order The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nicholas W. Papageorge, Matthew V. Zahn, Michèle Belot, Eline van den Broek-
Altenburg, Syngjoo Choi, Julian C. Jamison, and Egon Tripodi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Socio-Demographic Factors Associated with Self-Protecting Behavior during the Covid-19
Pandemic
Nicholas W. Papageorge, Matthew V. Zahn, Michèle Belot, Eline van den Broek-Altenburg,
Syngjoo Choi, Julian C. Jamison, and Egon Tripodi
NBER Working Paper No. 27378
June 2020
JEL No. I1

                                          ABSTRACT

Disease spread is in part a function of individual behavior. We examine the factors predicting
individual behavior during the Covid-19 pandemic in the United States using novel data collected
by Belot et al. (2020). Among other factors, we show that people with lower income, less flexible
work arrangements (e.g., an inability to tele-work) and lack of outside space at home are less
likely to engage in behaviors, such as social distancing, that limit the spread of disease. We also
find evidence that region, gender and beliefs predict behavior. Broadly, our findings align with
typical relationships between health and socio-economic status. Moreover, they suggest that the
burden of measures designed to stem the pandemic are unevenly distributed across socio-
demographic groups in ways that affect behavior and thus potentially the spread of illness.
Policies that assume otherwise are unlikely to be effective or sustainable.

Nicholas W. Papageorge                           Syngjoo Choi
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Johns Hopkins University 3400                    Seoul National University
N. Charles Street Baltimore,                     1 Gwanak-ro Gwanak-gu
MD 21218                                         Seoul, Republic of Korea
and IZA                                          syngjooc@snu.ac.kr
and also NBER
papageorge@jhu.edu                               Julian C. Jamison
                                                 Department of Economics
Matthew V. Zahn                                  University of Exeter Business School
Johns Hopkins University                         Exeter EX4 4PU
Economics Department                             United Kingdom
Wyman Park Building                              j.jamison@exeter.ac.uk
3400 N. Charles St Baltimore,
MD 21218                                         Egon Tripodi
matthew.zahn@jhu.edu                             European University Institute
                                                 egon.tripodi@eui.eu
Michèle Belot
European University Institute
and IZA
michele.belot@eui.eu

Eline van den Broek-Altenburg
The University of Vermont
Larner College of Medicine 89
Beaumont Avenue Burlington,
VT 05405
eline.altenburg@med.uvm.edu
1    Introduction

The spread of illness is not solely a biological phenomenon. It is also a social one, driven in
part by human behavior. In the presence of strong externalities, a concern is that individ-
ual behavior may not align with socially optimal outcomes (Posner and Philipson (1993)).
This is especially salient in contexts where the costs of protective behaviors, i.e., behaviors
that limit the spread of illness, are unevenly distributed across socio-demographic groups
(Pampel, Krueger, and Denney (2010)). For instance, in the Covid-19 pandemic, individ-
uals who face a relatively low risk of serious illness, but who are economically vulnerable
(e.g., lacking comfortable housing, the ability to work from home, and so on) may not follow
recommendations or directives to engage in protective behaviors, such as wearing a mask or
social-distancing. This potentially puts high-risk groups in danger of infection and prolongs
the pandemic.

     The socially optimal amount of protective behaviors—the levels that balance public
health concerns with individual burdens and aggregate economic costs—are not yet fully
understood, and are unlikely to be for some time due to uncertainty about the virus and about
which behaviors most effectively prevent its spread (Manski (1999)). Compounding this
uncertainty, we do not yet understand the full extent of the economic and social costs of the
pandemic itself and measures taken to avoid it, ranging from job losses, shuttered businesses,
gaps in schooling, violence, and addiction, among others (Fairlie, Couch, and Xu (2020), Alon
et al. (2020), Mongey, Pilossoph, and Weinberg (2020), Coibion, Gorodnichenko, and Weber
(2020), Viner et al. (2020)). Never-the-less, understanding what factors affect individuals’
incentives to engage in protective behaviors will be of critical importance as we develop
effective and humane policy, evaluate the current epidemic, make plans to emerge from it,
and begin to prepare for future pandemics.

     This paper examines factors predicting individual self-protecting behaviors during the
Covid-19 pandemic. The factors we study include income, socio-demographic variables,


                                              1
pre-pandemic health characteristics, job and income losses, work arrangements (e.g., the
ability to tele-work) and housing, along with beliefs and perceptions about the pandemic
(e.g., whether individuals perceive social-distancing to be an effective measure and the con-
sequences of infection). We study how these factors relate to several behavior changes,
including social-distancing, mask-wearing and hand-washing. We focus on individuals living
in the United States using unique survey data collected during the last week of April 2020
and detailed in Belot et al. (2020). The data set follows roughly 6,000 individuals in 6 dif-
ferent countries and includes about 1,000 individuals from four different states in the US:
California, Florida, New York, and Texas.

      We begin by documenting a striking and robust pattern apparent in the data: higher
income is associated with higher levels of self-protective behaviors. Figure 1 illustrates this
relationship. The figure considers three measures: (i) whether the respondent changed any
behavior at all in response to the pandemic; (ii) whether the respondent increased social-
distancing, which includes avoiding public spaces, running fewer errands, and visiting friends
and family less often; and (iii) whether the respondent increased hand-washing or mask-
wearing. The data have information on a host of additional behaviors (and similar income
gradients emerge when we examine them). We choose to focus on these three measures
because they illustrate the wide range of possible self-protective behaviors: the first is very
broad, including any change in behavior at all; the second is a relatively high-cost activity;
and the third is a relatively low-cost activity. Using these measures, we show that on
average individuals in the fifth income quintile (quintile mean $233,895) are between 13 and
19 percentage points (16–54%) more likely to engage in protective behaviors compared to
individuals in the first income quintile (quintile mean $13,775).1

      Our main analysis explores the relationships between income, the pandemic, and self-
protective behaviors in two ways. First, we show how income relates to initial consequences
    1
      Quintile means come from the Tax Policy Center, administered by the Urban Institute and Brookings
Institution.




                                                  2
of the pandemic along with other factors that could affect social-distancing and other self-
protective behaviors. We show that lower-income respondents are more likely to lose their
job or some portion of their income due to the pandemic (or to expect to soon). They are
also less likely to be able to work from home or have access to open space where they reside.

     Next, we examine which socio-demographic characteristics predict self-protecting be-
haviors. In particular, we estimate a series of linear probability models in which a self-
protecting behavior is the outcome and the predictor variables include income along with
different sets of additional variables, culminating in a final specification including income
along with all variables. Several patterns emerge. Work arrangements and housing charac-
teristics, particularly transitioning to tele-working and access to outside space at home, are
associated with adopting more self-protecting behaviors. We also find that income losses due
to the pandemic are associated with increases in the behaviors that we examine. Surpris-
ingly, we find no meaningful patterns between pre-existing health conditions and increases in
self-protective actions. We also show that males and respondents from Florida and Texas are
less likely to engage in self protective behaviors compared to females and respondents from
California and New York, respectively. Moreover, beliefs about the effectiveness of social
distancing along with perceived benefits (e.g., more time spent with family) correlate with
increases in self-protective behaviors. Finally, we demonstrate that the income gradient is
only partially explained by the inclusion of these variables. The size of the income coefficient
estimates are fairly stable across specifications where different sets of controls included.

     Broadly, our findings are consistent with two key ideas. One, the initial economic
consequences of the pandemic are particularly harmful to low-income individuals. Two,
behaviors to stem the pandemic could place relatively large burdens on individuals with
lower incomes. For example, higher-income individuals are more likely to report being able
to work from home and more likely to have transitioned to tele-working instead of losing
their job. As a result, self-protective behaviors, such social-distancing, are more practical,
comfortable, and feasible for people with more income, which is evident in Figure 1.


                                               3
       This paper relates to a number of ongoing research efforts that are providing new
information on the current pandemic and people’s responses to it on a near-daily basis.2 To
the degree our questions and findings overlap, we provide crucial replication in an era of
rapid-response, hastily-completed research. When questions or focus differs, we provide new
information that other efforts do not. Finally, if we provide contradictory answers to similar
questions, this is also important since it highlights where further research is needed. Existing
research ranges from other commissioned surveys to formal economic models. For example,
Adams-Prassl et al. (2020a) conducted a nationally representative survey of the UK, US, and
German population on the labor market impacts of Covid-19. Adams-Prassl et al. (2020b)
examines the impacts of Covid-19 lockdowns on mental health. Other studies have focused
on the impacts of the Covid-19 pandemic on personal economic outcomes. Borjas (2020)
examines how demographic factors influence testing and infections in the New York City area.
Another example is Mongey, Pilossoph, and Weinberg (2020). The authors analyze which
workers and jobs are most affected by social distancing measures. Closely related to this
paper, Wozniak (2020) uses a unique U.S. data set, also publicly available, to show declines
in well-being due to the pandemic and patterns between disease exposure and the decision
to work or take protective measures. She finds people with Covid-19 exposure continue to
work at similar rates as the non-exposed, and people with elevated risk for contracting the
disease do not reduce work hours or take protective measures. We place greater attention on
the associations between an individual’s protective behaviors and their characteristics and
beliefs, while she focuses more on protective behaviors through the lens of risks factors (i.e.,
an individual’s susceptibility and potential spreading) and protective behaviors.

       More broadly, this paper relates to a vast literature studying how socio-demographic
characteristics associate with health and health behaviors. While our contribution reports
evidence in a very specific context, the Covid-19 pandemic, it is noteworthy that many of the
   2
    Because new research continues to emerge, we will augment our list of citations in later drafts of this
paper.




                                                    4
same relationships found in many other health contexts are evident here.3 In other words,
well-documented socio-demographic differences in health behaviors—and resulting health
disparities—extend to the current pandemic (Yancy (2020)). Understanding this could help
to inform optimal policy during a pandemic. Moreover, what we learn about behavior during
a pandemic, a period when stakes are high and shifts in behavior are swift and large, can help
us to understand health behavior differences more generally. As a concrete example, if we
learn that certain types of work arrangements prevent social-distancing, such arrangements
may prevent a host of other healthy behaviors that are unrelated to the pandemic. In
this way, the current pandemic can provide useful directions for future research on health
behaviors and health disparities.

       Finally, this paper relates to a literature examining the tension between individual
behavior and public health in the presence of externalities. A key historical analogy is
the HIV epidemic.4 In that context, reduction of risky sex behavior not only protected
individuals, but also slowed the spread of the virus, which is socially beneficial. The social
benefit means there is a positive externality and thus potentially a sub-optimally low level of
safer sex. In the current context, the tension between private behavior and public health is
exacerbated by the fact that many people asked to incur the most brutal economic and social
costs of protective behaviors face relatively low personal risk of serious health problems. This
opens up a host of broad and general ethical questions about who should bear the greatest
costs to protect public health. It also casts doubt on the sustainability of policies that
presume full compliance.5

       The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. First, we discuss our data source and
   3
      Cutler, Lleras-Muney, and Vogl (2011) provide an excellent summary and overview of the socioeconomic
status-health gradient literature.
    4
      Papageorge (2016) and Chan, Hamilton, and Papageorge (2016) are two studies which examine the
history of the HIV epidemic to make broader points about health. More generally, Cawley and Ruhm
(2011) provide a summary of the literature that examines cases where individuals make a trade off between
controllable behaviors and health outcomes.
    5
      Many of these ideas were explored in a recent blog post by DeLuca, Papageorge, and Kalish (2020).
The current study builds on this piece, in part by using data to test hypotheses it put forth.




                                                    5
its preliminary analysis, highlighting patterns in the data. From there, we then discuss the
results from our main analysis, which quantify the associations between individual charac-
teristics and behavior changes. The final section concludes and describes further work in
this area.



2        Data and Summary Statistics

We rely on recently-collected survey data from six different countries. In their accompanying
paper (Belot et al. (2020)), the authors describe their sampling procedure and key features of
the data. The United States sample, which is the focus of this paper, contains information
on approximately one thousand individuals, roughly 250 from each of the following from
four states: California, Florida, New York, and Texas. The survey was constructed to be
nationally representative along gender, age, household income, and race. While the survey
is representative along these characteristics, however, it is not a random sample of people
in the US, which means estimates must be interpreted with care. For example, it would
be inappropriate at this stage to interpret links between economic factors and behavior as
causal.

         Table 1 summarizes the socio-demographic characteristics and outcomes we study from
the survey sample. 15% of respondents are non-white, 44% are male and about 39% are
56 years or older. 45% of respondents report at least one pre-existing health condition.
Approximately 70% of respondents reported being employed. Among those that reported
working, nearly 54% work full time, 14% work part time and 82% are able to work from
home at the time of the survey when the pandemic was well underway. Also among these
respondents, 34% report shifting to tele-work, 38% are no longer working, and 20% reported
no change in their employment situation. On average, respondents lost $770 in household
income due to the pandemic.6
    6
        Some respondents reported very large income losses. Given the difficultly in determining whether these



                                                       6
      The survey contains two variables about labor status. The first asks about the current
work arrangement and the second asks about changes due to the pandemic. Using these two
variables, we construct a single measure that captures possible ways that the pandemic has
affected individuals with different work arrangements. There are five possibilities: (i) “Never
Worked” refers to individuals who were not working prior to or during the pandemic (e.g.,
retirees); (ii) “Stopped Working” refers to people who were working (full-time, part-time or
self-employed) and stopped working due to the pandemic; (iii) “Began Tele-Working” refers
to people who were employed prior to the pandemic and are still employed, but transitioned
to working from home due to the pandemic; (iv) “Still Working” describes individuals who
were working prior to the pandemic and whose work status has not changed; and (v) “Other”
includes people who report working prior to the pandemic and also report “other” when
asked how their work status has changed. We should note that roughly 17 individuals do
not fit into any of the categories above due to contradictory answers. As an example, some
respondents report not working before the pandemic and also transitioning to tele-working,
which is difficult to categorize.7

      Figure 2 summarizes this work status variable by age group and income quintile. As
expected, we find that younger respondents tend to be more likely to begin tele-working
whereas older workers are more likely to not be working before or during the pandemic.
We also see that higher income people are more likely to transition to tele-working, while
lower income people are more likely to either not be working before the pandemic or to have
stopped working due to the pandemic. The share of respondents that were still working
without any change was relatively stable across income quintiles. A deeper look into the
survey finds an intuitive pattern. Those that were in lower income quintiles and reported
still working belong to professions such as cashiers, packers and packagers, among others.
are actual losses or survey errors, we use a dummy variable to flag these values. There are 173 of these
observations. Our results are robust to the inclusion of these observations. The only difference is the
magnitude on the lost income coefficient. The number in the table reflects the average of the remaining
values.
    7
      If we include these observations in the “Other” category, our results remain unchanged.



                                                   7
Those in higher quintiles that reported still working included lawyers, computer programmers
and managers. These professions differ substantially in what they pay, but include people
who have been deemed “essential workers.” This explains the lack of an income gradient for
this particular category.

      The survey also includes information on beliefs and perceptions. Approximately 73%
believe that social-distancing is either very effective or extremely effective, versus 24% who
believe it is slightly or moderately effective. Only 3% of the sample believed social distancing
was not effective at all. Almost 39% of respondents believed it to be extremely effective. On
average, respondents believe that 24% of the people in their locality are infected. This high
number is driven by a mass of respondents reporting implausibly high numbers (including
some saying over 90%), which will be discussed below.8 Finally, about 84% perceive some
benefits from the pandemic (e.g., getting to spend more time with family or reductions in
pollution). As we show below, these perceptions predict behavior.

      The survey measures behavior change in two ways. First, respondents are asked directly
if they engaged in any self-protective behavior in response to the pandemic. About 88%
report having done so. Second, the survey asks respondents to report how frequently they
engaged in 15 different activities before the pandemic, at the start of the pandemic, and
a few weeks after the pandemic began. These behaviors ranged from hand washing and
eating healthy to visiting large open or closed spaces and visiting friends and family. Given
this data structure, we observe how the respondents changed their behavior over time. For
each behavior, respondents could answer (1) never, (2) rarely, (3) sometimes, (4) very often,
or (5) always. Figure A.1 in the Appendix summarizes the average frequency with which
respondents engaged in some of these behaviors at each time period. Consistent with Figure
3, we see an increase in the average frequency of self protective behaviors from before the
pandemic to weeks after the pandemic started. To get a sense of behavior change, we
    8
      In some specifications, we experiment with dropping some extreme values under the assumption that
they reflect respondent confusion. However, doing so does not alter our results.




                                                  8
construct a count variable for each individual for the number of changes towards (or away
from) self-protection from before the pandemic to a few weeks after it had begun, when the
data were collected. Figure 3 plots the distribution of the resulting variable. The changes
are normalized such that self-protecting changes are positive, while reducing such behaviors
is recorded as negative.9 The median number of changes towards self-protection is 9. We
highlight two main takeaways from Figure 3. First, very few people exhibit a net decline
in self-protective behaviors. Second, most people either do not change their behavior much
at all (note the spike in the distribution at zero) or make a fairly large number of changes.
Figure 4 presents a smoothed version of Figure 3 for the lowest and highest income quintiles.
We find that a greater mass of low income people are not increasing their self protective
behaviors. We see the opposite pattern for high income people, with a greater share of high
income people increasing their self protective behaviors.

       In our subsequent analysis, we focus on three measures of behavior change. The first is
from the aforementioned question asking respondents directly if they changed their behavior
in response to the epidemic. The second is a composite behavior variable for social distancing.
We focus on: visiting large open spaces, visiting large closed spaces, attending large social
gatherings, and visiting with friends or family. As we are mainly interested in how behaviors
change, we look at how this social distancing composite changes over time.10 An increase
in social distancing is defined as an above-median increase in the number of self-protecting
improvements for the four behaviors of interest. The third measure focuses on changes in
hand-washing and in wearing a mask.

       In these analyses, we make four types of drops from the full US survey sample for our
   9
      To fix ideas, suppose an individual answered 3 (sometimes) for hand washing and 3 (sometimes) for
taking public transport before the pandemic and 5 and 4, respectively, during the pandemic. The increase
in hand washing accounts for 2 increases in self protective behaviors and the increase in taking public
transportation is recorded as a 1 increment decrease in self protective behaviors. Taken together this results
in a net effect of 2 − 1 = 1.
   10
      Note that we drop respondents that were never engaging in these activities (i.e., were always social
distancing) prior to the pandemic since they would have no way of increasing their social distancing measures
in response to the pandemic. This means we lose 40-73 individuals, depending on the specification.




                                                      9
analysis. First, we drop respondents who did not report an income quintile or gender (15
observations). Second, as discussed previously, our composite behavior dependent variables
examine increases in behaviors. We drop respondents that were already engaging in these
behaviors and had no ability to increase further (40 observations for social distancing and 73
for hand washing-mask wearing). The third set of drops are the outliers in local infection rate
beliefs (36 observations). Finally, we drop about 17 respondents that did not map into our
composite work status variable. For each dependent variable, we hold the analysis sample
constant across specifications to facilitate comparisons. Thus for each outcome, we take the
maximum number of observations that remain after these sets of drops.



3     Results

3.1    Connecting Socio-demographic Characteristics to Income

Table 2 summarizes the difference in means of several characteristics broken by income
groups. Here, we have defined high income as the top three quintiles and low income as the
bottom two quintiles. We find significant differences for most of these characteristics between
high income and low income respondents. For example, non-white respondents were more
likely to be low income than white respondents. We find no significant income differences
for pre-existing health conditions, exposure to a person 56 years or older, and beliefs in the
effectiveness of social distancing.

      Figure 5 explores expected losses to labor and household income by labor status and
income quintile. Expected losses to labor income are a much larger share of income for
low income respondents. For example, people in the first income quintile reported expected
labor income losses of over 10% while respondents in the fifth income quintile expected losses
of no more than 5%. We observe a similar pattern when looking at expected household
income losses. First quintile expected losses range from nearly 20% to about 25% while fifth


                                              10
quintile losses range from 10% to just under 15%. Figure 6 assesses losses that have already
occurred. We observe a similar relationship between income quintile and the magnitude of
income losses. The second panel examines job losses due to the pandemic. We see that the
lowest-income respondents had the lowest amount of job security and the highest probability
of temporary unemployment. An interesting pattern is that higher income individuals were
the most likely to permanently lose their jobs, despite also having the highest level of job
security across all income quintiles. This may reflect selection: higher-income jobs are more
secure in general so a job loss reflects a large and permanent shift, e.g., a bankruptcy.

      Next, we consider work arrangements by income. Figure 7 consists of three panels,
which plot labor status (full time, part time, self employed or not working), whether respon-
dents have experienced a change in work status and how well they can work from home,
respectively. According to the figure, full time employment, the ability to work from home
and a change in work status to tele-working all rise with income. Lower-income people are
more likely to report either that they stopped working or that they experienced no change in
work status (which includes not having switched to tele-working). For example, nearly 75%
of respondents in the fifth income quintile are working full-time. About the same percentage
of respondents in the first quintile are not working. More than 50% of respondents in the
fifth income quintile reported transitioning to tele-work post-pandemic, whereas only 10%
of those in the first quintile did so. This pattern appears consistent with the fact that nearly
40% of low income respondents report being unable to work from home.11

      The other broad categories of socio-demographic characteristics that are potentially
associated with income and behavior changes are pre-existing health conditions, household
features, and beliefs related to the pandemic. From Table 1 we know that 43% of survey
respondents reported having a pre-existing health condition such as diabetes, high blood
pressure, heart disease, or asthma. Given strong income-health gradients found in other
   11
      We also ran a multinomial logit model where the outcome variable is our work status variable in order
to study which factors predict which types of work changes and find that these patterns hold. These results
are available upon request.


                                                    11
literature, this pattern is surprising and may reflect that the sample is not representative
of the US in terms of the relationship between income and health. In contrast, housing is
strongly related to income. Higher-income respondents are far more likely to live in homes
(versus apartments) and to have access to open air where they reside compared to lower-
income respondents. As we noted earlier, we do not observe a pattern between income and
beliefs in the effectiveness of social distancing.12 Across all income quintiles, 70%–78% of
respondents believe social distancing is either very effective or extremely effective.13

       The survey data also contain respondents’ beliefs about various rates related to the
disease such as infection rates, likelihood of contracting the disease, and so on. However, it
is difficult to interpret responses. For example, consider beliefs about the local infection rate.
The distribution of these beliefs is presented in Figure A.2. We can see that many respondents
report implausibly small and large numbers. This could reflect several factors, including
misinformation about the spread of illness, difficulties with probabilistic thinking, which is
well-documented in the literature (see e.g., Barth, Papageorge, and Thom (2020), Lillard
and Willis (2001), Delavande, Perry, and Willis (2006), etc.), fatalistic beliefs (e.g., Akesson
et al. (2020)), optimism about herd immunity, etc.14 In any case, these interpretational
difficulties will limit conclusions we can draw using some of the beliefs variables.



3.2     Factors Associated with Behavior Change

Our analysis until now shows that several factors are related to income. These factors
could potentially help to explain differences across income groups in self-protective behaviors
depicted in Figure 1. In this section, we explore which socio-demographic characteristics are
associated with behavior changes.
  12
      We measure a respondent’s belief in social distancing as the average of their beliefs about the effec-
tiveness of shutting down non-essential businesses, limiting mobility outside the home, and forbidding mass
gatherings.
   13
      These patterns are explored further in Tables A.1, A.2, A.3, and A.4.
   14
      Indeed, we must leave open the possibility that, due to our lack of knowledge about the illness,
implausibly-high answers are correct.



                                                    12
       To begin, Table 3 summarizes the difference in means across different characteristics for
those who increased social distancing behavior according to our metric. We find significant
differences between males and females and between those who believe in the effectiveness of
social distancing. These findings suggest that women are more likely than men to increase
social distancing as are those who believe strongly in the effectiveness of social distancing.
There are significant differences between those who have not stopped working and those
that are still working. We do not find any other significant differences across individual
characteristics.

       For our main analysis, we examine three outcomes: any behavior change, social dis-
tancing, and mask-wearing or hand-washing. For each outcome, we estimate linear proba-
bility models as a function of income and different sets of explanatory variables. Our main
findings are summarized in Table 4. In general, we find that income, work arrangements
such as tele-working, lost income, and beliefs about the effectiveness of social distancing are
significantly associated with the self-protective measures we examine. Detailed results are
presented in Tables A.5, A.6, and A.7 in the Appendix. In each table, all columns include
income quintiles as explanatory variables. Column (1) includes only income, Column(2)
adds in socio-demographic characteristics, Column (3) adds pre-existing health conditions,
Column (4) brings in housing characteristics, Column (5) work arrangements and economic
loss characteristics, Column (6) adds in beliefs about social distancing and local infection
rates and perceived benefits from the pandemic. Finally, in Column (7) we include all of
these sets of controls in a single specification. We will discuss each of these columns in the
following subsections.15
  15
     We examined other characteristic associations beyond what is presented in the paper. These results are
available upon request.




                                                    13
3.2.1    Income

Across all three of our dependent variables we find strong, statistically significant associations
with income. Higher income individuals are more likely to engage in the behavior we examine.
To fix ideas, relative to the first income quintile, a member of the fifth income quintile is
10%–15% more likely to change their behaviors, 14%—28% more likely to increase social
distancing behaviors, and 18%–28% more likely to increase hand washing or mask wearing.
We find that these income effects are fairly robust to the inclusion of controls. From the
baseline to the case where we include all of our controls, the size of the coefficient estimates
remain fairly stable as we add additional variables, which means that these other factors do
not fully explain the income gradient.


3.2.2    Gender, Age, Race and Location

The next set of controls we include are gender, age, race and state. We do not find many
significant associations between these factors and the change behaviors outcome. In the
baseline case we see negative associations between males, people 56 years or older, and some
regional effects. However, most of these relationships disappear when other variables are
added to the analysis. We find more robust significance for the increased social distancing
behavior. We find strong negative associations between males, and respondents from Florida
and Texas, which maintain significance once other controls are added. To fix ideas, we find
that males are 15% less likely than females to increase social distancing. Similarly, we
find that relative to respondents from California, people in Texas and Florida tended to be
16% and 12% less likely to increase social distancing, respectively. Finally, we find positive
significant associations between race and people 56 years or older for the hand washing-
mask wearing outcome. Specifically, we find that Black respondents are 13% more likely
than white respondents to increase hand washing or mask wearing.16 We find a similarly
   16
      A data set that over-samples non-white individuals would potentially reveal other differences by race
or ethnicity in the likelihood of engaging in self-protective behaviors.


                                                    14
sized relationship for those 56 years or older. It is interesting that we pick up these effects
for increased hand washing or mask wearing. This may be reflect the fact that of the three
activities we examine, this one is a relatively low-cost way to self protect for people who
face risks, but are unable to engage in higher-cost, less practical activities, such as social-
distancing.


3.2.3    Health

We also examine various pre-existing health conditions, including diabetes, high blood pres-
sure, heart disease, asthma, allergies, and other conditions. Overall, and surprisingly, these
variables are not strongly correlated to behavior change.17 Yet, it is surprising that health
conditions more strongly associated with serious illness (e.g., diabetes, asthma, or high blood
pressure) are not associated with behavior change. An exception is that we find a robust
significant association between allergies and increases in hand-washing and mask-wearing. A
number of factors could explain this, including the possibility that people with allergies could
feel they are becoming ill even if they are not and thus be more willing to take precautions.


3.2.4    Housing

Next we examine housing characteristics. We find a negative significant relationship between
respondents in the countryside and changing behaviors but this association becomes indis-
tinguishable from zero as other controls are added. We find a robust negative association
for having no access to open air and increased social distancing behavior. In our full control
case, we find that respondents that live in homes without open air access are 12% less likely
to increase social distancing behaviors. We find this to be an intuitive result. People who
are more comfortable sheltering-in-place are more likely to do it. Policies aiming to slow the
pandemic should take these factors into account as they suggest cramped and uncomfortable
  17
      Oddly, we find a strong negative association between heart disease and increased social distancing,
which may reflect that people with heart disease are generally unhealthy and thus less likely to engage in
self-protective behaviors.


                                                   15
housing can potentially undermine efforts to “flatten the curve.” We find similar patterns for
the two other outcome variables, but they lose significance in the final specification, where
we add additional variables.


3.2.5   Work Arrangements and Losses

We also consider work arrangements and economic losses. In general we find fairly consistent
results across all three of our outcome variables. People who transitioned into tele-working
are more likely to change behaviors, increase social distancing, and increase hand washing-
mask wearing. This association ranges from roughly 9%–12% relative to somebody who
continued to work. This effect is robust to the inclusion of other controls. We find similarly-
sized effect for those that stopped working or never worked but significance was retained with
less consistency. This result is intuitive. People who can work from home are more likely to
abide by stay-at-home orders. Factors related to work arrangements, which vary across socio-
demographic groups, can determine the sustainability and effectiveness of policies aiming to
prevent the spread of illness. We also find that realized household income losses have a
significant positive association with each of these behaviors. After controlling for extreme
lost income values, we find that for every $1,000 lost a respondent is 1%–4% more likely to
adjust to each of the behaviors we examined. People who have experienced these losses have
already been harmed by the pandemic. As a result, they may be more careful than others
and view contracting the disease as a higher risk. Another possibility is that these people
have fewer monetary resources and may not have money to cover medical expenses if they
were to contract the disease.


3.2.6   Beliefs and Perceptions

The final set of variables we examined were beliefs and perceptions about the pandemic.
Reassuringly, we find a fairly consistent effect for beliefs in the effectiveness of social dis-
tancing across the three behaviors we included. These findings are strongest for the changed

                                              16
behaviors and increase social distancing variables. We find similar results but with weaker
significance for increased hand washing-mask wearing. As we previewed earlier, we find a
significant negative association between beliefs about the local infection rate and each of the
three outcome variables. We discussed possible reasons why respondents may have reported
these implausibly high beliefs earlier. Our findings are robust to removing this variable
as well as using a dummy variable to control for extremely high beliefs.18 We also find
some positive associations between perceived benefits from the pandemic and increases in
our behaviors of interest. Less pollution and more family time were two that came out as
significant and tended to retain significance as other controls were added. In Table 5, we
present cross-tabulations of the survey data which indicate most of the people identifying
these benefits belonged to higher income quintiles and were non-white.

        One finding that surprised us was the negative association between beliefs about local
infection rates and increases in self protecting behaviors. As discussed previously, the distri-
bution of respondent beliefs about local infection rates has significant mass at the low and
high end, which are difficult to reconcile with reality. In Figures A.3, A.4, and A.5 we present
lowess smoother results for three behavioral outcomes of interest and this belief. In each
case, people who reported an infection rate of 20% or fewer exhibit the expected response: a
rise in perceived infection rates is associated with more protective behavior. Thus, negative
coefficient estimates are driven by people with implausibly high perceptions of infection rates.
This could reflect respondent confusion. It could also reflect a sort of fatalism, i.e., people
believe infection rates are so high that they are bound to become infected, too, and thus
don’t bother to engage in protective behaviors. Fatalism is a well documented phenomenon
in several fields, see e.g., Akesson et al. (2020), Ferrer and Klein (2015), Shapiro and Wu
(2011), etc.19
  18
       We defined the cutoff for “extremely high” as any belief above 20%.
  19
       Figures A.6, A.7, and A.8 present similar figures using the lpoly smoother.




                                                      17
3.3    Robustness checks

We conducted a series of other robustness checks to these specifications. For example, rather
than examining increases in social distancing or hand washing-mask wearing, we considered
whether or not the respondent was doing these behaviors at all in the weeks following the
start of the pandemic. Our main conclusions are unchanged, with the additional finding that
pre-pandemic behavior has a very significant association with post-pandemic behavior. We
also considered whether the behavior changes for people who had experienced some loss due
to the pandemic were distinct from the pooled sample. In general we do not pick up many
significant effects for these sub-samples. The associations that are captured are generally
in line with the findings from the main analysis. We also ran our specifications for each
state individually as well as for pooled groups of states. In general we either lose statistical
significance or find patterns similar to our main results. These tables are available upon
request.



4     Conclusion

While many of the questions raised and discussed in this paper focus on the here-and-now,
the Covid-19 pandemic will eventually run its course. However, it would be shortsighted and
naive to think that another virus, perhaps an even more damaging one, will not come about
in the future. Indeed, many specialists believe that this virus will be cyclical, returning
annually. If so, the questions we are addressing now will be important not only as we move
through the current crisis, but also as we begin to prepare for the next one. Social scientists
who study behavior—and the policies that affect it—must play a critical role in these efforts.
One way is through the collection and analysis of new survey data, which shed light on what
behavior can be expected of different segments of the population during a pandemic given
heterogeneity in the incentives, constraints and circumstances people face. These data could
be used not only to describe behavior, but also in more targeted research projects, such as:

                                              18
examining how information is transmitted and belief about the pandemic are formed and
affect behavior, analyzing location-specific policy responses and their relative merit, and
calibrating epidemiologically-grounded models relating variation in individual behavior to
the spread of illness, among many others.




                                            19
References
Adams-Prassl, Abi, Teodora Boneva, Marta Golin, and Christopher Rauh (Apr. 2020a).
      Inequality in the Impact of the Coronavirus Shock: Evidence from Real Time Surveys.
      Working Paper 2018. Cambridge-INET.
— (May 2020b). The Impact of the Coronavirus Lockdown on Mental Health: Evidence
      from the US. Working Paper 2020-030. Human Capital and Economic Opportunity
      Working Group.
Akesson, Jesper, Sam Ashworth-Hayes, Robert Hahn, Robert D Metcalfe, and
      Itzhak Rasooly (May 2020). Fatalism, Beliefs, and Behaviors During the COVID-19
      Pandemic. Working Paper 27245. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Alon, Titan M, Matthias Doepke, Jane Olmstead-Rumsey, and Michele Tertilt (Apr. 2020).
      The Impact of COVID-19 on Gender Equality. Working Paper 26947. National
      Bureau of Economic Research.
Barth, Daniel, Nicholas W Papageorge, and Kevin Thom (2020). “Genetic Endowments
      and Wealth Inequality”. In: Journal of Political Economy 128.4, pp. 1474–1522.
Belot, Michele, Syngjoo Choi, Julian Jamison, Nicholas W Papageorge, Egon Tripodi, and
      Eline van den Broeck (May 2020). Six-country Survey on Covid-19. Discussion Paper
      13230. IZA.
Borjas, George J (Apr. 2020). Demographic Determinants of Testing Incidence and
      COVID-19 Infections in New York City Neighborhoods. Working Paper 26952.
      National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cawley, John and Christopher J Ruhm (2011). “The Economics of Risky Health
      Behaviors”. In: Handbook of Health Economics. Vol. 2. Elsevier, pp. 95–199.
Chan, Tat Y, Barton H Hamilton, and Nicholas W Papageorge (2016). “Health, Risky
      Behaviour and the Value of Medical Innovation for Infectious Disease”. In: The
      Review of Economic Studies 83.4, pp. 1465–1510.
Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Michael Weber (May 2020). The Cost of the
      COVID-19 Crisis: Lockdowns, Macroeconomic Expectations, and Consumer Spending.
      Working Paper 27141. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cutler, David M., Adriana Lleras-Muney, and Tom Vogl (Apr. 2011). “Socioeconomic
      Status and Health: Dimensions and Mechanisms”. In: The Oxford Handbook of Health
      Economics. Oxford University Press.
Delavande, Adeline, Michael Perry, and Robert J Willis (2006). Probabilistic Thinking and
      Social Security Claiming. Working Paper 129. Michigan Retirement Research Center.
DeLuca, Stephanie, Nicholas W Papageorge, and Emma Kalish (Apr. 2020). The Unequal
      Cost of Social Distancing. Available at https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/from-our-
      experts/the-unequal-cost-of-social-distancing.
Fairlie, Robert W, Kenneth Couch, and Huanan Xu (May 2020). The Impacts of
      COVID-19 on Minority Unemployment: First Evidence from April 2020 CPS
      Microdata. Working Paper 27246. National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ferrer, Rebecca A and William MP Klein (2015). “Risk Perceptions and Health Behavior”.
      In: Current Opinion in Psychology 5, pp. 85–89.
Lillard, Lee A and Robert J Willis (2001). Cognition and Wealth: The Importance of
      Probabilistic Thinking. Working Paper 7. Michigan Retirement Research Center.

                                           20
Manski, Charles F (1999). Identification Problems in the Social Sciences. Harvard
     University Press.
Mongey, Simon, Laura Pilossoph, and Alex Weinberg (May 2020). Which Workers Bear the
     Burden of Social Distancing Policies? Working Paper 27085. National Bureau of
     Economic Research.
Pampel, Fred C, Patrick M Krueger, and Justin T Denney (2010). “Socioeconomic
     Disparities in Health Behaviors”. In: Annual Review of Sociology 36, pp. 349–370.
Papageorge, Nicholas W (2016). “Why Medical Innovation is Valuable: Health, Human
     Capital, and the Labor Market”. In: Quantitative Economics 7.3, pp. 671–725.
Posner, Richard A and Tomas J. Philipson (1993). Private Choices and Public Health: The
     AIDS Epidemic in an Economic Perspective. Harvard University Press.
Shapiro, Joel and Stephen Wu (2011). “Fatalism and Savings”. In: The Journal of
     Socio-Economics 40.5, pp. 645–651.
Viner, Russell M, Simon J Russell, Helen Croker, Jessica Packer, Joseph Ward,
     Claire Stansfield, Oliver Mytton, Chris Bonell, and Robert Booy (2020). “School
     Closure and Management Practices During Coronavirus Outbreaks Including
     COVID-19: A Rapid Systematic Review”. In: The Lancet Child & Adolescent Health.
Wozniak, Abigail (May 2020). Disparities and Mitigation Behavior During COVID-19.
     Institute Working Paper 32. Opportunity and Inclusive Inclusive Growth Institute:
     Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
Yancy, Clyde W. (May 2020). “COVID-19 and African Americans”. In: Journal of the
     American Medical Association 323.19, pp. 1891–1892.




                                          21
Figures




Figure 1: Probability of Actions by Income Quintile: Proportion of respondents within an in-
come quintile that changed behaviors, increased social distancing, or increased handwashing-
mask wearing.




                                            22
Figure 2: Probability of Work Arrangement by Age Group and Income Quintile: Proportion
of respondents within an age group or income quintile that are classified into our work
arrangements variable.




                                          23
Figure 3: Distribution of Behavior Changes: Distribution of behavior changes from before
the pandemic to a few weeks after the pandemic started. Changes are normalized such that
self-protecting changes are positive and reductions in these behaviors are negative.




                                          24
Figure 4: Distribution of Behavior Changes by Income Quintile: Distribution of behavior
changes by income quintile from before the pandemic to a few weeks after the pandemic
started. Changes are normalized such that self-protecting changes are positive and reductions
in these behaviors are negative.




                                             25
Figure 5: Expected Income Losses by Income and Labor Status: Expected labor and house-
hold income losses across income quintiles. Income losses are normalized by the mean income
of the respondent’s quintile.




                                            26
Figure 6: Realized Losses by Income: Realized income and job losses by income quintile.
Income losses are normalized by the mean income of the respondent’s quintile. Job losses
are proportions of each type of labor transition within an income quintile.




                                          27
Figure 7: Probability of Labor Characteristic by Income Quintile: Proportion of respondents
within an income quintile with various labor characteristics.




                                            28
Tables

                          Table 1: Summary Statistics

         Variable                                           Prob    N
         Socio-Demographics:
           Non-White                                        0.15   1006
           Male                                             0.44   1006
           New York-California                              0.54   1006
           Elderly                                          0.39   1006
         Health:
          Pre-existing Condition                            0.45   1006
         Housing:
          Urban                                             0.41   1006
          Home w/o Open Air Access                          0.15   1006
          Elderly Exposure                                  0.46   1006
         Work Arrangements and Losses:
          Mean Income Quintile                              3.11   1006
          Working                                            0.7   990
          Full-Time — Working                               0.54    701
          Part-Time — Working                               0.14   701
          Can Work From Home — Working                      0.82   701
          Work Change: No Longer Working — Working          0.38   701
          Work Change: Tele-Working — Working               0.34   701
          Work Change: No Change — Working                   0.2    701
          Mean Lost HH. Income ($1,000)                     0.77   475
         Beliefs and Perceptions:
          Mean Belief in Effectiveness of SD                3.99   1006
          Local Infection Rate                              0.24   971
          Benefits from Pandemic                            0.84   1006
         Outcomes:
           Changed Behavior                                 0.88   1006
           Increased SD                                     0.46   967
           Increased Hand Washing-Mask Wearing              0.71   933
         N                                                         1006
          Values represent the proportion of respondents with the listed
         characteristic for the entire US sample.




                                       29
                  Table 2: Differences by Characteristic for Low Income

Characteristic                                               Difference of Means     p-value
Not White - White                                                    0.14             0.00
Not Male - Male                                                      0.19             0.00
No Pre-existing Condition - Pre-existing Condition                   0.03             0.40
No Elderly Exposure - Elderly Exposure                               -0.05            0.11
Not Working - Working                                                 0.2             0.00
Not Full-Time - Full-Time — Working                                   0.36            0.00
Not Part-Time - Part-Time — Working                                  -0.15            0.00
No Work From Home - Work From Home — Working                          0.11            0.01
Not Still Working - Still Working — Working                          -0.08            0.07
Not Stopped Working - Stopped Working — Working                      -0.24            0.00
Not Tele-Working - Tele-Working — Working                            0.31             0.00
Above Med. Belief in SD - Below Med. Belief in SD                    0.06             0.10
N                                                                    1006               .
Values are the results from difference of means tests for the listed characteristics. The
calculated means are for the proportion of people that are low income.


     Table 3: Differences by Characteristic for Increased Social Distancing Behavior

Characteristic                                                      Difference of Means      p-value
Non-White - White                                                            -0.08             0.07
Not Male - Male                                                              0.16              0.00
No Pre-existing Condition - Pre-existing Condition                           0.02              0.58
No Elderly Exposure - Elderly Exposure                                       -0.05             0.14
Not Working - Working                                                         0.07             0.06
Not Full-Time - Full-Time — Working                                           0.02             0.64
Not Part-Time - Part-Time — Working                                          -0.04             0.46
Cannot Work From Home - Can Work From Home — Working                          0.01             0.92
Not Still Working - Still Working — Working                                   0.16             0.00
Not Stopped Working - Stopped Working — Working                              -0.01             0.82
Not Tele-Working - Tele-Working — Working                                    -0.07             0.07
Below Med. Belief in SD - Above Med. Belief in SD                            -0.24             0.00
N                                                                             967                .
 Values are the results from difference of means tests for the listed characteristics. The calcu-
lated means are for the proportion of people that increased social distancing behaviors.




                                             30
Table 4: Summary of Factors Associated with Self-Protective Behaviors

                Variable         Metric       CB SD     WM
                                Significant   3    3      3
       Income
                                Sign          +    +      +
                                Significant   3     7     3
       Not Working
                                Sign          +    NA     +
                                Significant   3    3      3
       Tele-Working
                                Sign          +    +      +
                                Significant    7   3      7
       Not Working Pre-Covid
                                Sign          NA   +     NA
                                Significant   3    3      3
       Lost Income
                                Sign          +    +      +
                                Significant   3    3      3
       Effectiveness of SD
                                Sign          +    +      +
                                Significant    7   3      3
       Area Infection Rate
                                Sign          NA   −      −
                                Significant   3    3      3
       Benefits
                                Sign          +    +      +
        This table summarizes the core findings from linear
        probability models examining the association between
        socio-demographic characteristics and three different
        self-protective behaviors. Detailed tables with co-
        efficient estimates, standard errors, significance
        levels, and other controls can be found in the
        Appendix.




                                 31
                   Table 5: Benefits of Pandemic by Income

                       More Family Time                      Less Pollution
Income Quintile   Not Selected   Selected     Total   Not Selected   Selected   Total
First                 0.64        0.36        168         0.64        0.36      168
Second                0.67        0.33        190         0.61        0.39      190
Third                 0.59        0.41        210         0.56        0.44      210
Fourth                0.53        0.47        243         0.59        0.41      243
Fifth                 0.43        0.57        196         0.61        0.39      196
Cross tabulation of US sample for two perceived benefits of the pandemic by in-
come quintiles.




                                         32
A     Additional Figures and Tables

A.1    Figures




Figure A.1: Average Frequency of Select Behaviors by Income Quintile and Time Period:
These tabulations are the average frequency respondents within an income group reported
doing each listed activity. Frequencies ranged from 1 (Never) to 5 (Always). These are
calculated for the time period before the pandemic, at the start of the pandemic, and a few
weeks after the pandemic.




                                            33
Figure A.2: Distribution of Beliefs About Local Infection Rates: Distribution of the reported
beliefs of respondents about the rate of infections within their local community.




                                             34
Figure A.3: Lowess Smoother Changed Behaviors: Lowess smoother applied to the binary
changed behaviors outcome to beliefs about the local infection rate.




                                        35
Figure A.4: Lowess Smoother Increased Social Distancing: Lowess smoother applied to the
binary increased social distancing variable to beliefs about the local infection rate. Increased
social distancing is defined as an above median increase in self protective behaviors (e.g.,
visiting public spaces, visiting friends and family, etc.) from before the pandemic to a few
weeks after it started.




                                              36
Figure A.5: Lowess Smoother Increased Hand Washing-Mask Wearing: Lowess smoother
applied to the binary increased hand washing-mask wearing variable to beliefs about the
local infection rate. Increased hand washing-mask wearing is defined as an above median
increase in hand washing or mask wearing behavior from before the pandemic to a few weeks
after it started.




                                           37
Figure A.6: Lpolyci Smoother Changed Behaviors: Lpolyci smoother applied to the binary
changed behaviors outcome to beliefs about the local infection rate.




                                         38
Figure A.7: Lpolyci Smoother Increased Social Distancing: Lpolyci smoother applied to the
binary increased social distancing outcome to beliefs about the local infection rate. Increased
social distancing is defined as an above median increase in self protective behaviors (e.g.,
visiting public spaces, visiting friends and family, etc.) from before the pandemic to a few
weeks after it started.




                                              39
Figure A.8: Lpolyci Smoother Increased Hand Washing-Mask Wearing: Lpolyci smoother
applied to the binary increased hand washing-mask wearing outcome to beliefs about the
local infection rate. Increased hand washing-mask wearing is defined as an above median
increase in hand washing or mask wearing behavior from before the pandemic to a few weeks
after it started.




                                           40
A.2     Tables

A.2.1   Cross Tabulations

                  Table A.1: Pre-Existing Health Conditions by Income

        Income             Diabetes   High Blood Pressure       Heart Disease     Asthma
        First quintile       0.14                0.3                  0.06          0.13
        Second quintile      0.14               0.32                  0.05          0.12
        Third quintile       0.19               0.32                  0.05          0.14
        Fourth quintile      0.16               0.28                  0.05          0.15
        Fifth quintile       0.25               0.21                  0.05          0.14
        Values are share of respondents within each income quintile that reported
        having the listed pre-existing health condition. Note respondents may have
        multiple conditions.


                          Table A.2: Current Living Area by Income

             Current Living Area        First        Second   Third   Fourth    Fifth
             Urban                       0.41         0.33    0.29     0.41     0.62
             Semi-urban / residential    0.41         0.52     0.6     0.49     0.35
             Countryside                 0.18         0.15    0.11      0.1     0.03
             Total                       168          190     210      243      196
             Cross tabulation of US sample for current living area by income
             quintiles.




                                                41
                        Table A.3: Home Characteristics by Income

                  Variable          First     Second        Third        Fourth     Fifth
                  Current Home:
                   House            0.43       0.56         0.63          0.78      0.77
                   Apartment        0.39       0.29         0.24          0.15      0.18
                   Condominium      0.03       0.07         0.07          0.04      0.05
                   Trailer          0.1        0.07         0.04          0.01      NA
                   Shelter          0.02       NA           NA            NA        NA
                   Other            0.03       0.02         0.01          0.02      0.01
                   Total            168        190          210           243        196
                  No Open Air Access:
                   Not selected 0.67           0.83         0.88          0.92      0.9
                   Selected     0.33           0.17         0.12          0.08      0.1
                   Total        168            190          210           243       196
                  Cross tabulation of US sample for home characteristics
                  by race.


                      Table A.4: Belief in Social Distancing by Income

          Belief in Social Distancing       First    Second        Third     Fourth         Fifth
          Not effective at all              0.03      0.04          0.03         0.02       0.03
          Slightly effective                 0.1      0.11          0.07         0.06       0.04
          Moderately effective              0.17      0.16          0.17         0.19       0.15
          Very effective                    0.31      0.32          0.35         0.35       0.39
          Extremely effective               0.39      0.38          0.38         0.38       0.39
          Total                             168           190       210          243        196
          Cross tabulation of US sample for belief in social distancing by in-
          come quintiles.


A.2.2   Linear Probability Models

                      Table A.5: Factors Associated with Changing Behaviors

                                     (1)            (2)          (3)        (4)          (5)         (6)      (7)
Income:
Second quintile                      -0.00         -0.00         -0.01      -0.01        -0.01       0.00     -0.00
                                    (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.04)   (0.04)
Third quintile                      0.09∗∗        0.09∗∗        0.09∗∗     0.08∗∗       0.07∗       0.08∗∗   0.07∗
                                    (0.04)        (0.04)        (0.04)     (0.04)       (0.04)      (0.04)   (0.04)
                                               42
Fourth quintile            0.11∗∗∗   0.12∗∗∗   0.11∗∗∗   0.10∗∗∗   0.09∗∗∗   0.10∗∗∗   0.09∗∗
                           (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)
Fifth quintile             0.14∗∗∗   0.15∗∗∗   0.15∗∗∗   0.12∗∗∗   0.11∗∗∗   0.12∗∗∗   0.10∗∗∗
                           (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.03)    (0.04)
Socio-Demographics:
Black                                 -0.04                                             -0.02
                                     (0.04)                                            (0.04)
Other                                 -0.04                                             -0.05
                                     (0.05)                                            (0.05)
Male                                 -0.06∗∗                                            -0.03
                                     (0.02)                                            (0.02)
Florida                               0.01                                              -0.00
                                     (0.03)                                            (0.03)
New York                              -0.03                                             -0.04
                                     (0.03)                                            (0.03)
Texas                                 -0.05                                             -0.04
                                     (0.03)                                            (0.03)
56 or Older                          -0.05∗∗                                            -0.02
                                     (0.02)                                            (0.03)
Health:
Diabetes                                        -0.05                                  -0.05∗
                                               (0.03)                                  (0.03)
High Blood Pressure                             -0.03                                   -0.01
                                               (0.03)                                  (0.03)
Heart Disease                                    0.03                                   0.02
                                               (0.05)                                  (0.05)
Asthma                                           0.04                                   0.04
                                               (0.03)                                  (0.03)
Allergies                                        0.04                                   0.02
                                               (0.02)                                  (0.02)
Other Condition                                0.06∗∗                                  0.06∗∗
                                               (0.03)                                  (0.03)
Housing:
Semi-urban / residential                                  -0.03                         -0.03
                                                         (0.02)                        (0.02)


                                     43
Countryside                      -0.08∗∗                        -0.05
                                 (0.04)                        (0.04)
No Access to Open Air             -0.04                         0.00
                                 (0.03)                        (0.03)
Work Arrangements-Losses:
Stopped Working                            0.10∗∗               0.07
                                           (0.04)              (0.04)
Began Tele-Working                         0.12∗∗∗             0.09∗∗
                                           (0.04)              (0.04)
Not Observed Working                        0.07∗               0.04
                                           (0.04)              (0.04)
Other                                      0.18∗∗∗             0.13∗∗∗
                                           (0.04)              (0.04)
Flag extreme lost income                   -0.05∗∗              -0.03
                                           (0.03)              (0.03)
Lost HH Inc./$1,000 Orig                    -0.00               0.00
                                           (0.00)              (0.00)
Lost HH Inc./$1,000 Adj.                   0.02∗∗∗             0.01∗∗
                                           (0.01)              (0.01)
Beliefs-Perceptions:
Slightly effective                                   0.24∗∗    0.23∗∗
                                                     (0.10)    (0.10)
Moderately effective                                 0.25∗∗∗   0.24∗∗
                                                     (0.10)    (0.10)
Very effective                                       0.33∗∗∗   0.32∗∗∗
                                                     (0.09)    (0.09)
Extremely effective                                  0.37∗∗∗   0.34∗∗∗
                                                     (0.09)    (0.09)
Infected in Area                                      0.04      0.01
                                                     (0.04)    (0.04)
More Free Time                                        0.02      0.01
                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)
More Family Time                                     0.05∗∗     0.04∗
                                                     (0.02)    (0.02)
Less Pollution                                       0.06∗∗∗   0.06∗∗


                            44
                                                                                                      (0.02)      (0.02)
Less Noise                                                                                             -0.03       -0.03
                                                                                                      (0.02)      (0.02)
Other                                                                                                   0.02        0.00
                                                                                                      (0.05)      (0.05)
Observations                                      955       955        955       955        955        955         955
R2                                               0.033     0.049      0.046     0.040      0.064      0.099       0.138
Standard errors in parentheses
Linear probability models estimates for association between socidemographic characteristics and behavior change.
∗              ∗∗               ∗∗∗
    p < 0.1,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01



                    Table A.6: Factors Associated with Social Distancing More–Previously Not

                                                  (1)           (2)     (3)       (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)
Income:
Second quintile                                   0.10∗    0.12∗∗      0.09∗      0.06       0.10∗       0.08        0.08
                                                 (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)
Third quintile                                   0.14∗∗∗   0.16∗∗∗    0.13∗∗      0.09      0.15∗∗∗     0.10∗∗       0.09∗
                                                 (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)
Fourth quintile                                  0.15∗∗∗   0.18∗∗∗    0.14∗∗∗     0.10∗     0.17∗∗∗     0.13∗∗∗     0.12∗∗
                                                 (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)     (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)
Fifth quintile                                   0.22∗∗∗   0.30∗∗∗    0.22∗∗∗    0.18∗∗∗    0.26∗∗∗     0.20∗∗∗     0.20∗∗∗
                                                 (0.05)    (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)     (0.06)      (0.05)      (0.06)
Socio-Demographics:
Black                                                        -0.05                                                   -0.01
                                                            (0.05)                                                  (0.05)
Other                                                        -0.08                                                  -0.15∗∗
                                                            (0.08)                                                  (0.07)
Male                                                       -0.19∗∗∗                                                -0.14∗∗∗
                                                            (0.03)                                                  (0.03)
Florida                                                    -0.13∗∗∗                                                -0.15∗∗∗
                                                            (0.05)                                                  (0.04)
New York                                                     -0.06                                                   -0.04
                                                            (0.04)                                                  (0.04)
Texas                                                       -0.12∗∗                                                 -0.11∗∗
                                                            (0.05)                                                  (0.05)
                                                           45
56 or Older                  0.05                                     0.04
                            (0.03)                                   (0.04)
Health:
Diabetes                               -0.01                           0.02
                                      (0.05)                          (0.04)
High Blood Pressure                     0.01                           -0.01
                                      (0.04)                          (0.04)
Heart Disease                        -0.24∗∗∗                        -0.21∗∗∗
                                      (0.07)                          (0.07)
Asthma                                  0.02                           0.01
                                      (0.05)                          (0.05)
Allergies                               0.03                           -0.01
                                      (0.04)                          (0.04)
Other Condition                        0.05                            0.01
                                      (0.05)                          (0.05)
Housing:
Semi-urban / residential                          0.06                0.04
                                                 (0.04)              (0.04)
Countryside                                       0.02                -0.01
                                                 (0.06)              (0.05)
No Access to Open Air                           -0.19∗∗∗             -0.11∗∗
                                                 (0.05)              (0.05)
Work Arrangements-Losses:
Stopped Working                                            0.14∗∗∗    0.08
                                                           (0.05)    (0.05)
Began Tele-Working                                         0.14∗∗    0.12∗∗
                                                           (0.06)    (0.05)
Not Observed Working                                       0.22∗∗∗   0.12∗∗
                                                           (0.05)    (0.05)
Other                                                      0.19∗∗     0.10
                                                           (0.08)    (0.08)
Flag extreme lost income                                     0.03     0.08
                                                           (0.05)    (0.05)
Lost HH Inc./$1,000 Orig                                    -0.00     0.00
                                                           (0.00)    (0.00)


                            46
Lost HH Inc./$1,000 Adj.                                                                   0.04∗∗∗                  0.03∗∗∗
                                                                                           (0.01)                   (0.01)
Beliefs-Perceptions:
Slightly effective                                                                                      0.16∗        0.11
                                                                                                        (0.09)      (0.11)
Moderately effective                                                                                    0.15∗        0.09
                                                                                                        (0.08)      (0.10)
Very effective                                                                                         0.33∗∗∗     0.27∗∗∗
                                                                                                        (0.08)      (0.10)
Extremely effective                                                                                    0.39∗∗∗     0.30∗∗∗
                                                                                                        (0.08)      (0.10)
Infected in Area                                                                                       -0.28∗∗∗    -0.24∗∗∗
                                                                                                        (0.07)      (0.07)
More Free Time                                                                                           0.01        0.01
                                                                                                        (0.03)      (0.03)
More Family Time                                                                                        0.08∗∗     0.10∗∗∗
                                                                                                        (0.03)      (0.03)
Less Pollution                                                                                         0.17∗∗∗     0.15∗∗∗
                                                                                                        (0.04)      (0.04)
Less Noise                                                                                               0.03        0.02
                                                                                                        (0.04)      (0.04)
Other                                                                                                   0.18∗∗      0.15∗
                                                                                                        (0.09)      (0.09)
Observations                                      918        918       918        918        918         918         918
R2                                               0.019      0.071     0.030      0.038      0.057       0.135       0.206
Standard errors in parentheses
Linear probability models estimates for association between socidemographic characteristics and behavior change.
∗              ∗∗               ∗∗∗
    p < 0.1,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01



                Table A.7: Factors Associated with Increased Washing Hands-Wearing Mask

                                                  (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)          (7)
Income:
Second quintile                                   0.07      0.07      0.06      0.05      0.07        0.06         0.05
                                                 (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)      (0.05)       (0.05)
Third quintile                                   0.19∗∗∗   0.21∗∗∗   0.19∗∗∗   0.17∗∗∗   0.20∗∗∗     0.17∗∗∗      0.17∗∗∗
                                                           47
                           (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)
Fourth quintile            0.13∗∗∗   0.15∗∗∗   0.13∗∗     0.10∗    0.15∗∗∗   0.13∗∗∗   0.11∗∗
                           (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)
Fifth quintile             0.20∗∗∗   0.25∗∗∗   0.22∗∗∗   0.17∗∗∗   0.24∗∗∗   0.20∗∗∗   0.19∗∗∗
                           (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.05)    (0.06)
Socio-Demographics:
Black                                 0.09∗                                            0.13∗∗∗
                                     (0.05)                                            (0.05)
Other                                 0.08                                              0.06
                                     (0.07)                                            (0.07)
Male                                 -0.06∗                                             -0.01
                                     (0.03)                                            (0.03)
Florida                               0.02                                              -0.00
                                     (0.04)                                            (0.04)
New York                              0.04                                              0.05
                                     (0.04)                                            (0.04)
Texas                                 -0.03                                             -0.03
                                     (0.04)                                            (0.04)
56 or Older                          0.14∗∗∗                                           0.13∗∗∗
                                     (0.03)                                            (0.04)
Health:
Diabetes                                       -0.07∗                                   -0.06
                                               (0.04)                                  (0.04)
High Blood Pressure                            0.09∗∗∗                                   0.04
                                               (0.03)                                  (0.03)
Heart Disease                                   -0.05                                   -0.05
                                               (0.08)                                  (0.07)
Asthma                                           0.05                                    0.03
                                               (0.04)                                  (0.04)
Allergies                                      0.08∗∗                                  0.08∗∗
                                               (0.03)                                  (0.03)
Other Condition                                 0.08∗                                    0.05
                                               (0.05)                                  (0.04)
Housing:
Semi-urban / residential                                 -0.02                         -0.06∗


                                     48
                                 (0.03)                         (0.03)
Countryside                       -0.04                          -0.07
                                 (0.05)                         (0.05)
No Access to Open Air            -0.12∗∗                         -0.07
                                 (0.05)                         (0.05)
Work Arrangements-Losses:
Stopped Working                            0.19∗∗∗              0.13∗∗
                                           (0.05)               (0.05)
Began Tele-Working                          0.13∗∗              0.13∗∗
                                           (0.06)               (0.05)
Not Observed Working                       0.19∗∗∗                0.08
                                           (0.05)               (0.05)
Other                                      0.24∗∗∗              0.20∗∗∗
                                           (0.07)               (0.06)
Flag extreme lost income                    -0.02                -0.03
                                           (0.05)               (0.05)
Lost HH Inc./$1,000 Orig                   -0.00∗∗               -0.00
                                           (0.00)               (0.00)
Lost HH Inc./$1,000 Adj.                   0.02∗∗               0.02∗∗
                                           (0.01)               (0.01)
Beliefs-Perceptions:
Slightly effective                                     -0.03      -0.04
                                                      (0.13)     (0.13)
Moderately effective                                   0.10       0.08
                                                      (0.12)     (0.12)
Very effective                                        0.22∗        0.19
                                                      (0.11)     (0.12)
Extremely effective                                  0.30∗∗∗     0.24∗∗
                                                      (0.11)     (0.12)
Infected in Area                                     -0.20∗∗∗   -0.20∗∗∗
                                                      (0.07)     (0.07)
More Free Time                                         -0.04      -0.04
                                                      (0.03)     (0.03)
More Family Time                                       -0.02      0.00
                                                      (0.03)     (0.03)


                            49
Less Pollution                                                                              0.09∗∗∗    0.09∗∗∗
                                                                                            (0.03)     (0.03)
Less Noise                                                                                   0.05       0.04
                                                                                            (0.03)     (0.03)
Other                                                                                        0.09       0.05
                                                                                            (0.07)     (0.07)
Observations                                      891     891     891     891      891       891         891
R2                                               0.026   0.058   0.046   0.034    0.059     0.120       0.175
Standard errors in parentheses
Linear probability models estimates for association between socidemographic characteristics and behavior change.
∗              ∗∗               ∗∗∗
    p < 0.1,        p < 0.05,         p < 0.01




                                                         50
