NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LATIN AMERICA'S INTRAREGIONAL TRADE:
EVOLUTION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS

Sebastian Edwards

Miguel Savastano

Working Paper No. 2738

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1988

This paper was written for presentation at the Conference on "Economic
1988.
Aspects of Regional Trading Arrangements," Lehigh University May 25-27,
Edwards gratefully acknowledges financial support from UCLA's Academic Senste
Edwards is a Professor of
and from the National Science Foundation.
Economics st the University of Californim, Los Angeles and s Research
Ssvastsno is a
Associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
This
doctoral candidate at the University of California, Los Angeles.
research is pmrt of the NBER's research program in International Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2738
October 1988

LATIN AMERICA'S INTRAREGIONAL TRADE:
EVOLUTION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS

ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes in detail the evolution of Latin America's international
trade patterns,

focusing on intraregional trade and on the formal attempts

made to create free trade zones or custom unions.

In particular, we assess

trade in the structural

adjustment required by the

the role of intraregional

Latin American debt crisis.

The data analyzed show that the success of the

commercial integration process has been quite limited.

They also show that

there has been no significant change in the DECO countries'

share in Latin

American imports or in the volume of intraregional trade flows since the
early l970a.

Furthermore,

the nature of the adjustment

to the debt crisis

of the 1980s indicate that Latin American markets possess a rather limited
capacity to absorb a substantial increase in regional exports in the current
context.

Thus, we conclude that the success of the required expansion

in

Latin American exports will depend more on the region's ability to design
innovative mechanisms to penetrate the markets of industrialized

than on the deepening of any regional trade integration process.

Sebastian Edwards
Department of Economica

UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90024

Miguel Savastano
Department of Economics

UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90024

countries

I.

Introduction
The attempts to integrate Latin American trade date back, at least, to

the days of the independence wars.

Simon Solivar dreamed of a Spanish

America integratedpolitically and economically.

Although no serious

efforts have been made to politically unify the region, throughout

the years

many attempts have been made at generating some sort of integrated economic
zone within which free trade would prevail.
atcempta have been less than successful.

Historically moat of those

Recently, however,

some experts

have argued that renewed efforts towards regional trade integration should
be undertaken as a way to face the debt crisis.
There is little doubt that a permanent solution to Latin America's
current crisis, and the resumption of sustained

growth, will require a major

effort to increase exports and to enhance the role of the external sector.
It is especially important, then, to determine where thoae exports will go
and who will Latin America import from in the future.

In particular, it is

important to evaluate what contribution could an expansion of intraregional
trade make to this process.

The purpose of this paper is to analyze the evolution of Latin
America's

international

trade patterns,

focusing on intraregional

trade and

on the formal attempts made to create free trade zones or custom unions.
The analysis also deals with the role of the Latin America's main trade

partner

--

the United

States -- and discusses the role of Japan and the

Asian NICs in the future evolution of Latin America's
paper also discusses

trade flows.

The

the possible future evolution of regional trade.

The paper is organized aa follows:

Section II provides a general

account of the evolution of Latin America's
section is divided into two parts.

commercial policies.

The

The first provides a broad view of the

2

evolution of protectionism

in the region; the second psrt is s more detailed

analysis of the region's attempts to formally integrate its international
trade.

Here the objectives

snd institutional characteristics

important multilateral trade agreements
are evaluated.

of the most

are reviewed and their achievements

Section III deals with the recent evolution of Latin

America's directions of trade; the origin of aggregate imports and the
destination of aggregate exports are analyzed.
significantly more detailed and disaggregated

Section IV provides a
analysis of the region's

composition of trade with special emphasis on intraregional

trade.

Unfort-

unately, due to the lack of current data this analysis only covers until
1984.

The information available,

however, is detailed enough as to provide

a broad picture of the recent trends.
protectionism

-

- both in

In Section V we discuss the issue of

the rest of the world as well as in the region

and the future evolution of LatIn America's trade.

-

-

Section VI deals with

the possible role of enhanced intraregional trade in the aolution of the
debt crisis.

II.

Finally Section VII contains the concluding remarks.

The Evolution of Latin America's Corercial Policy

11.1 General Trends
Until the 1930s the external sector in the great majority of the Latin
American countries was highly opened; exchange controls were almost nonexistent, import tariffs were very low, and the "rules of the game" were

strictly followed.

All of this ended with the great depression;

time an epoch of import substitution and protectionism

at that

beganJ

During the 1950s and 1960a, under the intellectual leadership of the
United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA/CEPAL),2 and its
charismatic

Secretary General Raul Prebisch, most of the Latin American

3

countries embarked on ambitious
substitution.

industrialization

programs based on import

This strategy was based on the premise that high import

tariffs and other impediments to international trade would provide temporary

protection to the domestic manufacturing sector.

According to this approach

after some time the domestic firms would have "learned",

would not be necessary any more (Prebisch 1984).

and protection

Things, however, did not

work out as predicted by the theory, and protectionbecame a permanent
feature.

As a result, in most of the Latin American countries the indust-

rial sector developed under the barriers of protection; this industrial
sector was largely inefficient and used highly capital intensive techniques
(Krueger 1980, 1983).

During the 1950s and first half of the l960s it became apparent that
the import substitution strategy was losing dynamism.

Although the easier

and more obvious imports had already been substituted,

these countries

remained highly "dependent" on imported intermediate inputs and capital
goods.

At the same time the highly overvalued domesr[c currencies conspired

against the development

of a dynamic export sector, with the consequent

scarcity of foreign exchange.3
During the late l960s a mild reaction against excessive protectionism
started to take place in some countries.

In Colombia, for example, there

was an important move towards export promotion schemes (Diaz Alejandro
1976).

Also, and as is discussed in greater detail below, during this

period some serious efforts were made to create common markets comprising
either all Latin American countries or subgroups of them.

In that respect

the creation of the Latin American Free Trade Association,

the Andean Group

and the Central American Common Market were
particularly important.

Although in some regards these integrationist schemes were successful, they

4

did not turn around the region's economies, and in many cases the external

sector

--

and the excessive protectionism -- was

still seen as

the "weak

link" by most analysts.4

During the second half of the 1970s a larger and larger number of
countries began to recognize

the benefits of export promotion,

them began to rationalize their external sector.

and some of

This process was supple-

mented by significant debt inflows from the international banking system.
This opening up process was particularly important in the countries of the
Southern Cone (Edwards 1985, Calvo 1986).

In August of 1982, immediately

following Mexico's formal announcement that it was facing serious financial
difficulties,

the international financial community greatly reduced the

amount of funds intermediated to the developing world.

Even some countries,

such as Colombia, which in no way faced payments problems, had serious
macroeconomic

disequilibria,

or had accumulated debt at a very fast pace,

were affected by this reduction in foreign lending.

In fact, it is fair to

was reduced in a brutal way.
say that the availability of foreign funds

For

the developingworld as a whole, external financing was reduced by almost 40
percent between 1981 and 1983.

Moreover,

the major debtors were forced to

fully close a current account deficit that in 1982 exceeded $50 billion in
less than 3 years.

By 1985 the aggregate current account had reached

virtual equilibrium ($-0.l billion).

In order to achieve this significant

adjustment these countries had to engineer a major turnaround in their trade
balance, which went from an aggregate deficit of almost $7 billion in 1981

to a surplus of more than $40 billion in 1984.
During the initial stages of the adjustment process, most Latin
American nations resorted to an extraordinary increase in protectionism as
the most rapid and effective

(although not efficient) way of reducing

5

In some countries the extent of trade restrictions has recently

imports.

been somewhat relaxed, while other have announced some easing up in the'near
In Chile, for exsmple, tariffs were reduced to a 20% uniform level.

future.

Mexico has taken some steps towards reducing the coverage of licenses, while
in Bolivia as part of the stabilization program aimed at stopping hyperinflation, quotas have been abolished and tariffs reduced.
trade liberalization

In many countries

packages are being discussed as a part of

conditionalityagreements with the multilateral institutions.
in mid-1988 the level of trade restrictions

however,

All in all,

remain very high in

most of the region.
11.2 Latin America's Historical Attempts at Rezional Trade Intezrptiort
The first modern attempts at commercial
late 1950s and early 1960s.

integration date back to the

The rationale for these attempts, however,

cannot be found on the traditional
by the customs unions theory.5

(static) trade-creation

effects predicted

Instead, commercial integration in Latin

America was perceived and advocated as the only alternative to overcome the
problems related to the inadequate

scale of domestic markets.

Also,

it was

thought that regional integration would help overcome the existing difficulties of substituting the importation of the full range of intermediate

and capital goods.
In effect, it was basically as an attempt to extend the import
substitution strategy

--

and as a response to the urgings of ECIA

--

that

six South American countries and Mexico established the Latin American Free
Trade Area (LAFTA/AIALC) and four Central American nations created the
Central American Common Market (CACM) in 1960.

These attempts at commercial

integration were followed by the creation of two other subregional
markets

-

- the

Caribbean Free Trade Association

common

(CARIFTA) in 1965 and the

6

Andean Group (AG) in 1969 - - and ended up with the replacement of LAFTA by
the Latin American Integration Association

(LAIA/ALADI) in 1980.

In general, the differences among these institutions are not restricted
to the number and relative homogeneity of their members, but also lie on
their attempted goals and on the mechanisms designed to achieve them, as

well as on their accomplishments.

As a way to provide a basic framework for

the understanding of the current state and future prospects of this process,
this section provides a brief review of the most salient features of the

different attempts at commercial integration in Latin America in the last
three decades.
11.2.1.

The Latin American Free Trade Area

The Treaty of Montevideo, signed in 1960 and put into effect on June

1,

1961, created the Latin American Free Trade Area (LAFTA/ALALC) comprised of
Argentina,

Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Paraguay,

Peru and Uruguay (the two remain-

ing South American countries, Bolivia and Venezuela,

only in 1966 and 1967, respectively).

joined the association

The main objective

gradual elimination of trade barriers and the progressive
tariffs affecting intraregional

trade flows.

of LAFTA was the
reduction of

The goal of an almost

completely liberalized regional market was scheduled to be accomplished after
a 12-year transitionperiod of continuous multilateral
negotiations.
countries agreed on following a product-by-product
regulated by GATT-type principles

The

negotiation strategy

of most favored nation and reciprocity.

The latter was designed to provide more favorable treatment to the least
developed countries of the region (Bolivia and Ecuador).
In order to achieve its goal of a gradual liberalization of
intraregional

trade flows LAFTA established three mechanisms:

lists", the "common lists" and the agreements

for industrial

the "national

7
complementation.

The items included in the "national lists" were those for

which each country agreed to reduce nominal tariffs by at least 8% per year.
The negotiations concerning

the products each country was to include in

these lists were scheduled to be conducted annually.

the other hand, included those producta in which
have fully liberalized
tions

-

- intraregional

--

i.e.,

The "common lists", on

jj countries

agreed to

zero tariffs and no quantitative restric-

trade by the end of the transition period.

The

Treaty established that negotiations regarding this list should be carried
out every 3 years and that the members should progressively

increase the

number of items included on it, in order to fulfill the objective of having
75% of the intraregional

trade subject to this treatment by 1972.

the agreements for industrial

complementation

Finally,

were supposed to constitute

the mechanisms for coordinating at a regional level the industrial policies

in those sectors in which the volume of intraregional trade was too low or
nonexistent.

This attempt at commercial integration, however, faced serious
obstacles almost since its inception.

Pressures

for the extension of the

original 12-year transition period began to build up just after the first

round of negotiations.

After successive postponements and amendments of the

liberalizationschedule, this was finally extended until 1980.
hand,

despite an auspicious

On the other

start, the number of items added each year to

the "national list" of the member countries experienced a rapid and abrupt
reduction.

As can be seen in Table

1, the total

number of tariff conces-

sions granted by LAflA members on their "national lists" more than doubled
between 1962 and 1968, but almost stagnated from then on.
countries

By 1968 the

had already granted 93% of the total concessions they had given by

the end of the LAflA agreement

in 1980.6

8

The other two mechanisms designed by LAflA performed even worse.

Only

one "common list" was negotiated and approved in 1964, but it never became

while the agreements for industrial complementationcovered very

effective,

few sectors, moat of which were dominated by multinational

corporations

located in the three larger countries (Argentina, Brazil and Mexico).
The relative failure of the negotiation mechanisms
the sluggish evolution of the volume of intraregional

was also reflected in

trade.

Table 1 shows

that the percentage of LAFTA'a exports directed to the regional market only
increased from 7.6% to 11.4% between 1962-64 and 1971-72.

After a decrease

in

the period 1973-74 caused by the oil crisis, this ratio remained quite stable
at a level lower than 14% until the dissolution of LAflA in 1980.
A key factor to understand the very limited success of LAflA in
promoting a vigorous increase in the level of intraregionsl trade can be
found in the type of products for which tariff concessions were granted.

Most of the items included in the "national lists" of the member countries
were either primary products (on which trade within the region had been
traditionally
region.

based) or commodities that had never been produced in the

In this sense, the slow acceleration in the volume of intraregional

exports seems to have been just a consequence of making the whole scheme
dependent

on the intensification

of the traditional patterns of trade within

the region.

Among the different explanations that the literature on the subject has
provided for this modest overall result of the LAflA experience we have:7
(1)

the absence of a mechanism that would have prevented an uneven distri-

bution of the costs and benefits of the integration process among the
heterogeneous members of LAflA;

(2)

the favorable effect generated by the

abundance of capital inflows in the early 1970s on

LAFA

countries'

foreign

exchange constraints;

(3)

the nonexistence

of provisions for the

coordination of macroeconomic policies within the members;
bargaining process implicit in a product-by-product
and

(5)

(4)

the costly

negotiation technique;

the inherent conflict that exists between a domestic import sub-

stitution strategy and a commercial integration scheme.

Even though there

is no doubt that factors (1) through (4) played a role in the disappointing
outcome of the LAflA attempt, it can also be said that all of them were,

in

one way or another, a consequence of the conflict between the goals of

import substitution end those of a genuine integration process.
In effect, the underlying rationale of all these explanations seems to
be the existence of a basic misperception of the significant costs involved
in the attempt to extend the import substitution strategy to a regional
level.

The fact that potential regional imports of manufacturing products

were even more competitive with domestic production than the permitted
imports from third sources made the highly protected

import competing sector

of each country to strongly oppose the scheduled liberalization.

The large

efficiency differentials among the industrial sectors of LAFTA members only
exacerbated this problem.

This also explains why the integration process

experienced a halt in the late l960s, precisely when its further progress
required granting tariff concessions on the highly protected durable and
nondurable consumer goods sector.
The reaction of LAFTA members to this paralysis of the integration
process varied widely;

it went from the early creation of the Andean Group

by a subgroup of nations in 1969, to the final replacement of LAFTA by the
more modest, in terms of goals, Latin American IntegrationAssociation
(l.AIA/ALADI) in 1980.

By that time, however, the trade orientation strategy

of most countries of the region had already experienced a drastic change.

10

11.2.2 Central American and Caribbean Exoeriences With Common Market
Arrangements
i)

The Central American Common Market

The first movements towards commercial integration in Central America
consisted of a series of bilateral trade agreements established among the
five countries

of the region in the 1950s.

The integration process was

accelerated at the end of that decade when, with the assistance of ECLA,

some of these countries attempted to extend their import substitution
strategy by implementing a regional industrialization scheme based on
"integration-industries"

previously allocated among the members.

those countries with a more advanced industrial
Salvador)

demonstrated

However,

sector (Guatemala and El

their strong opposition to this approach by signing,

together with Honduras, a free trade agreement ("Treaty of Economic Association") in February of 1960.

This agreement was ratified by Nicaragua in

December of the same year with the signature of the "General Treaty of
Economic Integration", which created the Central American Common Marker
(CACM/MCCA).8

The terms of the treaty implied the immediate adoption of

free intraregional trade in most manufacturing

commodities and the

establishment of a five-year schedule for the elimination of tariffs on the
remaining items (mainly agricultural products) as well as for the
harmonization of a coinon external tariff structure.

The treaty also

considered the creation of a regional payments regime administered by a
Central American Clearing House, which was established in July 1961.
There was remarkable progress during the first years of the treaty.

1966 more than 94% of the items of the CACM tariff classification (NAUCA)
were subject to free trade within the region and to a common external tariff.

As a consequence, intraregional trade experienced a spectacular

By

11

growth; Table 2 ahowa how the proportion of CACM's exporta traded in the

regional market increased from 7.8% to 24.2% between 1961 and 1968.
However,

this transition towards a fully liberalized regional trade waa

marked by the continuous complaints of the poorer membera of the agreement
(Honduras and Nicaragua) regarding

benefits of the common market.

the asymmetry

in the distribution of the

This discontent, reflected in these

countries' balance of payments deficits and coupled with adverse external
terms of trade in the late 1960s, led to the imposition of a 30% "temporary"
surcharge on the common external tariff in

1967, and prompted Nicaragua

to

implement discriminatorymeasures against the other CACM members in 1968.

A

related event was the July 1969 "Soccer War" between Honduras and El

Salvador that resulted in the withdrawal of Honduras from the CACM in
December of 1970.
In spite of the disruptive effects of these circumstances, particularly
of Honduras' withdrawal,
remaining

four countries

an improving external environment allowed the
to continue with the intraregional

agreement during the l970s.

Moreover,

the continuous

free trade

attempts of Honduras

to re-enter the common market had the effect of not altering drastically
pattern of trade within the region.

the

In fact, Table 2 shows that by 1974

intraregional exports accounted for more than 25% of total exports of the
region.

The evolution

performsnce

of this ratio not only contrasts with the poor

of LAFTA in the same period, but is also higher than similar

indicators for all the other commercial integration groupings

among

developing countries.
The most common explanation given to the good performance of this
integration attempt stresses the economic homogeneity of their members and
the lack of political

strength of their domestic import competing sectors.

12

It is precisely because of these reasons that Cline (1983) sustains that the
liberalizationstrategy followed by CACM cannot be generalized to broader
commercial

integration schemes in Latin America.

Even if Cline's statement

is correct, and despite the negative effects that the severe internal problems and the adverse external shocks surrounding the debt crisis have had on
intraregional

trade flows, the CACM stands out as the most successful

the attempts at liberalizing

of all

intraregional trade that have been made in

Latin America.
ii)

The Caribbean Exoeriences with Common Markets:

CARIVA and

CARICOM

The attempts at commercial integration among the very small and
extremely open Caribbean economies date back to the mid-l960s.
articles of a Caribbean Free Trade Association
Antigua,

Barbados and Guyana.

In 1965,

(CARIFrA) were subscribed by

This agreement was ratified three years later

(in May 1968), by eight other Caribbean countries

(Jamaica, Trinidad and

Tobago, Grenada,

Dominica, St. Lucia, St. Vincent, Montserrat and St. Kitts-

Nevis-Anguilla);

the remaining Caribbean nation, Belize, only joined the

association in 1971.

10

The CARIFTA agreement
countries

immediately freed most of the trade among member

from import and export dutiea and from nontariff barriers.

year schedule for the elimination of intraregional
the few import-aubstituting

A five

tariffs was designed for

products exempted from the regulation.

However,

the agreement did not consider any measure related to the impositionof a

common external tariff.
the establishment

Intraregional

trade increased significantly after

of CARIFTA; between 1967 and 1973 the share of intrareg-

ional trade rose from approximately

7.8 percent to 11 percent.

The gains from this integration process, however, were strongly biased

in favor of the more developed countries of the agreement which accounted

13

Given this asymmetry in

for more than 90 percent of intraregional trade.
the distribution of benefits,

the less developed countries

of CARIFTA

exerted pressure for a broadening of the scope of integration.
lar, these countries were concerned with the establishment

In particu-

of mechanisms

that could imply a more favorable treatment for them within the agreement.
As a result of this situation the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) was
established in August of 1973.
integration,

Its objectives went further than commercial

since they also involved the harmonization

of monetary and

fiscal policies and the creation of planning agencies for agricultural and
industrtnl development.

Also, a common external tariff for imports from

nonmember countries was established.

Despite the almost immediate adoption

of the common external tariff, the adverse external terms of trade caused by
the oil shock prompted protectionist

import licensing

-

- from Guyana and

responses

dropped to 8% in 1975 and 7% in 1976

--

but

-

in

the form of restrictive

This action not only affected

Jamaica.

negatively the level of intraregional trade

-

-

-

which

share in total trade

also provoked antagonism and

retaliatory responses from the other members of CARICDM.11 Although some
conciliatory measures were subsequently attempted, the share of intraregional trade has remained in the neighborhood of 7% in the following years

and the trade flows have still been heavily concentrated among the four more
developed countries of the region.

These facts seem to indicate that the

wide differences in the economic size of the members, and the lack of
diversification

of their productive structures, constitute insurmountable

obstacles for a successful commercial integration within this region.

11.2.3 The Andean Group
As pointed out in Section 11.2.1, one of the consequences of the
inoperacy of LAFTA was the formation of the Andean Group (AG) by five of its

14

middle-size members.

In 1969 Bolivia, Colombia, Chile, Ecuador and Peru

signed the Cartagena Agreement with the explicit goal of avoiding the inconthat determined the poor performance of

sistencies

These

LAFI'A.12

optizuistic expectations were based on the relative economic homogeneity of
the AG members and on the by-then widely accepted conception that a compre-

hensive industrial planning strategy was the prerequisite of a successful
deepening

of the integration process.

Within these expanded framework, the AG established as its objeccives:
(1)

a progressive liberalization of intraregional trade;

achievement

of a common external tariff;

(3)

(2)

the gradual

the emphasis on regional

investment programs designed to balance the costs and benefits of the integration process among the member countries, and

(4)

the establishment

code for the common treatment of foreign direct investment.

of a

The specific

mechanisms designed to achieve these objectives allowed for a special treatment of the less developed countries of the region - -

Bolivia and

Ecuador.

In this sense, with respect to the first two objectives, the AG
countries agreed that Colombia, Chile, Peru and Venezuela should carry out
an automatic yearly reduction of their average tariff level of the order of
7% of the initial tariff structure, in order to achieve a complete liberal-

ization of their trade flows by 1980.13

By that time the common external

tariff of the region was supposed to be already in practice.

In the cases

of Bolivia and Ecuador, however, this liberalizationwas expected to start
only in 1980, and to be completed by 1990.

Although the automaticity of

this liberalization schedule contrasts with the inefficient product-by-product strategy adopted by LAflA, the AG scheme exempted several items from the

proposed tariff reduction.

It was argued that the allocation of industries

in those sectors should be a result of the regional investment program.

15

With respect to the last objective
governing foreign investment

--

the AG

-

- the

establishment

of common rules

contemplated two mechanisms that were

supposed to alter significantly the industrial configuration of the region:
the reallocation of some multisectoral
the member countries

-

- as a way to

industries that already existed among

distribute more equally the potential

benefits provided by the expanded market - - and the programming of new
investments
countries

in eight "strategic" industrial sectorsJ4

Finally, the Andean

agreed to maintain permanent negotiations on the issue of foreign

direct investment until a code for its common treatment could be unanimously
approved.

Although the results obtained by the Andean Group are better than those
achieved by LAFTA, they are much less spectacular than what its members
originally expected.
niarket

increased

1979, and

The proportion of AG's exports traded in the regional

from a low value of 1.7 percent in 1970 to 4.5 percent in

since then has remained stable in the neighborhood of 4 percent.

The main factors determining this meager achievement seem to have been the
excessive number of exemptions granted on the tariff liberalization
schedule,

the serious difficulties

faced by the members in the design of the

common external tariff and the inconsistency between the regional industrial
planning strategy and the particular trade regime prevailing on each of the
member countries.
The importance of the generalized granting of exemptions

is reflected

by the fact that, as of 1980, more than 25 percent of the items included in
the NABANDINA tariff nomenclature had not been subject to the tariff

liberalizationprocess.

On the other hand, the differences in the level and

dispersion of the protective structure of the AG members generated divergent
positions

regarding

the appropriate timing, and the optimal level of the

16

common external tariff.

The problem was exacerbated by the overvaluation

of

most of the members' real exchange rates and the existence of different
exchange rate practices within the region thet made it more difficult to
measure the effective rate of protection received by any activity in some
particular countryJ5

Overall, the fact that the members' positions in this

particular respect seemed irreconcilable, and thet the common external
tariff was never accomplished, influenced negatively the commercial
integration process within the Andean Group.
The failure of the regional industrial planning strategy also

contributed to the slowdown of the integration process.

As of 1985 only

three of the eight investment programs in "strategic" sectors had been

approved (on the petrochemical,

metalmechanic

and automobile sectors) and

not a single regional reallocation of the previously established multisectoral industries

had been carried out.

the incompatibility

This put in evidence, once again,

of the national industrialization objectives with the

attempts to extend the import substitution strategy to a regional level; it
seems extremely

difficult for domestic producers

to internalize the

potential benefits stemming from a regional liberalization,

even if the

latter is carried out properly.
Finally,

the attempt to coordinate

the region's position towards direct

foreign investment ended up constituting another disruptive factor.
approval of the Andean Code for Foreign Investment - Decision 24

-

- which severely limited the

The

better known as

share of foreign capital in

industries operating within the region, provoked the withdrawal of Chile
from the Andean Group in 1976 and caused a slight decrease in the inflow of
this type of private capital to the remaining members.

17

As a whole, then, the mechanisms designed by the AG for deepening the
integration process among its members

(the industrial programming

the common external tariff), have not been successful.
to exist a consensus

scheme and

However, there seems

in the sense that with a less interventionist

and a more comprehensive

liberalization,

approach

there are still significant gains

to be obtained from a commercial integration arrangement within this region.
11.2.4 The Latin American Inteeration Association
The recognition of the benefits of export promotion policies and the
adoption of a more outward oriented strategy by most Latin American countries in the late 1970s, coupled with the poor performance
comprehensive

of the

integration processes attempted until then, determined the

replacement of LAFTA by the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA/

ALADI) in 1980.

This new arrangement substituted

the ambitious

goal of

establishing a free trade area within Latin America for the more pragmatic
objective

of facilitating the negotiation of bilateral commercial agreements

that might be later generalized to other countries of the region.
In this sense, the basic mechanisms designed by LAIA are bilateral
tariff negotiations - -

that

on extended to other members

should allow for the possibility of being later
-

- and

the granting of regional tariff

preferences by each of the member countries.
however, are not subject to any pre-determined

These tariff preferences,
schedule and do not intend to

be a part of a common external tariff for the region.
The increased efficiency of the negotiation strategy adopted by LAIA,
together with the realism of its objectives, reflect a clear change in the

expected role of commercial integration arrangements in Latin America.

From

being conceived as the extension of domestic import substitution strategies
to a regional level, they are now perceived as a component

of an overall

18

outward-orientedstrategy that can contribute to enhance export growth for
the region as a whole, without discriminating

excessively against other

trade partners.

III.

Latin America's International Trade:

Aggreaste Trends

In this section we analyze the evolution of Latin America's direction
of foreign trade at an aggregate level.

Table 3 contains data on the dollar

value of imports and exports for fourteen Latin American countries for selected years between 1970 and 1985.

This table shows that for most countries

the (nominal) dollar value of imports peaked between 1980 and 1982, only to
experience
crisis.

a dramatic fall in the years following the eruption of the debt

Aa can be seen, in every single country the (nominal) dollar value

of imports in 1985 was well below its 1980 level.

For these 14 countries as

a whole the (nominal) dollar value of imports was, in 1985, 36 percent below
its 1980 value.

Moreover,

when expressed in real dollar terms, 1985 total

imports are 45 percent below their 1980

value6

Of course, this mainly

reflects the reduction in imports required by the adjustment programs implemented by these countries after the 1982 debt crisis that was discussed in
The evolution of the value of exports in Table 3 also

Section 11.1.

reflects the effects of the adjustment programs.
countries

--

Argentina,

In a number of these

Brazil, Ecuador and Mexico --

was in 1985 significantly above its 1980 value.

the

value of exports

This was achieved in spite

of the fact that for most of the countries in the region the international
prices of their exports declined quite substantially during the period (see
Edwards l988a).
Table 4 contains data on an indicator of these economies degree of
openness:

the ratio of total trade (imports

exports)

to GOP.

Although

19

the index differs from country-to-country,

it is still possible to draw as a

general pattern of behavior that there was a fairly significant increase in
the degree of openness in the l970s.

This general move towards greater

openness is revealed both when 1975 is compared with 1970 as when 1980 is

compared with 1970.

Generally

speaking, the available

evidence strongly

indicates that the 1970s was a decade where most of the nations of Latin

America became more open to the rest of the world.

In fact, Edwards (1988d)

shows that this claim is supported by the evolution of the level of import
tariffs and other impediments to trade during this period.

Table 4 also

shows that during the first half of the 1980s the trend towards greater
openness was drastically reversed, with the openness
sharp drop for most countries.

index exhibiting a

This, of course, was partially the consequ-

ence of che debt crisis and of the significant cut in imports that the
adjustment policies required.

As can be seen in Table 4, in the case of the

tocal crade to GDP ratio, in 9 of the 14 countries there was a decline
between 1980 and 1985.17
111.1

The Origin of Aggregate Imnorts
In this subsection we focus on the recent evolution of intraregional

trade by analyzing the behavior of different countries

of Latin America's

imports at an aggregate level.

general picture and a better understanding

shares of the value

In order co have a

of the way in which regional

trade has performed, we also look in some detail at the way other countries'

shares of regional imports have evolved.
the share of the OECD -partners

--

has

which

In particular we inquire on how

comprises the region's most important trade

evolved through time.

Tables 5 contains data on the percentage distribution of the value of
imports for 14 Latin American countries for 1977-86.

These data give us

20

information on what fraction of the U.S. dollar value of each of these
imports came from industrialized

countries'

ponded to intraregional
Caribbean

-

trade

-

- and what proportion

countries, what share corres-

- imports from within Latin America and

the

came from the rest of the world.

Several facts arise from this table.

First, notice that the

distribution of the origin of imports varies significantly across countries.
While in some of them the industrialized countries' share in total imports
is in the 70 to 80 percent range, in others it is approximately 50 to 60
percent, while still in others it is in the order of 30 percent (i.e.
Uruguay).

Another interesting fact, that due to the aggregation does not

emerge from the table, is that for the great majority of the Latin American
countries

there have been no perceptible changes in the proportion of

imports coming from the U.S.18
countries

Third, in some of the large and medium size

either in 1982 or 1983 there is a slight drop in the share of

imports coming from the industrialized

countries

1982; Chile 1982 and 1983; Mexico, 1983).

(Argentina, 1982; Brazil,

Finally,

there was a slight increase in the industrialized

in 8 of these countriea

countries

market share in

1985 and 1986 (Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Uruguay, Venezuela, Colombia,
Costa Rica and Ecuador).
With respect to intraregional trade, it is interesting to note that in
the years corresponding to the debt crisis, and until 1983 or 1984, in al-

most every country there was a significant increase in the share of imports
coming from the region.

The reason for this has mainly to do with the way

in which the import compression that followed the crisis was distributed
across countries.
source; however,

Most Latin American nations reduced imports from every
during the initial years of the crisis the drop in total

imports greatly exceeded the decline in imports from the region.

This

21

increase in the share of intraregional
countries

imports was reversed in most

This reflects, to a large extent, the

in the last few years.

converse of the phenomenon of 1982-83.

As these nations have been able to

increase their total imports, these have mainly come from outside the
region.

Overall, Table S shows that the share of aggregate

imports coming

from the region stood in 1986 significantly above its level in the late
1970s in most of the middle-income
For the majority of upper-middle
the share of intraregional

decreased -- as in Mexico
111.2

and low-income Latin American countries.

income countries

of the region, however,

imports has remained rather stagnant, or has even
--

in

the last decade.

The Destination of Aazreaate

Exvorts

Table 6 contains data on the regional destination of aggregate exports
for a group of 16 Latin American countries for 1970-83.

Given that this

table permits us to assess which markets sustained the aggregate expansion

of exports from the region in the adjustment period, an additional refinement has been made by explicitly identifying the export shares of LAIA/
ALADI, the U.S. and Japan.

A number of interesting facts are revealed by this table.
last two years show a reversal of the declining

trend that characterized

evolution of the share of exports going to the OECD.
exports to the U.S. have increased

First, the
the

Furthermore, regional

substantially after the debt crisis.

This fact seems to indicate that the U.S. market has absorbed most of the
regional attempt to close its current account gap.

Second, after reaching a

peak in 1980, intraregional exports have experienced a significant decline.
This implies that the regional market has not been able to couple with the
region's efforts to increase its foreign exchange earnings.

The latter

becomes evident if we note that in 1983 and 1984 the proportion of intra-

22

Latin American exports reached their lowest value since 1970.

Finally,

another important trend captured. in Table 6 is the steady increase in Latin
American exports going to the rest (i.e., non-Japan)
then, the aggregate

of Asia.

In general,

trends seem to indicate that the regional market posses-

ses a rather limited absorption capacity for new Latin American exports, at

least during periods in which the region as a whole is trying to solve acute
external disequilibria.
IV.

Latin American International Trade:

Disanreeated Data

In the preceding section we investigated the evolution of Latin America's aggregate

imports and exports.

these aggregate

data.

In this section we ask what is behind

In particular we inquire on which specific products

does Latin America import from whom and exports to whom.

As in the previous

section our main interest is with the evolution of intraregional
The Economic Commission for Latin America (ECLA/CEPAL)

trade.

constructs

fairly detailed and very reliable data on the region's directions of trade.
Unfortunately in their effort to clean up the new data obtained from UNCTAD,
they take a long time checking and rechecking the figures.

This means that

any atudy that wants to rely on these quality data has to use time series
that end some years back.

This paper is no exception;

data discussed here only cover the period up to 1984.
only rely on some preliminary indicators
figures

-

-

to

-

the disaggregated

At this point we can

- including some

preliminary ECLA

predict how these directions of trade have evolved in the last

3 years or so.

ECLA collects disaggregated data at the one digit SITC level; thus in
the analysis that follows it will be possible to
distinguish between the
following goods' categories:

23

- Category

0:

Foodstuffs and Live Animals

-

Category

1:

Beverages

-

Category

2:

Raw Non-Food Materials,

-

Category

3:

Fuel and related products

-

Category

4:

Oil, greases and waxes of vegetable and animal origins

-

Category

5:

Chemical products

-

Category

6:

Manufactured products

-

Category

7:

Machinery and transport equipment

-

Category

8:

Other manufactured goods

-

Category

9:

Other commodities.

and Tobacco
except Fuel

Couroosition and Oriain of Latin American Imoorts:

IV.l

Disasarezated Trends

Table 7 shows the composition of imports in our 16 Latin American
countries

taken as a whole.

It reveals that the bulk of the region's

imports has always been concentrated on the manufacturing

sector (categories

5, 6, 7 and 8), with capital goods (category 7) being the most important
item.

However,

it also shows a clear decline in the import shares of

categories 6 and

7

that has been explained by a substantial increase in the

relative importance of fuel imports (category 3).
In order to isolate the effects of the oil shocks, which affected
asymmetrically the countries of the region, Tables

8

and 9 provide disaggre-

gated information on the distribution of different categories of non-fuel
imports among the intraregional
middle-income

market, the U.S. and Japan for 12 upper-

and middle-income Latin American countries.

The

disaggregationused here distinguishes between primary and manufactured
products,

obtained in the following way:

-0, 1, 2 and 4
5, 6, 7 and 8.

as

defined above,

(ii)

Primary products:

Categories

Manufactured products:

Categories

(i)

The tables also include information on the dollar value of

24

imports of each category to get an idea of their relative magnitudes.

From these tables it is possible to detect some common patterns across
First, with the exception of Uruguay and Paraguay,

countries.

the U.S.

remains as the most important supplier of manufactured imports to the regThe range of the U.S. share of this type of imports in Latin America

ion.

goes from a low 17 percent
percent --

in

-

-

in

the case of Paraguay

the case of Mexico.

-

to

as high as 67

A second interesting pattern is related

to the increase in the share of intraregional imports.
American countries, Mexico being the major exception,
participation

-

In moat Latin
this increase in the

of imports from within the region has constituted the

counterpart of the slight loss of competitiveness

and some other OECD countries in the last decade.

experiencedby the U.S.
As mentioned in the

previous section, this phenomenon was particularly clear in the asymmetric
compression of intraregional
by the debt crisis.

However,

imports during the enormous adjustment provoked

it is also clear form the table that, perhaps

with the exception of Argentina, the absolute magnitude of the share of
manufactured imports from within the region is relatively large only for the
smaller countries of Latin America.

With respect to agricultural products, it is important to note the
increase in the share of imports coming from the U.S.

of Argentina,

Except for the cases

Chile, Uruguay and Paraguay, the U.S. has displaced

other

Latin American and Caribbean countries as the main provider of these type of
goods.

Moreover,

by 1984 some of these countries imported almost half of

their primary products from the U.S.

A further disaggregationof these trends is provided in Tables 10 and
11.

They show how each of the two more important Latin American integration

schemes (LAflA --

which

later on became IAIA -- and the CACM) distribute

25

their imports of the different

"categories" of goods añiong the different

Each cell in each of these tables indicate what proportion of

suppliers.

that particular category of good is imported by that integration scheme from
that specific supplier.
distribution

Also, the last column of these tables reflect the

of total imports from the region among the different suppliers.

In this way, Table 10 shows that imports from the members of i.AFTA-LAIA
have been concentrated on categories 7 (machinery), 5 (chemicals), 3 (fuel)
2 (raw materials)

and 0 (foodstuffs).

With the exception of fuel, which is

mainly imported from OPEC countries, the OECD countries have been, by large
margin, the most important suppliers of these goods to the region.
table also reveals that the increase in the share of intraregional

The
imports

of manufactures (category 6) and chemicals (category 5) represent the major
achievement of this integration scheme in the recent years.

What is even

more important is that this increase in intraregional impdrts coincided with
the adoption of the more pragmatic
opposed to that of LAFTA

--

prompted by the debt crisis.

approach of the LAIA agreement

-

aa

and, more recently, with the drastic adjustment
Finally, this table also shows that the shares

of the other integration schemes (CACM and CARICOM) on the imports of LAIA
members have been almost insignificant,

although this fact maybe explained

by the enormous differences in the size of the countries involved in each
group.

As shown by Table 11, the distributionof imports by origin in the
countries

of the CACM is somewhat different from that of the

L.AIA membera.

Although the OECD countries also constitute the major providers of all types
of goods, except fuel, to the CACM, the countries from within this region
have consistently remained as the second most important suppliers of
imports.

The significant difference in the magnitudes of the share of

26

intraregional

imports of the CACM and LAIA arrangements

is a reflection of

the relative success of the integration process in Central America already
discussed in subsection 11.2.2.
of intraregional

The substantial decline in the CACM share

be
imports in the recent years, on the other hand, has to

the political
interpreted with caution since it can be just a consequence of
turmoil that has characterized

the region since the late 1970s.

P7.2 Structure and Destination of Latin American Exports:
Disasarezated Trends
Given the major role that a significant increase in Latin American

a long lasting solution to the
exports will play in the achievement of
region's pressing economic problems,

it is important to assess what and to

whom will Latin America export in the following years.
aggregate

The analysis of the

trends of regional exports made in subsection 111.2 have already

shown that the intraregional market embodied a somewhat limited capacity to
absorb the substantial increase in exportable output from the region in the
mid-1980s.

The disaggregated

data on the composition of regional exports

presented in this subsection will permit us to identify the type of exports
that determined this outcome.
The data in Table 12 describe the evolution of the composition of totsl
and Non-Fuel exports of our sample of 16 Latin American countries.
facts emerge from this table.

Several

First, the share of exports of foodstuffs

and

agricultural products (category 0) has declined steadily throughout the period.

Second, exports of fuel have increased in importance both as a result

of the increases in the price of oil and of the larger gas and oil
production in the region.
categories

Third, manufactured exports corresponding

to

5 (chemicals) and 7 (machinery) have experienced an important

increase in recenc years.

This trend is more clearly captured in the second

27

panel of the table that excludes fuel exports:

whereas in 1970 categories 5

and 7 represented no more than 6 percent of non-fuel exports,
accounted

for 19.2 percent.

manufactures

in 1984 they

Finally, these data also show that exports of

(category 6) have mostly maintained their relative importance

throughout the period, accounting for less than 20 percent of non-fuel
exports.

In order to determine which trade partners have supported the export
expansion of Latin American countries, Tables 13 to 15 provide disaggregated
information on the destination of non-fuel exports for the Latin American
nations grouped according to their per capita income.19

These tables show

that those upper-middle income Latin American countries that achieved a
substantial

increase in manufactured exports in the last years

(Argentina,

Brazil, Mexico, Venezuela and even Chile), have experienced a decline in the

proportion of their exports directed to the regional market.

In most cases

this lower share of intraregional exports has implied an increase in the
share of exports to the U.S., confirming the aggregate
Table 6.

The intraregional

trend captured by

share of manufactured exports in all the other

countries has not exhibited that much of a trend, having been this share

particularly large for the Central American countries,

With respect to

primary exports, these tables reflect that the U.S. constitutes the most
important market in the majority of cases.

Although the U.S. share has

declined in recent years, the shsre of incraregional exports of this type of
products,

which has rarely been larger than 20 percent, has not shown an

increasing trend.
The more disaggregated data contained in Table 16 reveal even more
clearly how the substantial increase in manufactured exports of the LAIA
members has been mostly absorbed by OECD countries.

Between 1980 and 1984

28

the regional exports of this type of goods increased by 37 percent (U.S.
$6.7 billion),
categories

while the share of intraregional exports in all these

declined drastically.

the exports of these goods to

Actually,

the region only increased by 0.4 billion during that period.

On the other hand, the data in Table 17 shows that the large share of
intraregional

exports of manufactures in the CACM has not experienced a

significant reduction

in recent years.

However, this group of countries

have confronted shocks of a very different nature than the ones faced by
LAIA members, as indicated by the fact that the nominal value of these
countries'

exports has decreased since 1980.

In general, then, the evidence presented in this subsection seems to
indicate that a sustained increase in Latin American exports
of non-traditional

products - in
-

the present circumstances

-

-

particularly

w4ll depend more

on these nations' ability to diversify their exportable output and to penetrate industrialized countries' markets than on the deepening of
intraregional

trade agreements.

However, the achievement of this goal will

require not only a more transparent trade regime in the Latin American
countries, but also a significant decline in the protectionist

prevailing in the developed nations.

sentiments

To both of these issues we turn in the

following section.

V.

protectionism and the Future

Evolution

of Latin Anerica's International

As noted in Section II, after approximately three decades of inward
oriented policies, in the mid-l970s a number of Latin American countries
started to move towards more outward oriented trade regimes,

abandoning

the

idea of extending the import substitution process to a regional level.
Although this trend towards greater openness occurred at different speeds,

29

it involved a large number of countries.

Edwards (l988a), for example,

reports data on average tariffs that clearly show that several countries
the region went through nontrivial
1980s.

trade liberalizations

in

up to the early

the debt crisis and the need to reduce imports very fast

However,

resulted in a dramatic reversal of that tendency.
the preceding sections,

As already mentioned in

in the mid-1980s in almost every country the degree

of protectionism exceeds that of the beginning of the decade.
Although there is some debate on how desirable it is for the developing

trade,

nations to move towards

there is wide agreement that the Latin

American nations should implement more transparent and non-discriminatory
outward oriented regimes.
volume of international
enough.

Only in this way will efficiency increase and the

trade, and especially exports, will grow fast

In fact, Mexico is already energetically moving in that direction.

Tariffs, of course, constitute only one form of protection, and
countries

in fact use a large number of other mechanisms, generally known as

nontariff barriers, to introduce de facto wedges between domestic and world
prices.

Nontariff barriers can take many different forms ranging from

prior-deposits to outright quotas.

The history of nontariff barriera in

Latin America is long and generalized.
volume of trade

-

- both

Thus, in order for the region's

intraregional and with the reat of the world

-

- to

experience a significant increase both tariffs and the wide variety of NTBs
should be drastically reduced.

Multiple exchange rates are another

mechanism used quite extensively by the Latin American nations to obstruct
trade flows.

Interestingly

enough, intraregional

trade agreements,

the studies on NTB5, have not focused on this protective tool.

and even

At this

point a number of countries in the region in fact do have multiple rates.

30

The lack of reliable data on NTBs

has

generally frustrated analysts

that have tried to assess with some degree of rigor the extent of protection
in the developingworld.

For this reason in a recent massive cross country

study undertakenat the World Bank, an effort to construct subjective "indexes of liberalization"

was made.

the extent of trade impediments,
subjective,

These indexes are supposed to capture

including tariffs and other NTBs.

They are

in the sense that they don't combine actual objective measurea.

Although there are some shortcomings related to this subjectivity,
the nonverifiabilityand noncomparability

including

across countries, their construc-

tion has been extremely useful, helping understand the evolution of "true
protectionism" in some of these countries.
nations

For the five Latin American

included among the 18 countries covered by the study, the indexes

reflect both the protectionist history of these countries, as well as the
efforts toward non-discriminatoryliberalization implemented in the late
1970s and early 1980s (see Michaely, Papageorgiou and Choksi, 1986).
Unfortunately

the data available on NTBs in the developing countries,

and in particular in Latin America, are exceedingly sketchy.

However,

a

recent study by ALADI (1984) provides some indication of the coverage of two
forms of NTBs:

outright prohibitions and prior import licenses.

summarizes these data.

Table 18

As can be seen from this table NTBs in Latin America

constitute a serious obstacle and are as prevalent, if not more, than in the
developed countries.
V.].

Macroeconomic

Disequilibrium

and Protectionist

Pressures

An issue that has not been sufficiently emphasized, especially by the
supporters of an active integration process, is that Latin America's protectionist history has been intimately related to the region's macroeconomic
instability.

A

common scenario observed again and again can be described as

31

follows:

at some point in time the authorities of a-particular country

decide to pursue a fiscal policy that is inconsistent with the chosen nominal exchange rate regime

--

usually

a pegged rate.

Given the underdeveloped

nature of the domestic capital market, the fiscal expansion is basically
financed with domestic credit creation.
of international

As a result, there will be a loss

reserves, domestic inflation will exceed world inflation,

and the real exchange rate will become increasingly overvalued.

In an

effort to stop the drainage of reserves the authorities will usually respond
by imposing exchange controls and by increasing the degree of restrictiveness of the existing trade impediments
be imposed.

-

tariffs will be

hiked and QR5 will

Naturally, as long as the ultimate causes of the macroeconomic

disequilibrium --

are

-

that

is, the inconsistent credit and fiscal policies --

not tackled, all the authorities will gain by imposing new trade

restrictions is delay the need for corrective macroeconomic measures.

The

real exchange rate will become more overvalued, international reserves will
continue to decline, and a black market for foreign exchange will emerge.
At some point this disequilibriumsituation will become unsustainable,
stabilization program -enacted.

usually

under the aegis of the IMF --

will

and a

be

This program will usually consist of a significant nominal

devaluation geared at correcting the over-valuation developed in the previous
period,

and of a contractionary macroeconomic policy.

Table 19 contains data on the evolution of import tariffs, exchange
controls and capital controls in the period preceding
crises in Latin America.
the cases the crisis

-

17 balance of payments

The table reveals that in the great majority of

- which

always took the form of a major devaluation

was preceded by an important piling up of exchange controls and restrictions.

In some episodes, such as Colombia in 1962 and 1967, Ecuador 1961,

-

-

32

and Peru in 1975, the initial conditions (two years prior to the crisis)
were already extremely restrictive, and became even tighter as the erosion
of reserves became severe and/or real exchange rate appreciation became more
In other cases, however

massive.

example

--

--

the period preceding the

Venezuela 1964 and Chile 1982, for
devaluation was characterized

by a

fairly free environment, with little restrictions and no attempts by the
authorities

to impose any additional

controls.

It is clear, then, that to the extent that the region does not
implement serious and far-reaching structural
macroeconomic

reforms aimed at avoiding

instability, we can expect the recurrence

of periodic balance

of payment crisis, with their concomitant negative effects on the trade
regime and on the volume of trade

-

- both

intraregional

and with the rest of

the world.

V.2

Protectionism

in the IndustrializedWorld

As noted in subsection IV.2, the way in which Latin America's trade
performs will not depend exclusively on the region's protectionist policies.

Equally important, if not more, is what happena with trade impediments in
the industrial nations.

While most Latin American nations have been going through almost heroic
efforts aimed at improving their external balance, the industrial countries
have been invaded with protectionist

sentiments.

In fact, in the past few

years the industrial countries have used a series of nontariff mechanisms
impede a freer flow of Latin American goods.
industrial

to

According to the CATT (1984),

countries currently use more than forty nontariff measures to

impede international flows of commodities.
A few authors have dealt with the issue of nontariff barriers,
analyzing

the extent of these practices,

their coverage across countries and

33

products,

For example, in a comprehensive

and their evolution through time.

recent study Nogues et al. (1986b) analyzed the use of nontariff barriers in
16 industrializedcountries.
the following practicea

For the purpose of their analysis they defined

as nontariff barriers:

cretionary import authorization,

prohibitions,

quotas, dis-

conditional import authorizations,

"voluntary" export restraints, variable levies, minimum price systems,
"voluntary" price restraints, tariff-quotas,

seasonal tariffs, price and

volume investigations, and antidumping and countervailingduties.

Their

analysis suggests that the coverage of this type of impediments is quite
broad, affecting more than one-fourth

of all these countries

imports, with

textiles being the industry most severely affected.

An important question is whether imports from all countries or regions
are affected in the same way by the NTBs.

Nogues et. al. found that this is

not the case; imports from the developing world are more severely affected
by this type of "semi-disguised" protectionism than those from the industrialized world.

A

study by ECLA/CEPAL (1986e), confirmed this

discriminatorytrend.

It found that the NTB5 of industrializedcountries,

particularly those of the EEC, discriminate strongly against the exports
coming from Latin American LDCs.
findings.

Table 20 provides a summary of these

Once the effects of the NTBs are taken into account the degree of

protection the industrializedcountries grant to some product can be quite
remarkable.

Edwards

(l988a), for instance, provides estimates of the total

and Brazilian exports
average rate of protection to which some Argentinian
to the EEC, Japan and the U.S. were subject in 1980.

These figures are in

many ways staggering, indicating that in many cases the NTBs more than
double the tariff protection.

34

What is even more serious is that the existing evidence clearly
a slow but steady increase in the degree of coverage of the NIBs.

indicates

For example, Nogues et al. (1986a) found that the NTBs coverage for all
goods in the 16 industrial

between 1981 and 1983.

countries increased by 1.5 percentage points

To the extent that these NTRs increase, or even if

they are maintained at their current level, it will become very difficult if
not plainly impossible, for the Latin American countries to continue to
increase their exports at the rate required to solve the current debt
crisis.

While the main responsibility

for increasing exports rests with the

Latin American countries, their efforts, no matter how serious, can be
easily frustrated by the protectionist policies of the industrialized world.
VI.

The Prosnects for Intraregional Trade and the Debt Crisis
Recently,

conditions

some authors have sustained that the adverse external

faced by Latin American countries in the aftermath of the debt

crisis are the appropriate ones for an intensification

process in the region.

of the integration

They argue that preferential reductions in tariffs

coupled with an effective "deadollarization" of intraregional payments - -

basically achieved through clearing house-type
ize intraregional

flows of trade.

arrangements - -

will

revital-

In fact, in a recent study that analyzed

the future prospects of the integration process in Latin America ECLA/CEPAL
(1986d) postulated that the adoption of these types of measures would be

translated in a sustained increase in the growth rate of intraregional
flows.

Specifically,

the projections

trade

that constituted the benchmark of that

study assumed that as a consequence of those measures the value of intra-

regional trade would grow at an annual rate of 16 percent in the following
years.

Table 21 reproduces these projections and shows how, under chose

35

assumptions,

the share of intra-LAIA imports would increase from 15.9

percent in 1984 to 18.6% in 1990 and to 22.2% in 1994.

The evidence presented in this paper indicates that both the
recommendations

and the projected scenario implied by such proposals are

fairly unrealistic.
countries

Although there is agreement that the Latin American

should implement significant reductions in their protective

structures and adopt more outward oriented policies, there

is no justifica-

tion for the presumption that the efficacy of these measures will be
enhanced by restricting them to the regional market.

and

the LAF1A

Moreover,

the Andean Group experiences have shown the significant costs involved

and the meager results achieved by regional liberalizations

arrangements

based on multilateral negotiations of the type that would be required, for
example,

to "de-dollarize" intraregional payments.

On the other hand, the

analysis in Sections III and IV have shown that the recent increase in Latin
American exports of manufactures have been absorbed mostly by OECD nations.
This in spite of the protectionist

trends of these countries.

the increase experienced by the aggregate

Furthermore,

share of intraregional

imports

during the same period was basically a consequence of the adjustment
process.

The adoption of a partial and discriminatory

liberalization

of

regional imports will surely not be translated in a significant increase in
that share in the current context.
In this sense, then, there does not seem to exist any solid basis for
advocating the return to a more regulatory approach to commercial
integration in Latin America.

As noted before, the resumption of growth

within the region will mainly depend on the design of a satisfactory
solution to the debt problem, on the eradication of trade discriminatory
practices

in industrialized

nations and on the extent to which each Latin

36

American country decides to implement profound structural reforms aimed at
avoiding macroeconomic
intricate

instability and at achieving a less unbiased and

Only if decisive steps in these directions sre

trade regime.

taken, the aggregate volume of imports and exports will grow, and it would

be reasonable to expect a significant and sustained increase in
intraregional

trade within the pragmatic

framework of the LAIA agreement.

VII. Concludine Remarks
In this paper we have analyzed in detail the evolution of Latin
America's international trade patterns.

The results of the different

attempts to implement commercial integration arrangements among these countries and the future prospects of intraregional trade have been discussed.
In particular, we have tried to assess the role of intraregional
the structural

trade in

adjustment process that the solution of the current crisis

requires from Latin American nations.

In this sense, it was seen that most of the schemes designed to promote
commercial integration within the region were initially perceived and
advocated as an extension to the import substitution strategy adopted by
most Latin American countries in the l950s and l96Os.

However, we pointed

out that these arrangements overlooked the basic inconsistency

that exists

between the ambitious goal of establishing a common market of a regional
(LAFTA) or subregional

(Andean Group) dimension and the need of each govern-

ment to satisfy the demands of their highly protected and influential import
competing sectors.

It was as a consequence of this conflict that these

schemes turned out to be incapable of promoting a significant turnaround in
the volume and direction of intraregional

trade.

Moreover,

it was noted

that the relative success of the regional liberalization process carried out

37

in the CACM was explained, precisely, by the initially weak position of
these nations' import competing sectors.
It was also established that the dissatisfaction
performance

of these comprehensive

with the poor overall

integration schemes, together with the

adoption of a more outward oriented strategy by most Latin American countries in the late l970s, determined the replacement of LAFTA by the LAIA
Treaty and the practical abandonment of negotiations within the Andean
Group.

However, before the results of the more pragmatic

LAIA agreement
reflected

-

- mainly based on

approach of the

tariff negotiations -

bilateral

- could be

in the data, the whole region was shocked by the abruptcurtail-

ment of foreign funds in 1982.

It was shown that the common denominators of

the region's adjustment process prompted by this drastic shock were an

abrupt contraction in the level of imports

-

- sometimes

resorting to

outright protectionist measures - and a desperate effort to increase exports

earnings -- which was achieved despite the low prices of these countries'
primary exports.
The extensive analysis of aggregate and disaggregate data carried out
in this paper reflected both the meager results of the initial integration
attempts and the particular characteristics
the debt crisis.

of the region's adjustment to

With respect to the first, it was not possible to detect

-any significant change in the OECD countries' share

share

--

in

Latin American imports during the 1970s.

especially

In particular, the

region remained highly dependent on imports of manufactured goods
-capital goods

from

the industrialized

countries.

the U.S.

-

- mainly

On the other hand, we

found that the major achievement of the integration arrangements in that
decade was limited to the increase in the intraregional trade share of some
manufactured products.

Nevertheless,

the overall increase in the volume of

38

intraregional

trade flows was not found to be significant during that

period.

In turn, the analysis of the more recent evolution of Latin America's
trade flows revealed some interesting patterns.

We could determine that the

increase in the share of intraregional imports in the years immediately
following the debt crisis was due to an asymmetric contraction in the demand
for imports originatedwithin the region.

The temporary nature of this

phenomenon was put in evidence by the increase in the proportion of imports
coming from industrialized

countries that accompanied the slight expansion

of the region's imports in 1985 and 1986.
the significant

Another interesting

increase in Latin America's

imports of primary products from

the OECD nations and particularly from the U.S.
relative loss of competitiveness

finding was

Although this implied a

in these countries' production of

manufactured goods in favor'of Latin America, the evidence showed that, for
the LAIA members,
substantially

the intraregional

share of manufactured imports is still

smaller than that of the industrialized nations.

On the other hand, the data on exports revealed that the significant
expansion of Latin American exports after the debt crisis was propelled by a
large increase in the production of fuel and of exportable manufactures.
Moreover,

we could determine that the latter were basically absorbed by the

OECD markets, in particular by the U.S.
countries

that achieved a substantial

In fact, all those Latin American

increase in manufactured exports in

that period (Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Venezuela and Chile) experienced a
decline in the proportion of their exports directed to the regional market.
Overall, this evidence seemed to indicate that the Latin American

markets possess a rather limited capacity to absorb a significant increase
in regional exports; at least in the current context of restrained imports

39

and generalized external disequilibria.

It appears, then, that the success

of the required expansion in Latin American exports will depend more on
these countries' capacity to diversify their exportable output and to design
innovative mechanisms to penetrate the markets of industrialized

countries,

than on a renewal of efforts towards a substantial deepening of any regional
trade integration process.
Even if the previous conclusion may seem uncontroversial
implementationis not free of serious obstacles.

its

As we have noted, the

current Latin American trade and exchange rate regimes are characterized
a high level of import restrictions

by

(tariffs, NTB's and multiple exchange

rates) and periodic balance of payments crises propelled by acute

macroeconomic disequilibria.

A sustained increase in Latin America's

exports will be highly unlikely without far-reaching

aimed at solving these problems.

structural reforms

Such an increase in the region's exports

would also be facilitated if a satisfactory solution to the debt problem is
finally reached and if a half is being put on the current protectionist
trend in industrializedcountries.

If decisive actions in the above directions were taken, the existent
schemes for coordinating

intraregional

trade (LAIA, CACM and even the Andean

Group) would play a very useful, but only complementary, role.

In effect,

by improving the payments clearing mechanisms and granting bilateral
preferences to the poorer countries these arrangements may facilitate the
transition towards a more affluent and liberalized

regional

trade.

--

in

However, the temptation to overestimate

a general sense -the potential

effects of these discriminatoryarrangements on the volume of intraregional

40

trade must be resisted.
crucially

A global solution to the current crisis depends

on the region's ability to avoid previous mistakes.

41

Footnotes

10n the early evolution of Latin
Furtado (1969).

example,

America's

external sector see, for

On Latin America and the great depression see Diaz

Alejandro (1982, 1983), Maddison (1985) and Edwards (l988a).
development

On the

strategies in Latin America, see Corbo (1986).

21n what follows, the English and Spanish acronysms of the different
organizations

or agreements will be separated by a slash.

3See, for example,

the discussion in Furtado (1969).

4Edwards (l988a).
5As reflected in the works of Viner (1950), Meade (1955), Lipsey (1957)

and Johnson (1960).
6These concessions were granted out of the NABALALC tariff nomenclature
which is based on the Brussels tariff nomenclature and contains approximately 9200 items.
"national

The proportion of these tariff lines included in the

list" of each country varied widely across LAFTA members.

7See Wionczek (1978), dine (1983), Blejer (1984) and Fishlow (1984).
8The fifth member of the
August of 1962.

CACZ4, Costa Rica,

joined the Treaty only in

A detailed analysis of the factors that prompted the

creation of CACM can be found in Delgado (1978).
9According to the 1965 "San Jose Protocol", this action was supposed to
be taken only under extremely unfavorable external conditions for the whole
region.

0Although all share the characteristics

of being primary producers

and extremely dependent on external markets, there are wide differences in
the economic size of these countries.
ished:

Two groups can be clearly distingu-

the relatively more developed countries

(Barbados, Guyana, Jamaica,

42

Trinidad and Tobago) and the less developed ones (the seven Eastern
Caribbean islands and Belize).
11These actions by Guyana and Jamaica were implicitly allowed by the

CARICOM Treaty, because it did not establish concrete requirements for the
elimination of domestic quantitative restrictions.

See Chernick (1978).

12Venezuela joined the group in 1973, while Chile withdrew from it in

1976 for reasons that will be addressed below.
deadline was later postponed to 1983.
L4See JUNAC (1982) for a detailed analysis of each of these programs.
15The need to develop an indicator of the "dual tariff-exchange

rate"

protection had its origins in this difficulty (see Morales 1983).
16An important issue refers to which external price index should be
used to compute the evolution of the real value of imports and exports.
figure quoted above was calculatedusing the U.S. CPI.

The

If instead the

wholesale price index for the industrialized countries is a whole, as
computed by the IMF, is used, Latin American imports declined by 49% on real
terms between 1980 and 1985.
17The decline of the trade ratio, however,
the imports ratio.

is less marked than that of

The reason for this is that as a result of the adjust-

ment program exports in most of these countries increased during the
period.

181n Argentina, Chile, Venezuela, Peru, and El Salvador the U.S. share
exhibited a slight increase between 1977 and 1982; in Brazil, Paraguay and
Nicaragua there was somewhat of a decline during the same period.
other countries

during 1977-81.

In the

the U.S. share fluctuatedaround a fairly stable value

43

19The distinction between primary and manufactured products made in

these tables follows a classificationcriterion similar to that of Tables S
and 9.

44

Bibliography

ALADI, 1984.

"Elementos

de Juicio para el Establecimiento

Para la Eliminacionde Restricciones no arancelarias,"

de un Programs
Caracas,

Venezuela.
Balassa, B. and C. Balassa, 1984.

"Industrial Protection in the Developing

Countries," The World Economy, June, 179-96.

_________

G.M. Bueno, P.P. Kuczynski and M.H. Simonsen, 1986.

Renewed Economic Growth in Latin America, Washington D.C.
International

Toward
Institute of

Economics.

Blejer, M., 1984.

"Economic Integration:

An Analytical Overview" in

Economic and Social Progress in Latin America, Interamerican Development
Bank.
Brock, P., 1987.

"The Collapse of Intraregional Trade in the Central

American Common Market:
Calvo, C., 1986.

l98D-1987," unpublished ms., Duke Universiry.

"Fractured Liberalism:

Argentina Under Martinez de Hor,"

Economic Development and Cultural Change, April.
Carvalho, J. and C. Haddad, 1981.

"Foreign Trade Strategies

and Employmenr

in Brazil" in A.O. Kraeger et al. (eds.) Trade and Employment in
Developins Countries, Chicago:
CEPAL. 1985.

Orisen y

Destino

Asociacion Latinoamericana
Centrosmericano,

U. of Chicago Press.

del Comercio Exterior de los Psises de la

de Interscion y

del

Mercado Comun

Cuadernos Estadisticos de la Cepal 9, Santiago, Chile.

__________ 1986a. Anuario Estadistico de la Cepal, Santiago, Chile.
_________

l986b.

"Origen y Destino del Comercio Exterior en 1983,"

Santiago, Chile, 28 August, 1986.

45

__________ 1986c. "Reorientacion del Comercio Exterior de Productos
Basicos Hacia America Latina," Santiago, Chile, 25 June,

__________ 1986d. "Cooperaciori Comercial y Negociaciones

1966.
Regionales,

Santiago, Chile, 28 July, 1986.

__________ l986e.

"Relaciones Economicas Internacionales

y Cooperacioti de

America Latina y ci Caribe," Santiago, Chile, May, 1986.
__________

l986f.

"Earico

de Datos Sobre Inversiones Extranjeras Directa en

America Latina y el Caribe," September,
"El Proteccionismo

1986g.

1986.

de los Paises Industrializados:

Estrategias Regionales de Negociacion y Defensa,"

_________ 1987.

"Origen

y

Santiago, April.

Destino del Comercio Exterior en 1984,"

Santiago, Chile, Mar. 20.
Chernick,

The Commonwealth Caribbean, Johns Hopkins University

S., 1978.

Press.
Cline, W., 1983.

"Estrategia de las Negociaciones

para la Integracion

in E. Conesa (ed.), Terminos de Intercambto y

Latinoamericana,"

Optima en America Latina,

Argentina,

Tarifa

INTAL.

__________ 1985. Imports of Manufactures from Developina Countries;
Performance

and Prospects for Market Access, Washington D.C.:

Brookings

Institution.
Corbo, V., 1985.

"Chilean Economic Policy and International Economic

Relations Since 1970" in G.M. Walton (ed.) The National Economic Policies
of Chile, Greenwich CT:
__________ 1986.
America,"

JAI Press.

"Problems, Development Theory and Strategies

of Latin

DRD Working Paper No. 190, The World Bank.

Cuddington, J., 1986.

"Capital Flight from the Developing Countries,"

Unpublished Paper, The World Bank.

46

1978.

Delgado, Enrique,

"Institutional

Evolution of the Central American

Common Market and the Principle of Balanced Development,"

in W. Cline and

E. Delgado (eds.), Economic Integration in Central America, Waahington,
DC;

Brookings Institution.

Diaz-Alejandro,

C.F., 1976.

Colombia, New York;

Columbia U. Preas.

__________ 1982. "Latin America in Depression, 1929-1939" in M. Gersovitz
et al. (eds.) The Theory and Experience of Economic Development, London;
Allen & Unwin.
__________ 1983. "Stories of the 1930s for the 1980s" in P. Aspe Armella,
et al. (eds.) Financial Policies and the World Capital Market, Chicago;
U. of Chicago Press.
Dornbusch,

in

"Multiple Exchange Rates for Commercial

R., l986a.

S. Edwards

and

L.

Ahsmed (eds.) Economic Adjustment and Exchange Rates

in Developing Countries, Chicago;
_________

l986b.

5.,

U. of Chicago Press.

"Special Exchange Rates for Capital Account

World Bank Economic Review, September, 3-34.

Transactions,"
Edwards,

Transactions"

1983.

"The External Sector in Colombia,"

Paper prepared for

The World Bank.
__________ 1984. "The Order of Liberalizationof the External Sector in
Developing Countries,TM Princeton Essays in International Finance No. 156.
__________ 1985. "Stabilization With Liberalization;

An Evaluation of Ten

Years of Chile's Experience With Free Market Policies, 1973-1983,"
Economic Develooment and Cultural Change, January.

_________ l988a. "The
M. Feldstein

U.S. and Foreign Competition in Latin America,"

(ed.), The U.S. and the World Economy.

of Chicago Press.

Chicago;

in

University

47

_________ 1988b.

"Exchange Controls, Devaluations

and Real Exchange

The Latin American Experience," Economic Development and Cultural

Rates:
Change.

__________

l988c.

Baltimore:

in Developing

Countries.

Johns Hopkins University Press.

__________ l988d.
Countries,"
Studies.

Exchange Rate Misalignment

in

"Structural Adjustment
J. Sachs

Chicago:

_________ 1989.

Policies in Highly Indebted

(ed.), The Develooinz Countries

Debt:

General

University of Chicago Press.

Real Exchange Rates. Devaluation and Adjustment:

Exchanae Rate Policy in Develoin Countries, forthcoming, MIT Press.
Edwards, S. and L. Ahamed

(eds.),

Rates in Develovina Countries,
Edwards, S. and A. Cox-Edwards,

Chilean
Edwards,

S.

Economic Adjustment and Exehanse

Chicago:

1987.

Experiment, Cambridge,

and F. Ng, 1985.

1986.

MA:

''-"

U. of Chicago Press.

'-"'"

The

Ballinger Publishing Co.

"Trends in Real Exchange Rate Behavior in

Selected Developing Countries," CPD Working Paper, The World Bank.
Evans, P.R., 1986.

"State, Capital, and the Transformationof Dependence:

The Brazilian Computer Case," World Development, 191-800.
Fishlow, A., 1984.

"Reciprocal Trade Growth:

The Latin American

in M. Syrquin, L. Taylor and L. Westphal (eds.),

Integration Experience,"

Economic Structure and Performance, Academic Press.
Furtado, C., 1969.

La Economia Latinoamericana, Santiago, Ed.

Universitaria.
GATT,

1984.

"Report of the Group of Quantitative Restrictions

and Other Non

Tariff Barriers," Geneva.
Hanson, J. and J. de Melo,
Stabilization

1985.

"External Shocks, Financial

Reforms, and

Attempts in Uruguay during 1974-1983," World Development,

48

August, 134-46.
1NTAL, The Latin American Intearation Process (Various Issues),

InterAmerican Development Bank, Washington, DC.
Monetary Fund, International Financial Statistics

International

DC.

Issues) Waahington,

Directions

__________

of Trade Statistics

(Various Issues) Washington, DC.

"An Economic Theory of Protectionism,

H., 1965.

Johnson,

(Various

Tariff Bargaining,

and the Formation of Customs Unions," Journal of Political Economy,
v. 73, April.
"Visible Imports Subject to Restraint,"

Jones, C.D., 1983.

Economic Services WP No.

62.

"La Programacion Industrial en el Grupo Andino," Lima, Peru.

JUNAC, 1982.
Krueger, A.0.,

Trade and Employment in Developing Countries,

1980.

Trade and Employment in Developing Countries:

_________ 1983.

and Conclusions, Chicago:
E.E., 1984.

E.

Synthesis

U. of Chicago Press.

Sources of International Comparative Advantage,

MIT Press.

Cambridge:
Learner,

Vol. I,

U. of Chicago Press.

Chicago:

Learner,

Covernment

and R. Stern, 1973.

Ouantitative

International

Economics,

Boston: Bycon Press.
"The Theory of Customs Unions, Trade Diversion

Lipsey, R., 1957.
Welfare,"
Maddison,

Economica,

A., 1985.

jfl, Paris:
Meade, J., 1955.
Publishing Co.

and

February.

Two Crises:

Latin America and Asia. 1929-38 and 1973-

OECD.

The Theory of Customs Unions, Amsterdam:

North Holland

49

Michaely,

M., D. Papageorgiou and A. Choksi "The Phasing of

Liberalization Policy:

Preliminary

A

Trade

Evidence," Paper Presented at AEA

Meeting, New Orleans.
"Problemas del Arancel Externo Comun:

Morales, J.A., 1983.

El Caso del

Grupo Andino," CLADS Discussion Paper #58, Boston University.
Nogues, J., A. Olechowski and L.A. Winters,

1986a.

"The Extent of Non

Tariff Barriers to Imports of Developing Countries," World Bank Staff
Working Paper 789.

_________ l986b.

"The Extent of Non Tariff Barriers

to Industrial

Countries' Imports," The World Bank Economic Review (September): 181-199.
Nugent, J., 1974.

in Central

Economic Intesration

Anierica,

Johns Hopkins

University Press.
Pfefferman,

"Overvalued Exchange Rates and Development,"

C., 1985.

Finance

and DeveloDment, 22 (March) 17-19.
Prebisch,

R., 1984.

"Five Stages in My Thinking on Development"

Meier and D. Seers (eds.) Pioneers in Develooment, Oxford:

in G.M.

Oxford U.

Press.
Rodriguez-Mendoza,

M., 1986.

"Latin America and the U.S. Trade and Tariff

Act," Journal of World Trade Law, February, 47-60.
Thomas, V., 1986.

Linkinz Macroeconomic

Adjustment With Growth, Baltimore:

and Agricultural

Johns Hopkins University Press.

Viner, J., 1950, The Customs Union Issue, New York:
International
Wionczek,

Policies for

Carnegie Endowment

Peace.

M., 1978.

"Can the Broken Humpty-Dumpty Be Put Together Again and

by Whom?" World Development, June.
World Bank, 1986.

for

World Develooment Report, Washington, D.C.

World Currency Yearbook (Various Issues).

TABLE 1
LAFrA:

Intraregional Exports and Preferences Granted
1962-1980

Intraregional Exports
+
Total LAFTA Extorts

Source:

Total Number Of

Concessions Granted
On "National Lists"

1962
1963
1964

7.6

4,274
7,593
8,248

1965
1966
1967

9.0

8,474
9,054
9,363

1968
1969
1970

10.1

10,382
10,869
11,017

1971
1972

11 4

11,042
11,079

1973
1974

10 6

11,110
11,157

1975
1976

13 5

1977
1978

133

11,173

1979
1980

13 8

11,249
11,252

INTAL -- The Latin

11,165

.

11,164

.

American

11,238

Integration

Process

(1976, 1979-80)

TABLE 2

Intraregional Exports

in the Central American Common Market
(Selected Years)

Intraregional Exports

+

Total CACM Exorts
1960

Source:

Cline (1983).

7.5

1961

7.8

1968

24.2

1971

23.4

1974

25.6

1978

21.4

1980

23.1

1983

20.4

TABLE 3
Evolution of Iiports and Exports in Selected
Latin American Countries:

1970-1985

(Millions $U.S.)

_______________

Imoorts

Country

221

12L..

2212

12.U 12.Q 22ffi.L

10541

5337

3814

1773

2961

8021

7624

8396

575

678

578

582

190

444

942

828

673

2849 13592

24961

21069

14346

2739

8670 20132

20175

25639

4671

3710

3797

1465 3945

3095

3551

Argentina 1694 3946

Bolivia

159

Brazil

22.L.

).2.2._

12J.Q

22

Chile

941

1338

5123

3528

2742

Colombia

843

1495

4663

5478

4141

736

Costa

317

694

1540

889

1098

231

493

1002

870

962

304

889

1640

1444

1487

249

894

961

767

735

Ecuador

274

987

2253

1989

1606

190

974

2481

2128

2905

Guatemala

284

733

1598

1388

1175

298

641

1557

1153

1140

2461 6571 19460

15127

1403 2904 15570

21214

22108

361

375

335

1034 1291 3898

3293

2966

Dorn.

Rica

Rep.

Mexico

13994

1248 1552

Panama

357

892

1449

1569

1423

Peru

622

2551

2500

3601

1835

Uruguay

231

557

1680

1110

788

233

8178

2627

Venezuela 1869 6004 11827

Source:

International

12944

Financial

Statistics.

110

286

384

1059

8800 19221

1023

855

16499 12272

TABLE 4
Openness Index in Selected Latin American Countries:
l965l985*
1965
Argentina

-

l9

1970

-

33.8

12.8

184a

Bolivia

40.2

33.6

41.4

30.9

Brazil

12.5

13.7

19.3

21.0

20.2b

Chile

18.6

29.2

31.1

35.5

38.0

Colombia

22.0

22.5

23.8

27.2

21.0

Costa Rica

48.9

55.6

60.5

52.6

56.8

Dom. Republic

23.3

37.2

49.5

39.2

47.7

Ecuador

28.6

33.1

45.5

40.3

334b

Guatemala

31.3

30.6

37.1

40.0

Mexico

13.0

10.9

10.81

18.9

13.3

Panama

43.6

45.7

64.0

50.8

37.4

Peru

33.0

26.6

31.4

41.9

316b

Uruguay

34.8

19.3

29.3

29.0

34•8b

Venezuela

45.2

38.3

53.7

52.4

516b

*

This index was constructed as the ratio of total trade (imports plus
exports) to GDP.
a1983
b1984

Source:

Constructed from data from Directions of Trade, International
Monetary Fund.

TABLE

5

Imports By Origin in Selected Latin American Countries
1977-1986

(percent)

1978

jQ

65.8
23.3

67.5
21.0

65.0 68.2
23.6 21.4

10.9

11.5

11.4 10.4

58.7
31.9

66.2
23.6

61.0 61.1
28.2 28.2

9.4

10.2

10.8 10.7

6

1983

1984 1985

62.9
32.6

58.1 60.4 63.1
36.5 34.6 31.5

Arzentina
•Industrialized

•Latin America
& Caribbean
•Rest

69.1 62.8
21.1 30.0
9.8

7.2

4.5

5.4

5.0

5.4

55.7 45.7 46.7
41.5 47.8 48.8

38.5
57.0

Bolivia
•Industrialized

•Latin America
Caribbean
•Rest

57.9 59.8
32.8 32.8
9.3

7.4

2.8

6.5

4.5

4.5

Brazil

•Industrialized
•Latin America

53.4 56.1

48.9 46.6 41.8 38.6 38.3 39.7

10.5

10.1

11.8 12.5

14.6

•Rest

36.1

33.8

39.3

40.9

43.6 44.0

46.9 44.5 42.4 29.0

Chile
•Industrialized
•Latin America

53.4 57.4 54.2
28.0 24.3 22.1.

60.1
27.1

60.7
25.6

57.0
23.5

50.1
29.9

52.2 51.2
28.1 26.5

56.3
24.9

18.6

20.0

19.7 22.3

18.8

17.4

14.8

45.1
15.8 12.5

61.3
9.7

& Caribbean

& Caribbean
•Rest

18.3

23.7

12.8

13.7

19.5

76.2 75.7
15.1 17.8

75.4
17.8

75.3
20.5

70.]
26.1

70.4 70.7 71.6
26.8 25.4 25.3

6.8

4.2

3.2

Colombia
•Industrialjzed
•Latin America

72.8 77.5
24.3 19.2

& Caribbean
•Rest
Costa

8.7

Rica

•Industrialized
•Latin America

6.5

2.8

3.9

3.1

2.9

3.3

65.6 68.0 62.4 63.7

60.9 56.3 58.8 61.7 63.1 71.3

29.3

29.3

31.8

34.2

36.8

40.5

38.7

34.8

33.0

23.5

5.1

2.7

5.8

2.1

2.3

3.2

2.5

3.5

3.9

5.2

69.1 65.9

67.3

61.6

28.5

31.8

30.0 36.4

58.3
39.7

55.2 50.8 54.3
42.7 46.9 42.8

43.3

2.4

2.3

& Caribbean

•Rest
Dominican

Republic

•Industrialized
•Latin America

69.6
28.7

48.1

& Caribbean
•Rest

1.7

2.7

0.2

0.2

2.1

2.3

2.9

8.6

(continued)

Table

5

n Ufl Un Un U Un Un

(contj

Un
Ecuador
'Industrialized
'Latin America
& Caribbean
'Rest

83.1
11.9

5.0

83.1 79.1
11.6 13.5

5.3

7.4

18.9 13.4

78.7
15.5

74.3
19.6

69.9
24.4

7.3 13.1

5.8

6.1

5.7

73.8

Guatemala

73.5

76.2 77.1
16.8

17.0

7.0

5.9

'Industrialized 67.4 63.3 60.3 59.4

60.6

57.6 52.4 52.1 58.6 61.3

35.3 37.3

35.8

39.5 45.3

3.3

3.6

'Latin

America
& Caribbean

'Rest

28.5 34.1

4.1

2.6

4.4

2.9

2.3

44.9 37.9

3.0

3.5

34.9

3.8

Mexico

'Industrialized 92.8 93.1 92.0 85.8 87.6 88.1 84.1 85.9 90.0 93.0
5.4 4.5
4.2 4.2 4.9 4.6 3.2 4.3 4.7 3.1
'Latin America
& Caribbean
'Rest

1.8

10.0

7.5

7.3

12.7

2.4

3.8

47.1 51.1
24.1 25.3

49.2

28.8 23.6

26.4 31.1 20.3 13.1 14.8

67.0
20.9

63.7
10.8

9.8

5.3

3.9

52.0 53.5
43.0 41.7

54.5
12.3

Panama

Cndustrialized
'Latin America

49.6 51.1 53.6 51.3
24.4 19.3 28.6 33.3 33.9

& Caribbean
'Rest

5.0

4.8

33.2

Peru
'Industrialized
'Latin America
& Caribbean
'Rest

74.9
11.6

62.0 66.7
11.8 14.3

12.1 13.5 25.5 26.2 19.0

77.1 78.5
19.1 18.3

3.8

3.2

71.7
23.6

69.7 69.3
25.6

26.5

4.7

4.7

4.2

34.3
38.7

39.9
43.2

Urusuav

'Industrialized
'Latin America
& Caribbean

29.4 29.3 38.2

35.9 35.8
37.6 45.7

34.7 29.8 31.8
41.8 44.3 37.2

'Rest

32.1

33.9

26.9

26.5 18.5

23.5

25.9

31.0 27.0

16.9

85.5

86.2

85.3
11.6

86.3
10.2

86.1 84.0
10.3 12.5

82.6
14.4

82.2 83.2
15.0 12.8

85.3
11.2

3.1

3.5

38.5

36.8

34.9

Venezuela
'Industrialized
'Latin America

10.1 10.1

& Caribbean
'Rest

Source:

4.4

3.7

3.6

3.5

3.0

Directions of Trade, International Monetary Fund.

2.8

4.0

3.5

TABLE 6

Destination

of Exports:

*

16 Latin American Countries -- 1970-1984
(percent)

fl

fl
Latin

n si sin sin sin

Sn

sin

13.4
America
& Caribbean

16.5

15.8

16.1

15.6

16.4

16.2

15.9

14.3

10.5

10.6

AI..ADI

9.3

12.5

12.1

12.7

12.1

13.4

13.2

12.8

11.8

8.2

8.6

OECD
• U.S.
• Japan

75.0
30.4

63.6
28.5

66.1
28.9

67.5
32.3

66.2
31.1

4.5

62.8
29.5

6.0

69.0
37.1
5.5

71.1
40.3

CAME

4.8
5.2

63.6
29.4
4.9

58.4
26.8

5.8
2.5

4.8

66.4
29.8

4.9

4.6

3.9

3.3

4.6

6.1

4.3

4.5

3.8

Rest of

1.1

2.9

2.1

3.4

3.6

3.8

3.7

3.1

4.8

7.1

5.8

REST

8.0

11.8

11.1

9.5

9.4

10.3

11.9

16.5

12.0

8.9

8.7

100.0 100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

•

TOTAL

100.0

4.5

4.4

4.6

5.4

*
The countries included here are Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua,
Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela.
Source:

ECLA/CEPAL.

TABLE 7
Sectoral Composition of Imports In

16 Latin American Countries:

1970-1984

Total Imoorts

1211

12Q

12fl

1iá

0.

Foodstuffs and Live Animals

8.5

8.3

10.0

11.0

9.7

I.

Beverages and Tobacco

0.6

0.5

0.6

0.4

0.3

2.

Raw Nonfood, Except Fuel

5.7

4.5

4.2

4.8

6.1

3.

Fuel and Related Products

5.7

14.0

17.8

22.9

20.5

4.

Oil, Grease & Waxes of
Sectoral Origin

0.8

0.8

0.8

1.1

1.5

5.

Chemicals

14.1

14.0

12.7

14.0

15.4

6.

Manufactured

19.1

18.1

14.5

11.6

12.2

7.

Machinery and Transport

39.3

35.6

33.9

29.5

29.7

8.

Other Manufactured

6.1

4.2

5.5

4.5

4.4

9.

Other

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.2

13,240

40,527

89,798

Total (Millions U.S.$)

Source:

ECLA/CEPAL.

56,479 59,567

TABLE 8
Upper Middle Income Latin American Countries Imports of
Manufactured and Primary Goods

-

-

1970-1984

Manufactured Imports

Country

Year

Total
U.S.$

Argentina

1970

1320.7

0.108

1975

2822.9
8311.4

0.120

3509.0
3527.3

0.200

2058.5

1980
1983
1984
Brazil

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

Chile

1984
Mexico

1970
1975
1980
1983

1984

Venezuela

Source:

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

Total
U.S.$

0.245

0.064
0.170
0.117
0.097
0.106

287.4
600.1
499.0
530.5
578.6

0.047
0.042
0.093
0.083
0.106

0.358
0.310
0.320
0.325
0.299

0.084
0.140
0.099
0.109
0.115

3097.6
1503.5
1960.2

0.069
0.160
0.156
0.155
0.171

0.438
0.344
0.289
0.291
0.260

2007.1
4923.4
13898.3
7585.9
10666.0

0.017
0.026
0.042
0.013
0.016

147 . 2
264.6
932.8
323.9

L.A.

&

Caribbean
0.693
0.616
0.181
0.646

Jj

0.670

0.071
0.185
0.319
0.113
0.085

0.002
0.004
0.011
0.007
0.005

391.8
1209.3
3141.3
1857.7
1913.4

0.380
0,243
0.333
0.252
0.313

0.267
0.381
0.283
0.323
0.342

0.009
0.019
0.003
0.004
0.002

0.040
0.085
0.124
0.103
0.146

188.3
353.8
1080.0

0.628
0.418
0.412

0.178
0.383
0.327
0.377
0.319

0.002
0.005
0.011
0.002
0.001

0.626
0.625
0.644
0.677
0.678

0.042
0.062
0.064
0.052
0.060

374.7
1286.1

0.661
0.657
0.775
0.876
0.757

0.002
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001

0.254
0.298
0.362
0.361
0.431

0.168
0.136
0.14
0.134
0.140

0.022
0.044
0.066
0.046
0.026

51.5
90.7

208.9

0.463
0.642
0.655
0.636

0.071
0.181
0.097
0.087
0.105

0.005
0.006
0.009
0.002
0.003

4454.5
4912.2

0.085
0.093

0.47
0.483
0.472
0.448
0.475

0.092
0.090
0.097
0.077
0.068

281.3
879.6
2182.3
1514.1
1901.6

0.079
0.098
0.089
0.21
0.182

0.549
0.515
0.529
0.542
0.528

0.014
0.012

9871.7

0.034
0.052
0.071

8812.4
11659.7
6020.3
5233.6
682.8
875.8

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

Uruguay

gp
0.288
0.164
0.262
0.249
0.210

1970
1975
1980
1983

L.A &
Caribbean

Primary Imoorts

359.6
1597.5

4871.4

ECLA/CEPAL.

0.132

611.6
573.6

3528.0
2816.7
3175.0

99.4

119.3

0.451
0.494
0.082
0.191
0.041
0.029
0.108

0.671

0.006

0.001
0.001

TABLE

9

Latin American Middle Income Countries Imports Of
Manufactured and Primary Goods

Manufactured
Total
U.S.S

L.A &
Caribbean

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

720.8
1249.0
3338.1
3562.9
3273.1

0.063
0.084

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

47.2
134.8
367.9
341.4
365.7

0.226
0.494
0.472

Country

Colombia

Paraguay

Costa Rica

Guatemala

Source:

1970-1984

Imoorts

Primary

gn

Total
U.S.$

L.A.

Imports

&

Caribbean U.S.

0.072
0.096
0.128
0.153
0.130

105.0
224.9
733.3
705.5
661.0

0.321
0.241
0.218
0.218
0.266

0.472
0.539
0.578
0.568
0.537

0.006

0.106
0.082
0.150
0.077
0.201

17.1
32.2
75.7
55.1
47.1

0.313
0.237
0.333
0.635
0.376

0.426
0.198
0.216

0.460

0.195
0.133
0.113
0.091
0.114

0.004
0.004
0.004
0.004
0.002

0.218
0.223
0.227
0.425
0.214

0.360
0.376
0.369
0.211
0.401

0.108
0.112
0.153
0.078
0.104

40.2
80.9
172.4
123.5
131.2

0.546
0.437
0.313
0.262
0.292

0.331
0.394

0.003

0.457

0.003

0.332
0.372
0.416
0.380
0.367

0.117
0.115
0.121
0.071
0.080

37.1
80.1
160.7

0.341
0.262
0.219

828.7
827.2

0.265
0.223
0.188
0.305
0.267

129.9
135.0

0.299
0.256

0.463
0.555
0.556
0.545
0.551

0.026
0.028
0.035
0.008
0.010

0.079
0.122
0.119
0.172
0.221

0.444
0.363
0.362
0.314
0.255

0.097
0.167
0.147
0.108
0.170

29.5
102.1
227.5
204.9
227.3

0.113
0.059

1984

224.1
895.1
1790.3
1267.7
1411.6

0.565
0.688
0.631
0.555
0.594

0.124
0.041
0.008
0.012
0.003

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

456.4
1638.6
1948.6
1545.4
1292.1

0.060
0.103
0.122
0.140

0.369
0.314
0.339
0.375
0.297

0.102
0.109
0.125
0.133
0.123

151.2

0.496

452.7
670.3
613.0
525.7

0.101

0.183
0.479
0.520
0.527
0.415

0.013
0.010
0.015
0.002
0.013

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984
1970

263.8
534.9

1094.2
670.3
786.8
240.5
553.9
1020.5

1984

Peru

-

0.474
0.414
0.378
0.299
0.345

1975
1980
1983

Ecuador

-

1970
1975
1980
1983

ECLA/CEPAL.

0.107

0.111
0.122

0.486

0.17

0.1
0.221
0.151

0.217

0.246
0.343

0.084
0.179

0.553
0.468

0.041
0.009
0.008
0.007

0.015
0
0

11.0

90.3
100.0

10.0

100.0

2378.1

88.1

5.7

100.0

16,688.3

0.3
0.0

72.8

3.8

100.0

6238.3

11.9

0.4
0.1

83.0

4.6

100.0

8028.0

34.2

0.0
0.0

65.5

0.3

100.0

22.6

0.2
0.0

11.1

66.1

24.9

0.8
0.3

63.6

10.4

13.0

0.0
0.0

85.4

1.6

73.1

2.9

Total

Others

OECD
CARICOM

CACM
LAIA
1984
4868.4
100.0

3614.1 517.9 8433.4 US$ MILL. TOTAL
100.0 100.0 100.0
Total
12.7
2.8
6.8
Others
60.9
89.7
69.9
75.3
9.3

6.1
85.0

0.7
0.6
25.1

188.1
100.0
2.5

29.2

100.0
5.0
77.7

100.0
12.7

91.5
0.0
0.0
6.0

1009.4 US$ MILL. TOTAL

86.1

5063.8

0.0
0.0

7.3

7.6

_j

Total

US$ MILL. TOTAL

1970

LAIA

CACM

OECD
CARICOM

Total
Others

I.AIA
1975

CACM

OECD
CARICOM

Others

3080.9

LAFTA/LAIA:

0

0.1
0.1

3.7
66.9

100.0

LAIA
1980

CACM

OECD
CARICOM

65.5
0.3
0.7
20.8

76.2

0.1
0.1
14.7

732.1

0.7
0.0

12.8
0.5
0.0
15.3

296.0 1774.1
100.0 100.0
4.1
71.4

0.0
0.0
21.7

703.2

0.0
0.0

11.7

0.9
0.1

100.0
3.5

23.8

100.0
46.7
31.1
1.4

100.0
8.1
62.6
0.3
0.3

100.0 100.0
3.3
1.9
89.1 55.2
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
42.8

2

0.1
0.1
23.1

89.9
0.2
0.2
6.2

95.2

0.0

28.7

7.9

4.1

1638.5

100.0
3.7
64.4
0.0
0.3

3

20.8

1774.7

0.0
0.0
9.8

100.0
3.1
91.8
0.2
0.1

31.6

72.1

2174.5

4.8

_._

0.1
0.1
17.1

0.1
0.9
23.0

US$ MILL. TOTAL

ECLA/CEPAL Source:

100.0
78.6

0.0
0.0
23.1

54,079.6

17.5
69.9

0.0
0.0
6.2

5305.1
100.0

66.3

0.0
0.0
11.4

826.4 10,801.3 3538.2 185.2
100.0
100.0

0.2
0.1
19.1

100.0

15.9
4580.3 29,133.8
100.0

83,856.2 47.3
100.0

11,734.3 10,285.5 641.1
100.0
100.0
1.6
70.7

100.0
3.8

89.5

100.0
0.9
97.9

15.0
74.1

18.1
68.9

88.1

0.0
0.0

100.0
5.4
82.9

5

6

13,624.1 6692.7
100.0

0.0
0.0
6.7

100.0

1.2

0.0

0.2
0.1
10.6

0.0

12.6
1525.9

0.3
0.1
37,588.0 24.7
100.0

100.0
2.0

75.9

0.1
0.1
1.1

100.0
1.6
95.3
0.0
7

Years Selected for Category and Origin By Imports of Structure
10 TABLE

3.1

0.0

92.6

100.0
7.2

5.4

10.8

83.9
0.2
0.0
8.7

4862.8

13.3

10.6

708.8

8

100.0 100.0
0.3
6.5
98.7 88.2
0.0
0.0
5.3
9

0.0
0.0
1.0

0.0
0.0

12,009.1 8.4

100.0
5.8
82.7

0.1
0.2

Total

11.2

(percent) 1970-1984

57.5
3.4
100.0

0.3

67.4
13.2
100.0

22.5

60.5
7.1
100.0

TOTAL MILL. US$ 455.6

1;'ff

0.3

0.2

0.1

5.0
15.8
100.0

1.8

0,7

76.7

110.3 1394.5

64.3
6.1
100.0

18.8

2.1

10.5

70.9

88.9

90.4
2.9
100.0

0.0

4.3

2.4

0.3

18.8

97.9

0.0

0.3
1.5

100.0

17.1

Others
Total

0.0

100.0
23.0

4.5

4.7

OECD

0.0

72.5

20.6
100.0

27.6

CARICOM

0.3
27.2

0.3

67.5
7.1
100.0
1,123.2

0.2

17.3

7.9

1,127.4

3.3
100.0

66.6

0.2

7.3
22.6

100.0
602.1

4.2

67.2

7.7
20.6

221.8

54.7
9.1
100.0
1,013.4

0.0

24.0

12.2

4.4
100.0
1,246.6

0.0
60.8

29.1

5.7

100.0
648.9

5.0
26.6
0.1
65.4
2.9

360.1

15.0

5.6
100.0
130.4

2.0
7.0

65.9

100.0
363.3

84.4
1.7
2.0
4.9
7.0

50.2

0.0

100.0

66.8

0.1

5.7
21.8

100.0
51.6

CACM

51.5
16.0
100.0
26.9

0.1

0.2

63.4
2.7

3.3
30.4

23.7

0.0
67.0
1.5
100.0

0.1

65.3
3.8
100.0

0.0

15.0
100.0

2.5

0.1
61.0
7.0
100.0

3.2
28.3

6

5.3
25.5

5

0.4
38.9

60.7

3.8

4

19.3

59.4

2.8

3

29.1

2

LAIA

1984

Total
TOTAL MILL. US$ 558.1

Others

CARICOM
OECD

4.1

34.7

CACM

1980

LAIA

2.4
30.2

100.0
11.2

2.0

100.0
TOTAL MILL. US$ 268.2

Others
Total

59.6
6.7

0.0

5.3
29.8

0.3

115.2

1.1
32.3

8.2

100.0

47.8
0.0
41.2
1.1

62.9

CARICOM
OECD

CACM

1975
LAIA

TOTAL MIL. US$

Total

Others

OECD

3.9

[AlA
CACM
CARICOM

1

0.5
48.3
0.2
43.6
7.4
100.0

0

1970

13.2

0.5
49.5
11.0
100.0
5,487.]

0.0

0.0
88.3
0.9
100.0
3.6

0.0
48.4
14.3
100.0
260.8

0.0
75.4

100.0
1,015.0

12.1

25.8

10.8

6.8
30.5

7.0
100.0
5,942.5

18.6
1.4
55.9

17.1

4.4

0.1
100.0
3.1

100.0
374.6

97.5

2.3
0.1
0.0
6.5

44.9

0.0

4.9
43.7

8.1

3.7
100.0
1,290.3

6.0
4.8
0.0
85.5

100.0
2,939.1
1.9

100.0
100.0
167.9

100.0
801.1

0.3

63.2
3.5

0.0

15.4
17.6
96.0
1.7

2.3
0.0

44.4
5.7

5.4
44.5
0.0

88.5
1.9

5.3

1231.1

0.5

100.8

335.3

4.3
0.0

0.0
67.5
2.6
100.0

0.0
98.9
0.0
100.0

0.0
44.6
3.7
100.0

0.0

5.5
24.3

Total

91.9
1.1
100.0

1.1
0.0

9

3.0
48.7

8

1.8
5.2

7

TABLE 11
CACM: Structure of Imports by Origin and Category For Selected Years 1970-1984 (percent)

Source:

0.0

0.1

0.0

0.0

ECLA/CEPAL

0.0
2.7

Other 9.

0.0
2.8

0.0

0.0
3.1

5.3

0.0

0.1
1.8

6.2

8.

3.8
7.8

15.2

Manufactured Other

4.3
7.9

10.5

1.4

4.4
3.1

11.4

2.6

5.0
7.7

11.5

7.

10.0
12.1

2.2

Transport and Machinery

13.0
19.7

2.8

2.4

13.0
15.4

2.9

Origin Animal
of Waxes and Grease Oil, 4.

6.

18.4

3.4

1.7

Manufactured

19.3
3.8

1.3

19.8
2.8

1.5

5.

4.0

1.4

Chemicals

4.7

2.0

5.7

2.2

Products Related and Fuel 3.

6.2

2.0

22.5

2.5

31.6

2.3

37.9

3.2

40.3

-

38.8

-

-

-

NonFood, Raw 2.
15.1

Animals Live and Footstuffs

0.

Tobacco and Beverages 1.

Fuel Except
14.0

20.1

10.6

17.4

8.5

14.2

8.7

14.2

0.6
0.7

0.9

1.4

0.7

1.1

0.9

1.5

11Q

0.8

1.3

12L

38.9

50.1

iii

30.9
45.2

1970

26.0

41.2

1975

25.6

39.6

1980

22.7

37.1
1983

Exports Total

-- Countries American Latin 16 In Exports of Composition Sectoral

1984

Exports NonFuel

1970-1984

12 TABLE

TABLE 13
Upper Middle Income Countries:
Exports of Manufactured and Primary Goods

-

-

Manufactured Exports

Country

Year

Argentina

1970
1975

1980
1983

1984
Brazil

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

Chile

Mexico

Uruguay

Venezuela

Primary Exoorts

L.A &
Caribbean Q....

Total
U.S.S

L.A.

&

Caribbean iLL..

248.0
722.3
1995.3
1363.8
1473.9

0.499
0.546
0.415
0.281
0.322

0.205
0.084
0.155
0.276
0.248

0.003
0.022
0.042
0.024
0.032

1517.2
2223.0
5737.0
6136.1
6299.1

0.160
0.170
0.176
0.094
0.137

0.070
0.060
0.074
0.050
0.051

0070

368.5
2209.9
7546.7

0.403
0.369
0.377
0.173
0.188

0.169
0.201
0.182
0.222
0.358

0.040
0.036
0.038
0.059
0.050

2329.0
6068.0
11906.0
11465.3
13183.2

0.062
0.051
0.047
0.042
0.050

0.261
0.137
0.174
0.15
0.212

0.055
0.096
0.079

0.137
0.069
0.129
0.343
0.269

0.074
0.081
0.041
0.021
0.067

214.7
454.0
1713.0
1548.8
1637.7

0.196
0.305
0.237
0.119
0.127

0.133

0.306
0.202
0.226
0.182
0.165

8987.3
11685.9

0.050
0.020
0.054
0.034

0.079

0.071

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

1104.1
1180.4
2807.0
2010.1
1776.8

0.143
0.204
0.244
0.132
0.184

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

454.1
1062.2
2156.9
6194.9
7110.6

0.213
0.297
0.231
0.067
0.058

0.596
0.416
0.541
0.782
0.805

0.022
0.010
0.026
0.022
0.017

682.0
1337.0
2688.0
2579.2
3024.3

0.021
0.025
0.022
0.020
0.022

0.770
0.720
0.667
0.744
0.739

0.085
0.078

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

42.0
114.2
401.8
313.3
345.4

0.259
0.424
0.463
0.319
0.364

0.22
0.198
0.135
0.236
0.275

0
0.001
0.001
0.006
0.005

192.0
265.0
657.0
729.8
575.3

0.098
0.228
0.058
0.202
0.202

0.057
0.012
0.032
0.040
0.053

0.001
0.021
0.031
0.025
0.042

1970

39.0
103.4
692.8
564.5
926.9

0.623
0.428
0.213
0.128
0.170

0.126
0.320
0.124
0.244
0.417

0.001
0
0.375
0.371
0.218

231.4
378.4
423.8
528.3
324.7

0.006
0.016
0.034
0.026
0.017

0.588
0.621
0.413
0.489
0.489

0.021
0.004
0.009
0.047
0.016

1975
1980
1983
1984

Source:

Total
U.S.$

1970-1984

ECLA/CEPAL.

0.133

0.057
0.159
0.203

0.064
0.052
0.043

TABLE 14
Middle Income Countries
Exports of Manufactured and Primary Goods

-

- 1970-1984

._, E

Manufactured Exoorts
Total
U.S.$

Country
Colombia

Paraguay

Costa Rica

Guatemala

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

62.8
308.1
777.4
549.0

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

5.7
30.8
36.5

591.3

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984
1970
1975
1980

Peru

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984
1970
1975
1980
1983

1984

Source:

&

0.043
0.030
0.046
0.063
0.047

591.3
1050.8
3055.2
2032.5
2344.3

0.062
0.114
0.060
0.038
0.031

0.347
0.316
0.293
0.269
0.314

0.030
0.017
0.036
0.051

0.365
0.465

0.359
0.039
0.100
0.181
0.508

0.004
0.057
0.011
0.006
0.003

58.4
143.2
273.7
240.1
315.5

0.387
0.335
0.416
0.389
0.386

0.111
0.101
0.087
0.073
0.026

0.006
0.009
0.012
0.008
0.025

185.7
364.3
836.8
559.0

0.092
0.146
0.190
0.101
0.058

0.433
0.440
0.489
0.692
0.460

0.182
0,027
0.039
0.028
0.007

0.134

0.384
0.295
0.375
0.447
0.468

0.094
0.069
0.040
0.054
0.060
0.060
0.012
0.022
0.008
0.022
0.164
0.113
0.146
0.190

19.0

0.253

42.9

0.853

0.017
0.021
0.049
0.069
0.144

0
0
0
0
0

117.7
289.7
228.6
226.1

0.822
0.799
0.738
0.680

81.6
156.1

0.937
0.896
0.739
0.896
0.862

0.026
0.030
0.030
0.059

0.003
0
0.020
0
0

0.79

0.132
0.183
0.081
0.132
0.157

0.007
0.011
0.006
0.005
0.007

185.6

0.049

0.761
0.875
0.793
0.665

364.5
673.7
601.2
764.1

0.070
0.072
0.046
0.071

0.521
0.548
0.468
0.444
0.713

0.059
0.191
0.267
0.192
0.214

0.514
0.278
0.166
0.426
0.386

0.077
0.128
0.087
0.041
0.092

715.7
942.5
1286.4
809.9
1017.7

0.062
0.147
0.148
0.109
0.118

0.253
0.232
0.225
0.311
0.249

3.3
21.5
75.3
22.2

21.1
320.9

349.7
1396.3
735.1
789.4

ECLA/CEPAL.

L.A.

Caribbean U.S.

0.325
0.203
0.174
0.281
0.302

0.733
0.510

279.2
257.0

1984
Ecuador

Total

U.S.$

0.386
0.443
0.501
0.365
0.328

18.1

428.1

1983

L.A &
Caribbean

0.09

707.1

208.4
467.0
1029.1
771.8
811.5

0.082
0.108
0.139

0.024

0.053

0.158

TABLE 15
Lower Income Latin American Countries:
Exports of Manufactured and Primary Goods
19 70-1984

Manufactured Extorts
Total
U.S.$

Country

Year

Nicaragua

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

28.2

El Salvador 1970

1983

67.2
142.8
269.2
165.9

1984

164.0

1970

14.9
33.3
103.7

1975
1980

Honduras

1975

1980
1983
1984
Bolivia

Source:

1970
1975
1980
1983
1984

ECLA/CEPAL.

63.0
59.9
34.7

32.1

60.0
48.4
102.0
187.9
293.0
191.5

207.6

Primary Extorts

L.A &
Caribbean

Total
U.S.$

0.953
0.916
0.880
0.595
0.208

0.022
0.066
0.069
0.002
0.012

0
0
0.002
0.005
0.003

146.1

0.960
0.909
0.918
0.851
0.844

0.016
0.017
0.026
0.057
0.077

0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001
0.001

159.9
364.3

0.852
0.744
0.689
0.691
0.644

0.131
0.116
0.205
0.225
0.276

0
0.001
0.001
0
0

148.6
249.6
705.9
596.0

0.037
0.117
0.149
0.107
0.083

0.190
0.338
0.487
0.546
0.366

0
0.004
0.012
0.006
0.001

116.7
188.0

306.4
393.9
393.9
354.5

430.6
290.2

434.3

649.4

499.0
205.8
184.6

L.A.

&

Caribbean U.S.
0.253
0.118
0.076
0.076
0.064

0.347
0.324
0.200
0.200
0.137

0.152
0.158
0.167
0.167
0.269

0.052
0.035
0.076
0.069
0.102

0.215
0.375
0.480
0.420
0.465

0.157
0.165
0.079
0.099
0.077

0.061
0.085
0.028
0.054
0.054

0.608
0.576
0.581
0.587
0.549

0.016
0.036
0.048
0.085
0.085

0.068
0.162
0.181
0.103
0.071

0.511
0.422
0.319
0.282
0.204

0.186
0.093
0.011
0.071
0.043

10.9

ECLA/CEPAL
36,888.9
100.0
17.8
74.4
0.5
1.4
5.9

7,841.6
100.0
15.5
73.3
0.2

3,366.1
100.0
16.3
54.4
0.3
2.1
26.9

100.0
24.2
65.9
0.1

15.1
74.5

8,255.9
100.0

0.1

11,229.4
100.0
17.1
68.9
0.3
1.1
12.6

545.0
100.0
9.5
79.2
0.9

Source:

19,220.4 US$ MILL. TOTAL
100.0
Total
23.9
Rest
70.3
OECD
0.1
CARICOM
0.1
CACM
5.6
LAIA
1984

7,507.8
100.0
10.6
73.3
0.2
1.1
14.8

0.2

0.1
9.7

727.7
100.0
12.8
81.1
0.5
0.0
5.6

2,793.8
100.0
4.0
84.3
0.2
0.6
10.9
8,967.4
100.0

31,429.9
100.0
23.8
66.0
1.0

10.3

1,880.4
100.0
66.4
19.0
0.0
0.3
14.3

81.4
100.0
39.8
53.3
0.0
0.3
6.6

13.4

2,119.1
100.0
9.0
49.3
0.2

0.0
10.2

8,607.4
100.0

91,537.5
100.0
18.8
71.1
0.3
0.9
8.9

61.8
0.4

2.1
7.1

278.0
100.0

86.7

0

100.0
8.5
83.3
0.1
0.1

8.0

Total

Rest
OECD

CACM

CARICOM

LAIA
1980

US$ MILL. TOTAL

Rest

Total

OECD
CARICOM

CACM
[AlA
1915

CACM
LAIA
1910

OECD
CARICOM

Rest

Total

MILL.US$ TOTAL

LAFTA/LAIA:

4616.3

US$19,006.9 MILL. TOTAL

5,079.7
100.0
14.8
38.7
0.3

0.1
11.4

5.3

2

0.1

2,013.5
100.0
10.8
57.3
0.2

38.4

4,108.4
100.0
11.5

4

1,282.9
100.0
53.8
34.7
0.0

1.0

0.7
23.7

10,133.8
100.0
26.4

57.3

3.1

6.1
100.0
35.9
54.0
0.0

1.9
44.3

421.4
100.0
33.0

78,705.9
100.0
20.9
63.5
0.5

30.7

724.4
100.0
9.3

0.1
10.0

3,172.2
100.0
10.1

3.1

17.7
31.2

1.2
13.9

1,647.5
100.0

60.5

746.5
100.0

52.5

1.2
100.0

0.0
0.0

29,840.4
100.0

66.1

48.2
0.7
5.7
1.0

0.4
0.3

25.4
63.8
0.1
0.2
10.5

7.2
67.1
0.2

1.2
0.0
6.8

0.2

80.9
0.0
0.0
7.6

0.5
18.9
0.0

3.1
2.7
7.3

20.7
63.3
1.2

14.5

22.4

36.1

2.3
48.5

1.5
24.0

73.5
100.0

20.4

1,918.1
100.0

1.4
13.4

3,063.2
100.0

237.7
100.0
7.4

225.6
100.0

1,972.5
100.0
3.1

311.2
100.0

12.2
75.5
1.5
0.7

12,556.5
100.0

136.2
100.0
4.4

7.8
83.9
3.1
0.1

2.2
100.0
3.2

9.6
80.8
0.0
0.1
81.9

27.5
60.1
5.6
1.6
0.4
4.0

9.5
78.0
0.0
0.0
83.2
0.1
0.5

3.7
46.7
0.3
1.7

5.1
1

60.3
0.2
2.4

9.5

0.0

5.2

11.8
9

3

12.5

30.9
5
7

47.6

13.1
6
8

32.7

10.1
Total

(percent) 1970-1984 Years Selected For Destination and Category by Exports of Structure
16 TABLE

7.7

0.0
15.8
0.5
82.3
1.4
100.0

45.8

2436.4

47.7

0.2
23.6
0.6
74.0
1.6
100.0

23.7

1.4
4.8
0.1
88.2
5.5
100.0

6.3
0.0
90.4
2.9
100.0
2,620.1

0.4

1,328.5

5.7

100.0

100.0

0.6

78.4

0.0
19.3

8.8

100.0

1.1

52.6

0.5

0.0

45.8

1

91.2
2.1

0.4

5.7

Source: ECLA/GEPAL

Others
Total
TOTAL MILL. US$

OECD

LAIA
CACM
CARICOM

1984

TOTAL MILL IIS$

CACM
CARICOM
OECD
Others
Total

LAIA

1980

TOTAL MILL. US$

Total

Others

OECD

LAIA
CACM
CARICOM

0.6

688.9

TOTAL MILL US$

i2l

100.0

2.]

89.6

0.0

0.0

0

Total

Others

OECD

CARICOM

CACM

IAIA

1910

20.7

0.1

1.5

0.0
99.5

0.4
21.1
9.1
100.0
112.9

2.1
12.1
11.4
100.0
52.6

0.6
16.5
5.3
100.0
320.1

3.0
15.4
100.0
241.8

100.0
461.3

71.1
0.2
100.0
13.1

0.5

36.2
33.2
100.0
65.7

0.0

3.2
66.7
24.2

100.0
0.8

0.0

0.4

0.0

3750.6

69.8
9.1
100.0

0.6

1.5
19.0

0.1
0.4
69.0
1.3

73.1

0.]

76.9

3.8
77.3

0.0
28.7

0.0

1.1
25.5
0.3
65.7
7.4
100.0
4,389.7

2,284.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
95.4
4.6
100.0
0.1

0.4

100.0

0.8
68.6
5.6
100.0

1.4
85.2
0.3
9.2
14.6
100.0
203.4

100.0
90.7

1.7

23.3

2.3
74.5
2.1
10.4
10.7
100.0
88.5

42.4

100.0

0.0

98.5

0.5
8.1
3.3

30.6

73.0
0.5
22.1
3.2
100.0
544.4

1.2

216.4

100.0

10.5

0.1
4.8

0.8
8.4
4.6

0.0
0.0

0.5
87.6

1.9

4.4
79.8
0.3
3.4
12.1
100.0
314.3

0.0
72.5
0.0
23.1
4.4
100.0
1.6

100.0
163.6

1.3
83.3

1.1

85.1

4.0

56.1

27.3
21.8
100.0

0.5

0.0
50.4

9.3

100.0 100.0

100.0
388.3

0.3
2.2
9.4

33.4

0.0

7.5
46.9

3.1

2.5

77.6
14.3

11.5
76.6

0.0
66.5

5.9

3.1
39.4

2.1
4.9
1.2
59.2
32.6
100.0
513.5

1,091.6

0.1

50.3

17.8

106.2

60.6

8.7

4.6

100.0

0.1

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

0.5

2.2
2.3
100.0

68.5

0.2

2.0
8.5

5.8
6.6

1.3
0.0

0.1

0.3

0.1

0.0

7.2
74.4
100.0

3.6
1.9
100.0

0.8

0.3

26.1

Total

98.3

0.8

0.0

0.1

95.2

1.0

88.4

0.2

94.0

2.0

85.5

4.0

94.7

9

8

7

6

5

4

2.1

0.0

16.3

3

2.0
3.6

144.4

100.0

80.8
10.6

1.1
4.2
3.3

2

TA8LE 17
CACM: Structure of Exports by Category and Destination 1970-1984 (percent)

TABLE 18

Coverage of Some NonTariff Barriers in Selected
Latin American Countries:

1983

Percent of Import
Items Subject to
Outright Prohibition

Percent of Import
Items Subject
To Imiort Licenses

23

29

Argentina
•

All Products

Brazil
•

All Products

42

n.a.

•

Textiles

93

n.a.

•

Agriculture

86

n.a.

•

Wood

80

n.a.

All Products

0

Chile
•

0

Colombia
•

All Products

n.a.

60

Ecuador
•

All Products

30

n.a.

•

Agriculture

71

n.a.

na.

82

Mexico
•

Source:

ALADI

All Products

(1984).

TABLE 19

Evolution of Trade Restrictions and Exchange Controls
In Two Years Preceding 17 Balance of Payments Crises in Latin America

Payments

Eoisode

Restrictions on
Restrictions on
Tariffs, Duties and
Current Transactions Cost Related Measures Cacital Transactions

Argentina 'Increased restrictions on capital
(1970)
goods.
'Public sector payments monitored.
'All foreign exchange transactions
suspended for 10
days prior to
devaluation.

Bolivia
(1972)

Bolivia
(1979)

Bolivia
(1982)

Chile
(1982)

'Advanced deposits of
40% for 180 days.
•Taxes on traditional
exports.
'Special regimes and
exceptions abolished.

•No restrictions,
and no changes
prior to devaluation.

'Public sector pay•Custom charge of
ments highly
15% is in place in
controlled.
1970.
20% tax on exports
•QRs on foodstuffs,
cattle, cotton.
imposed.
•Between May and Aug.
a number of imports
are prohibited (1972).

•Restrictive initial
condition.
No

'In 1977 most imports
•Payments restrictions are increased
subject to 5-25%
for a number of
advanced deposit.
items in year prior. 'Exceptions for duty
'Exchange transac payments eliminated
tions suspended for for essentials (Feb.)
8 days prior to
'500% advanced deposit
devaluation.
imposed on 600 items.

'All capital movements requires
authorization.
'Ceiling set on new

'In 1980 advanced
'Imports of industrial goods produced deposits of 5% to
25%.
locally are prohibited.
'1981: advanced
'All sales of foreign
deposits reduced;
exchange subject to
import duties
reduced.
authorization.

'July 1982, payments
tions were tightened in July 1982.

'Flat import tariff
'Payments highly
liberalized.
No re- of 10% not altered
strictions imposed.
prior to devaluation.

'Some restrictions
on capital movements are in place
preceding devaluation. No changes
prior to abandonment of peg.

changes.

foreign borrowing.

Table 19 (cant.)

Eoisode.

Colombia
(1962)

Payments
Restrictions on
Current Transactions
•Initial conditions
highly restrictive.
-Large number of
goods moved into
prior license list
during 1961.
-All but 11 items in
free list move to
prior license (Aug.)
.Many items moved to
prohibited list
(Nov. 1962).

Colombia
(1965)

Colombia
(1967)

Tariffs, Duties and
Cost Related Measures

Restrictions on
Caaital Transactions

.1960: Advanced

-Dual exchange rates
plus active parallel market.
No

deposits ranging
from 1%-l30%.
.1961: Many advanced
deposits reduced
during first half of

crisis.

year.

-Dec. 1964: Import
•Sept. 1964: 5%
free list suspended. advanced deposit
95% advanced deposit
imposed.
•Dec. 1964: 95% adimposed.
.1965: Many goods
vanced deposit
passed to prior
imposed on selected
items.
licensing.
-Dual rates imposed
(Sept.)
•Highly restrictive
payments.

change prior to

•Jan. 1967: All advanced deposits
increased by 50%.
•Feb.

advanced

•Oct. 1964: Banco de
la Republics ceases

operations in free
market.
-Slight increase in
tightness.

-Starting from controls, slight
increase in degree
of restrictions.

deposits further
increased.

Costa Rica
(1974)

-Due], rates

(1972).
•Most imports passed

•Mild restrictions on
trade, not increased.

to higher rate
during 1973.
-Process continues
1974 prior to
devaluation.
Ecuador
(1961)

-Some restrictions
in place (l0%-l5%
tax on remittances
to rest of world).

in

.1959: Multiple
rates; all imports
subject to licenses.
.1960: Proceeds from

-Highly restrictive
system, becomes
tighter year prior
to devaluation.
nontraditional
-Aug. 1962: Advanced
exports moved to
deposits increased to
free rate.
100% for list 2
-Prior to devaluation imports.
tightening of controls. Many items
passed to restrictive
list.

-

Capital

movements
should be
registered.

Table 19 (contJ
Payments

Restrictions on

Eoisode

Current Transactions

Ecuador

'Two types of import
lists with different
degrees of restrictions.
'Jan. -July 1970: Increased restrictions

(1970)

Tariffs, Duties and

Restrictions on

Cost Related Measures Capital Transactions

.1968: List 1 subject 'June 1970: Into 15% duties; List 2 creased restrictions. Banks and
subject to 70% duty.
nonbanks required
.1969: Increased surto
foreign
charges hiked.
'Jan. 1970: Duties
exchange holdinga
to Central Bank.
including $400 quota raised to 40% for
on travelers.
List 1 and 80% for

sell all

List

2.

May: Further increases in surcharges.

Ecuador
(1982)

Mexico
(1982)

'Same List 1/List 2
structure.
Multiple
rates.
.1981: Increased
restrictions.

'Feb. 1981 increase in 'Slight increase in
coverage and rates of restrictiveness.
advanced deposits.
•June: Import tariffs
raised in 500 items.

'Initial conditions:
•May 1981: Duties inImport licensing and cresed in 374 items.
import quotas.
'July: Further
'1981: Import licensincreases in duties
levels.
ing greatly
'Nov.: Duties hiked
increased.
for 120 items.

Nicaragua .2 groups of imports. 'Nov. 1979: Weekly
'Sales of foreign
(1979)
foreign exchange
exchange at official allocation for
rate restricted.
imports imposed.
'Licenses hiked in

'No change in
capital controls. in

period preceding
devaluation.

'Increased

restrictions.

1978/79.
'Multiple rates imposed (Apr. 1979).

Peru
(1967)

'Initial conditions
(1965): No licenses
required (except
for 12 items).

'In 1967 a number of
restrictions were
imposed.

Exports

required licenses
(Oct.).

Exports
proceeds surrendered
for certificates.

'Aug. 1966: Most
imports subject to
surcharge.
'June 1967: Generalized hike in import
duties.

'Very open initial
conditions.
'Sept. 1967: A

moratorium on payments of foreign
debt declared.
Lifted after 16
days.
'Slight increase in
degree of restrictions.

Table 19 (cont.)

Payments
Eoisode

Peru
(1975)

Restrictions on
Current Transactions

Restrictions on
Tariffs, Duties and
Cost Related Measures Caoital Transactions

•Initial conditions
(1973): Severe
restrictions.
Multiple exchange
rates. Licenses or

.Restrictive initial
conditions.
During
1974 degree of
restrictiveness is
increased,
•Jan. 1975: 12%
surcharge on all
imports.

.Very restrictive
initial conditions.
•No changes during
year prior to
devaluation.

•No changes in year
prior to devaluation,

•Almost complete

prior approval
required for almost
every item,
•No major changes

during year prior to
devaluation.

Venezuela .Multiple rates.
•Some restrictions
(1964)
initially, with
licenses required
on some items.
•No changes in year
prior to devalua-

capital mobility
which is maintained
throughout

episode.

tion.

Source:

IMF Yearbook on Exchanze Arranaements and Restrictions
issues) and Pick's Currency Yearbook.

(several

TAZLE 20
Developed Countries' Tariff and NonTariff Earners:

U.S.A.

1983

EEC

Japan

Average
Tariff
Rate

Proportion
of Imports
s.t. NTB's

Latin American
LDCs

2.0

7.3

2.6

27.7

5.1

18.5

African LDCs

0.7

0.8

0.2

10.4

2.4

10.6

Asian LDCs

3.3

10.2

0.9

9.9

3.7

4.8

Other Developed
Countries

3.1

6.8

3.4

19.7

8.6

19.9

Importer
Exporter

Source:

CEPAL (1986g).

Average Proportion
Tariff
of Imports
Rate st. NTB's

Average
Tariff
Rate

Proportion
of Imports
st. NTB's

TABLE
LAIA:

21

Pecent Evolution and ECLA's Projections
Of Intraregional Trade
(percent)

Intraregional

Total

Exports

+
LAIA Extorts

Intraregional

+

Total LAIA Imports

1980

13.8

12.6

1981

13.1

13.4

1982

12.2

14.9

1983

8.8

15.3

1984

8.9

15.9

9.0

14.8

Projected Valuesa
1985

1986

9.7

15.6

.1987

10.4

16.4

1988

11.2

17.0

1989

12.0

17.8

1990

12.9

18.6

1991

13.9

19.5

1992

14.9

20.4

1993

16.0

21.2

1994

17.2

22.2

aThe projections assume that the value of intraregional
at an annual rate of 16%.
Source:

CEPAL (1986d).

Imports

trade will grow

