                         NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   CAN INTER-INDUSIRYWAGEDIFFERENTIALS
                      JUSTIFY STRATEGIC TRADE POLICY?




                              Lawrence F. Katz

                             Lawrence H. Summers




                           Working Paper No. 2739




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                          1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                October 1988




We thank William Dickens and Alan Krueger for many helpful discussions. We
are grateful to Robert Stern for generously providing us with trade flow
data, to Richard Baldwin for providing us with data on Airbus, and to Joe
Cooper, David Cutler, and Daniel Kessler for expert research assistance.   An
analysis of labor rents and trade policies paralleling ours in many respects
is presented in Dickens and Lang (1988). Our analysis differs in contrasting
the relative importance of labor market and product market imperfections,
                                                                            of
focusing on the manufacturing aector, and making international comparisons
wages and trade flows. This research is part of the NBER's research programs
in International Studies and in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors nor those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                       NBER Working Paper #2739
                                       October 1988


                   CAN INTER-INDUSTRY WAGE DIFFERENTIALS
                     JUSTIFY STRATEGIC TRADE POLICIES


                                 ABSTRACT




     This paper examines the relationship between labor market

imperfections and trade policies.        The available evidence suggests

that pervasive industry wage differentials         of up to 20 percent

remain even after controlling      for differences in observed measures

of workers' skill and the effects of unions.          Theoretical   analysis

indicates that given non—competitive        wage differentials    of this

magnitude policies directed at encouraging employment in high-wage
sectors could significantly enhance allocative efficiency.            For the

United States and other developed countries, such policies are more

likely to involve export promotion than import substitution.

Increased international trade flows (at least through 1984) have

been associated with increased employment in high-wage U.S.

manufacturing    industries relative to low—wage U.S. manufacturing

industries.




Lawrence F. Katz                       Lawrence H. Summers
Department of Economics                Department of Economics
Harvard University                     Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                    Cambridge, MA 02138
I.   Introduction



      Industrial policies have been           a major source   of economic and

political debate in the United States and other nations in recent

years.   Advocates of industrial policies assert that since all
                                                                  of output and
public policies inevitably influence the composition
some industries are "better" for a national economy than others, it

is appropriate      for governments   to manage their influence on the

economy to promote goals like growth and competitiveness.

Industrial policy advocates often cite Japan as an example of a

nation that has benefitted from sound industrial policies.               Critics

of industrial policy have generally cited standard economic

arguments against such policies, suggesting that in competitive or
nearly competitive markets, there are no gains to be had from
altering the composition of output.
      In tandem with political debates over industrial policy, a

burgeoning academic literature on strategic trade policy, initiated
by Brander and Spencer (1983,         1984)    and surveyed in Krugman   (1986),

has examined policy measures that can shift monopoly rents from one

nation to another when product markets are imperfectly competitive.

A central focus in this literature has been on imperfections              in

product markets, especially markets with large learning curve

effects.   While this literature has yielded intriguing

counterexamples      to some widely believed propositions,         we believe

that its emphasis on product market imperfections as the potential
                                     2

rationale for industrial policies is somewhat misplaced.1
       We suspect that deviations from competitive labor markets which

give rise to significant inter-industry wage differentials are at
least equally important for industrial policy as are product market

imperfections.     Industrial policy advocates like Robert Reich and

Lester Thurow, who encourage subsidies for "high value added

production",    appear to be referring not to especially profitable

industries,    but to industries that pay high wages.   The

international pervasiveness    of subsidies to steel industries   is

probably more easily understood on the basis of their high wage jobs
than on the basis of the profits earned by steel companies.
       The observation   that rents accruing to labor are much more

significant than monopoly rents received by firms is a very general
one.     For the American non—financial corporate sector in 1987,

employee compensation represented     82 percent of value added while

operating profits represented only 18 percent, with the bulk of the
latter figure being the return to capital rather than monopoly

rents.     It follows that the labor rents associated with industry

wage differentials of even 10 percent bulk very large when compared
with plausible estimates of firms' monopoly rents.2

     LA prominent exception to this criticism is Krugman (1984), who
emphasizes the potential importance of wage differentials caused by
unions.

     2The presumption that labor rents are much greater than rents
received by firms does not necessarily mean that product market
imperfections are a minor source of rents. A large fraction of the
rents earned by workers may arise from the ability of both union and
nonunion labor to share in product market rents.  For example,
Salinger (1984) presents evidence indicating that union labor
captures most of the monopoly rents in heavily unionized
     This paper explores both theoretically         and empirically   the

implications    of labor market imperfections for trade policies,

focusing on the situation of the United States in the 1980s.            We

begin in Section II by demonstrating that, contrary to competitive

labor market theories, there are substantial differences between

industries    in the compensation received by workers with similar

characteristics    working under apparently similar conditions. The
industrial wage structure is remarkably stable across time and

space.   While unions are a partial source of these wage
differentials, wage differentials are large for non—union workers

and in settings like the American South, where union threats are not

very important.     The differentials appear to arise from the
differential    importance of motivating,    retaining, and recruiting
workers as suggested by the efficiency wage theories surveyed in

Katz (1986) and from rent—sharing considerations.

     Section III considers theoretically the implications of non—

competitive    wage differentials    for trade and industrial policies.

We find that inter—industry wage differences provide a rationale for

policies quite similar to those that have been advanced by

industrial policy advocates.        While it is difficult to justify

subsidizing    industries that achieve high value added per worker by

relying on abnormally skilled workers or by using a great deal of

capital or other inputs, there is a rationale for subsidizing
industries    that have high value added per worker because of non-

competitive wage differentials.        If firms   hire   labor to the point


industries.
                                       4

where its marginal product equals the wage, the marginal

productivity of an additional worker is greater in sectors paying
premium wages than in competitive wage sectors.          In this case,

policy measures that expand employment in high—wage sectors may be
desirable.     Of course, the basic thrust of this theoretical         argument

is not new.     The role of factor market distortions      in the design of

optimal trade policies has played a prominent role in trade theory
at least since the work of Hagen (1958) and of Shagwati and

Ramaswani (1963).       Furthermore, both stylized calculations    and

consideration    of actual examples suggest that these effects may well

be quantitatively      important.
     Section IV combines data on industry wage premiums with data on

trade flows to assess the importance of wage differentials for trade
policies.     We reach three primary conclusions.        First, wage

differentials    cause the United States to reap extra gains from

trade, at least within the manufacturing       sector.    US manufacturing

exports come disproportionatelyfrom industries that pay premium

wages, while manufacturing      imports generally come from low-wage
sectors.     Second,    exporting high—wage goods while importing lower—

wage goods is a characteristic common to other developed countries.

Third, despite concerns about undesirable       changes in the structure
of the US economy, it does not appear (at least through 1984) that

changing trade patterns have disproportionately          hurt the high-wage

portion of the US manufacturing sector.        Instead, increased import

competition    has had its greatest impact on employment in low-wage

parts of the U.S. manufacturing      sector.
                                       5

      Section   V concludes the   paper by offering a tentative

assessment of the implications of our results for actual trade

industrial and tax policies.       Our general view is that policies

directed at reducing imports are likely to have extremely adverse

impacts on economic welfare, whereas certain measures aimed at

expanding employment in export sectors may increase welfare.        Any

economic case for activist policy must be tempered by a recognition

that theoretically     optimal policies are extremely unlikely to be

implemented     in practice.



II.   The Inmortance of Inter-Industry Wage Differentials



      Several recent studies have documented large and persistent

wage differentials     among industries, even after controlling    for a

wide variety of worker and job characteristics      (Dickens and Katz,

l987a,b; Krueger and Summers, 1987, 1988; and Murphy and Topel,

l987).    The pattern of these differentials     is remarkably parallel

in looking at data for different countries and time periods and

suggests that workers in some sectors earn substantial      rents. This

section summarizes the available evidence on the inter—industry wage

structure and discusses the consistency with the evidence of

alternative models of wage determination.       We conclude that

competitive     labor market explanations stressing unmeasured labor

quality and compensating       differertia1s do not provide a plausible


     3This conclusion is hardly new. It was noted by Adam Smith,
highlighted by Sumner Slichter (1950), and has been emphasized by
institutionally— oriented labor economists for many years.
                                          6

explanation    for a substantial      component of inter—industry   wage
variations,    even for non—union workers.       Instead, industry wage
differentials    largely reflect firms' differing needs to use high

wages to motivate, retain and recruit their workers.


The Magnitude of Inter-Industry Wage Differences
     We analyze industry wage differences in the United States using
cross—sectional      data on individuals from the 1984 Current Population

Surveys.    All twelve CPS surveys from 1984 were combined to generate

a sample large enough to accurately estimate wage differentials                 for
detailed industry categories.4          Our sample consists of private

sector, nonagricultural         employees 16 years old or older.    The

earnings variable is usual weekly earnings divided by usual weekly
hours.5 The procedures utilized are described in Krueger and
Summers    (1988).    In particular, we normalize the estimated wage

differentials as deviations from the (employment-weighted)          mean
differential.

     The first column in Table 1 reports the proportionate

difference in wages between the average worker in a two-digit Census

industry and the weighted average worker in all industries.               The
second column reports the normalized industry wage differences              after

controlling   for education, age, occupation, gender, race, marital

     4
      Although the CPS is partially a panel data set, only
                            .



individuals in outgoing rotation groups are asked about earnings.
Further, people exit the sample only once a year. Thus, all
observations reflect unique individuals.

     5We eliminated employees who reported earning less that $1.00
an hour or greater than $250 an hour.
                                                            -   -   Full   Year 1984
Table 1:    Estimated    Industry Log Wage Differentials


                                  (1)            (2)                (3)               (4)
                                                           All - Total
                              All            All           Compensation         Nonunion
                            Without          With b           With b              With b
                             Controls      Controls         Controls            Controls
Industry


                                  .396           .268               .280              .273
Mining

Construction                      .163           .113               .100              .068

Lumber                        -   .118      -    .030               .007              .007

Furniture                     -   .120      -    .035           -   .014              .005

                                  .084           .070               .124              .066
Stone     Clay & Glass
                                  .269           .169               .270              .166
Primary Metals

FabricatedMetals                  .128           .077               .138              .082

             Excl. Elec.          .299           .149               .186              .177
Machinery

Electrical Machinery              .177           .085               .114              .10]


Transport    Equipment            .375           .211               .288              .194

Instruments                       .247           .110               .139              .158

Misc. Manufacturing           -   .102      -    .062           -   .041          -   .015

Food                              .039           .052               .105              .041

Tobacco                           .248           .236               .424              .213

Textile                       -   .146      -    .002               .010              .048


Apparel
                              -   .358       -   .153           -   .149          -   .111

                                  .220           .168               .205              .149
Paper

                                  .055           .033               .037              .034
Printing

Chemical                          .343           .192               .237              .223

Petroleum                         .490           .294               .543              .292

Rubber                            .090           .101               .146              .132

Leather                       -   .294       -   .134           -   .113          -   .090

Other Transport                   .245           .179               .208              .092

Communications                    .385           .250               .373              .215
                                        Table I (continued)

                                  (1)              (2)              (3)                (4)
                                                              All    -    Total
                                  All              All        Compensation        Nonunion
                             Without               With         With                With
Industry                     Controls            Controlsa     Controlaa          Controlsa

Public Utilities                  .349             .201             .278               .192

Wholesale Trade                   .108             .040             .018               .058

Eating and Drinking           -   .605            - .244        - .274             - .228

Dther Retail Trade            -   .267            - .139        - .169             - .138

Banking                           .098             .048             .077               .066

Insurance                         .101             .049             .053               .069

Private Household             -   .809            - .339       - .490              - .312

Business Services             -   .010            -.015        -.046                   .004

Repair Services               -   .076            - .085       - .115              - .053
Personal Services             -   .384            - .180       - .219              -   .161
Entertainment                 -   .211            - .130       - .151              -   .144
Medical Services              -   .152            - .034       - .030              - .014

Hospitals                         .096             .060          .064                  .077

Welfare Services              -   .187            - .203       - .286              - .207

Education   Services              .078            - .078       - .099              - .105

Professional    Services          .271             .091          .052                  .105

Sample Size                  135595              135595       135595              106599

Weighted adjusted
S.D. of differentialsc            .270             .144         .185                   .141


astandard errors are not reported to save apace. In all cases the standard
errors are between .004 and .020 except for Tobacco which has atandard
errors which range froa .039 to .049.
b
  Controls include education and its square; six age dummies; eight occupation
dummies; female dummy; race dummy; SMSA dummy; 3 region dummies; full-time
work dummy; full- and part-time student dummies; interactions of the female
dummy with marriage, education, education squared, and the 6 age dummies; and
a constant. Each column was estimated from a separte cross-sectional
regression.
c
    Weights are employment   shares for the entire sample (union and nonunion)
                                     7

status, SMSA, full-tine work, student status, and allowing many of

the coefficients   to differ for males and females.     Controlling    for

available worker characteristics has little impact on the rankings

of different industries;     the correlation of the industry wage
differentials   estimated with and without controls is 0.96.      This

finding suggests that comparisons of average industry wages over
time and across countries may be useful since it is unlikely that
controls would change one's inferences about the relative rankings
of industries   in the wage structure.

     The controls do substantially       reduce the estimated inter-

industry dispersion of wages.     The standard deviation of the
estimated wage differentials    falls from 27 percent without controls

to 14 percent when controls are added.       Almost all of this decline

is attributable    to holding occupation and sex constant.     Industry

affiliation   has a large impact on relative wages even allowing for

observed differences    in occupation, human capital variables, and

demographic   background.    Industry differentials range from a high of

29 percent above the mean in petroleum to 34 percent below the mean

in private household services.     Durable goods manufacturing,    mining,

and chemicals industries pay wages well above those for workers in
retail trade and service industries, all else constant.        Substantial

wage differentials are also apparent within the traded-goods
(manufacturing)    sector.

     One possibility    is that these differentials    largely serve to
offset differences    in nonwage compensation. One non—wage aspect of

compensation which we can control for using our data is fringe
                                     8

benefits.   Fringe benefits account for as much as 50 percent of

compensation   in some industries.   To adjust for variation in fringes

across industries, we multiplied our CPS hourly wage data for each

worker in the sample by the ratio of total labor costs to wages in
the corresponding industry.6     The third column of Table 1 presents

estimates of industry wage differentials with the dependent variable

adjusted to reflect both wage and nonwage compensation.7       The
estimated standard deviation of industry differentials actually
increases by more than one—fourth from 14.4 to 18.5 percent.         Thus,
the consideration    of fringe benefits reinforces,   rather than

reduces, industry compensation differences.

     Discussions    of industry wage differences   frequently emphasize
the importance of unions in wage setting.     The inclusion of union

membership and union coverage dummy variables in the specification
reported in the second column of Table    1, however,   has little impact
on the estimated industry differentials.     The standard deviation of

the differentials    falls from 14.4 to 13.9 percent.   Since unions are
likely to have different impacts on wages in industries with
different product market structures and costs of strikes, a better

approach is to assess the importance of industry differentials        for a




     6The industry labor cost and wage data are reported in the
National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA) and were previously
utilized in Krueger and Summers (1988).
     7Since the NIPA and CPS industry classification schemes do not
match exactly, caution should be taken in comparing the results in
column (3).
                                        9

sample containing only nonunion workers.8         Column   (4)   of Table 1

presents these.        The industry wage premia are quite substantial         for

nonunion workers.        We also estimated differentials    for the union

workers in our sample and found the standard deviation of the

di±ferentials    to be slightly larger for nonunion workers (14.1 to
13.3 percent).     The correlation     of the differentials      for the union

and nonunion samples is 0.80.         There appears to be little difference
in the process generating industry relative wages in the union and

no:nunion   sectors.     Further evidence that unions are not the primary

factor accounting for wage differentials        comes from Krueger and

Summers'    (1988) finding that the wage structure in the Southern part
of the United States looks very similar to that in the rest of the

country despite much lower rates of unionization.


Regularities    in the Inter—Industry Wage Structure

      Industry wage differences       appear to be quite stable across time
and space.     Krueger and Summers     (1987) examine evidence on the

industry wage structure in the United States from 1900 to 1984.

They find that between 1900 and 1984 the correlation             between
relative wages in nine major industries is 0.62 and between 1970 and
1984 the correlation       is 0.91.   Krueger and Summers further document
that the relative rankings of industry average wages in detailed

manufacturing    industries is also extremely stable over time.            Figure



     8The nonunion sample consists of workers not covered by
collective bargaining agreements. The results are almost identical
when the union membership is used as the criterion for excluding a
worker from the nonunion sample.
                          US Wage Structure: 1974 vs 1984
                              log wage premia for manufacturing
      0.4 * ___________________
                                                                                                       petroleum I
                                            0 bacco
      0.3 -


                                                                                          0 chemical
      0.2 -
                                                                    0 machine rans. equip.
                                                                   0 primary metals
                                                             0 paper 0 instruments

      01-                                               0 electrical mach.
0)
                                                  0 scg0 printing
                                                        0 fab.metals
                                    rubber dJ food

                                 textile o    ___________________________________________________________________
        0-                U ?urniture



              0 leather
     —0.1 -
                0 apparel


     —0.2—         i                    I               I           I
         —0.1          —0.06       —0.02        0.02        0.06        0.1        0.14       0.18        0.22

                                                            1974


                                                       rirc I
                                    10

1 plots    industry wage differentials for twenty two—digit
manufacturing    industries estimated from the May 1974 CPS against

analogous differentials estimated from the May 1984 CPS.9         Despite

widespread concern about the impact of trade on affected industries,
the figure illustrates that the industry wage structure in

manufacturing has been very stable over the last decade.         Freeman

and Katz (1987) study the effects of import competition on wages in
US manufacturing    and find that a 10 percent decrease in industry

revenues front increased import penetration     reduces an industry's

relative wage for production workers by only 0.5 percent.10

     Industry wage patterns are remarkably similar among countries
with diverse labor market institutions.     Table   2 presents   evidence

on the remarkable similarity of relative wages in manufacturing

among 9 countries in 1982.     The use of a single occupational     group

(operatives) allows us to control for skill mix differences        across

countries.     The cross—country correlations   of relative wages are

quite high, typically between 0.6 and 0.9.       For example, the

correlation    between the relative wages of operatives in the U.S. and

Japan is 0.95.     We illustrate this similarity in the wage structures

of U.S. and Japan in Figure 2.     Krueger and Summers   (1987) also find

strong positive correlations    in relative average industry wages


     9The estimates are taken from Table II of Krueger and Summers
(1988) .

     101n contrast, Murphy and Welch (1988) document that the
earnings of "skilled" (college—educated) workers rose dramatically
relative to those of less—educated workers from 1979 to 1985. They
provide some suggestive evidence that increased net imports in
manufacturing may have played an important role in the widening of
skill differentials.
               Table 2: ()rre1atioma of Lq Mar!ifaCthrir Wages Mor O:,uritries in 1983



                                                                  ntxva
                           ustralia thile      Frai     Germany   Japan   Korea Swien    UK      Us
                             (yr.)     (yr.)    (hr.)    (hr.)    (yr.)   (hr.) (yr.)    (yr.)   (hr.)


ustralia                      1.00     0.66     0.80    0.81      0.84    0.67    0.77   0.78    0.92
thile                                  1.00     0.60    0.60      0.69    0.46    0.67   0.56    0.67
Frar                                            1.00    0.89      0.80    0.53    0.64   0.77    0.85

Germany                                                 1.00      0.94    0.62    0.75   0.93    0.95

Japan                                                             1.00    0.59    0.80   0.95    0.92
Korea                                                                     1.00    0.68   0.59    0.66
Sen                                                                               1.00   0.79    0.79
UK                                                                                       1.00    0.86
Us                                                                                                1.00


Notes:
a. (yr.) deootes yearly wages and (hr.) denotes hcxlrly wages. Wages are for ceratives, except for
France where the wage is the average wage of all warkers. The data oover 19 mar*ifacturirvj industries.
Deta are available for only 18 industries for Korea and Australia, 17 industries for Germany and 15
indistries for France. Facth pairwise cerrelation uses the maxinum nuirber of industries pcmsible.
b. Deta soorce: Industrial Statistics Yearbook. 1984, volume 1, Unitnd Nations, 1986, Dept. of
International Ecenceic and Sccial Affairs, Statistical Office.
                                                               re'u   F
                                                             Japan
         9.9           9.7                9.5                 9.3             9.1   8.9         8.7
                         I         I       I    —
                                                      I        I          I          I
                                                                                                 1.5—
                                                                                    apparel 0    - 1.6
                                                          footwear    0                          -
                                                             leather 0                           - 1.8
                                                     furnituretextiiQ 0
                                                                                                 - 1.9
                                                    prod wood 0                                  - 2
                                                                                                 .1-        j
                                   metal 0
         printing 0          machinery electrical     0                                          - 2.2
                   machinery 0         0 rubber                                                  - 2.3
                         glass 0       0 paper
            chemical 0                                                                           - 2.4
        metals ferrous- non 0
                                                                                                 - 2.5
     equipment transport 0
           steel 0                                                                               -    2.6
leum petr 0
                                                                                                 -    2.7
                                          1983 operatives, of wages log
                       Japan VS US Structure: Wage
                                      11

among a larger group of countries.         The stability in differentiala

across time periods and countries strongly suggests that these wage

differences    result from factors fundamental to the operation of

industrial economies and are not the artifact of particular

collective bargaining systems or government interventions in the
labor market.

     The industry wage structure also appears to be very similar for

different types of workers.     Dickens and Katz (1987b) find that

inter—industry wage differentials     are highly correlated across

occupations:    in industries where one occupation is highly paid, all

occupations    tend to be highly paid.      For example, they find that the

correlation    in industry average wages for managers and laborers in

0.83, even after controlling    for worker characteristics.

Furthermore,    Krueger and Summers   (1988) show that the pattern of

differentials    is quite similar for young and old workers and for

workers with short and long job tenure.


The Characteristics of High— and Low—Wage Industries
     The evidence summarized above indicates that there exists a

pattern of wage differentials    in which all workers in some

industries are paid more than similar workers in other industries.

This raises the question of what are the attributes of high- and

low-wage industries.     Dickens and Katz (1987a) review the literature

on the relations among industry characteristics        and industry wages.

They find that even after controlling        for observed human capital,

geographic,    and demographic variables, both union and nonunion wages
                                       12
are positively correlated with capital—intensity,          neasures of
product market power and ability—to—pay, union density, average

education level, and firm and establishment       size.     High-wage
industries also have much lower quit rates than low—wage industries.

     The characteristics    of high—wage and low—wage industries in

U.S. manufacturing    are illustrated in Figures 3a—3d.        The tendency
of capital intensive industries (and those with a low labor share)

to pay high wages is apparent.     The relation between R&D spending
and wages is less clear cut.     Unfortunately,    as Dickens and Katz

note, it is not possible to reliably disentangle          the independent
effects of these factors on wages.



Do Industry Wage Differentials Reflect Labor Rents?

     The competitive    labor market model offers two types of

explanations    for persistent inter—industry wage differentials.

These differentials    may compensate for nonpecuniary differences in
job attributes,    or they may reflect differences    in unmeasured labor

quality.     If compensating differentials   and unobserved ability

adequately    explain the bulk of measured industry wage differences,
then the presence of large industry wage differentials          should not be
an important consideration    in the evaluation of trade policies.

     Inter—industry    wage differences do not appear to be easily

explained by compensating differentials, for several reasons.
First, Krueger and Summers    (1988)   find that the inclusion of

controls for observable differences in working conditions tends to

increase rather than decrease estimates of the extent of inter—
                                       Figure   .1




    Pre,ma vs Ya1ue Added per VurMer                     \    S9(   Prera   vs     or pcrce[rt or Sees

                                                                                                     v




                                                     I



             1:;                                         :                              =




\   ope Prerirro                                                    V ape Prerirra vs Percent   Vnrrorr




                                                         r—                         -
                                                                                            -
                                      13

industry wage variation.     Furthermore, the estimates in Table 1

indicate that the consideration     of fringe benefits leads to
                                                               differences.
substantially larger estimates of industry compensation
                           of observed nonwage compensation     exacerbates
Thus, the consideration
the industry differentials.

     Second, the strong correlation in inter—industry wage

differences   across occupations   is also difficult to explain through

equalizing differences, since it is unlikely that whenever working
conditions are poor for production workers they are also poor for

managers, secretaries,    and salesmen.    Third, Pencavel    (1970) and

many others have shown that there is a strong negative correlation
between industry wage differentials and quit rates.          Furthermore,

Holzer, Katz and Krueger     (1988) find that high-wage industries

attract a greater number of job applicants per opening than do low-

wage industries.  These findings strongly suggest that workers in

high-wage industries earn rents.
     An alternative competitive explanation of these wage
differences   is that they largely reflect differences       in workers'

productive abilities that are not captured by the variables

available in individual—level      data sets.   While it is almost certain

that unobserved quality differences account for much of the

variation in the wages that workers with similar observed

characteristics   receive, this does not necessarily     imply that

differences   in the average wage paid in different industries are the

result of differences     in the average level of unobserved ability.

Four types of evidence suggest that it is unlikely that a large part
                                         14

of measured inter—industry wage differences can be accounted for by

unmeasured ability.

     First, Krueger and Summers (1988) find that after controlling
for sex and occupation,    controlling for other skill variables like
education and experience has only a very small impact on the

dispersion of industry wages.          This is because there are only minor

differences    in educational    attainment and in experience across

industries after controlling       for differences   in occupational

composition.     Given the absence of a high degree of industrial

sorting on the basis of observed labor quality proxies, a high

degree of sorting on unobserved characteristics would be surprising.
     Second, Krueger and Summers (1988) present longitudinal

evidence that when individual workers move between industries,
either because of displacement         or because of normal labor market

processes, their wages change by amounts similar to the industry
                                                        11
differentials estimated in cross—sectional regressions.    This

finding casts some doubt on the hypothesis that measured inter-

industry wage differences       are largely attributable   to unobserved

productive ability.

     Third, much evidence indicates that more profitable industries,
those with more monopoly power, and those where labor's share is

smaller, pay higher wages.        These regularities   hold in different

times and places and explain       a   sizable fraction of inter—industry



     See   Murphy and Topel (1987) for contrasting findings using
matched March CPS data. Gibbons and Katz (1987) discuss in detail
potential reasons for differences in findings in alternative
longitudinal data sets.
                                       15

wage variation.     There is no obvious reason why these product market

factors should be strongly correlated with unmeasured ability.
                                                             for different
        Fourth, the strong similarity in wage differences

types of workers is also problematic        for the unmeasured ability
                                                         have such
view.     Why should industry technologies almost always
strong skill complementarities      that those requiring unusually good

operatives require unusually good       managers and clerical workers?

Furthermore,    industry differences    in observed quality measures for

different occupational groups do not appear to be nearly as strongly

correlated as do their industry wage differentials.         Dickens and

Katz (1988) find that industry average education levels are only

weakly positively correlated for many occupations and are negatively
correlated     for some groups.

     Our reading of the evidence is that it is difficult to account
                                                          of
convincingly for the industry wage structure on the basis
unobserved ability differences or equalizing differences.          Instead,

i   appears that workers in high wage industries earn rents.



Alternative Explanations       for Labor Market Rents

        The natural economic approach to explaining why firms in high

wage industries fail to cut wages in the absence of any legal

compulsion,     is to isolate reasons why reducing wages would be

unprofitable     for a firm.    This is the approach taken in the large

 and growing efficiency wage literature.        The efficiency wage

 literature, surveyed in Stiglitz      (1987) from a theoretical

                and Katz (1986) from an empirical perspective,     has put
 perspective
                                      16

forth a number of possible explanations          for   fins'   failure to cut

wages in the face of an excess supply of labor and their willingness
to confer rents on incumbent workers.

     A   first explanation,   emphasized by Shapiro and Stiglitz          (1984)
in the context of unemployment     and Bulow and Summers (1986) in the

context of wage differentials emphasizes the firms' need to deter
their workers from shirking.      Conferring rents on them, which will
be forfeited if they are caught shirking, may be an efficient

alternative    to more extensive monitoring costs.         This theory may

rationalize the observation     that capital intensive         fins   and those

offering more job autonomy pay higher wages because the cost of
shirking is higher in these fins.          Krueger (1987) provides some
supporting evidence by documenting that fast food           fins appear     to
trade—off wages and monitoring effort.
     A   second explanation   revolves around     fins'    desire to avoid

turnover because of fixed hiring and training costs.             This

explanation    elegantly modelled by Stiglitz (1985) is consistent with
the observation    that wage premia appear to be somewhat larger for

experienced    than for inexperienced workers.           It is also supported

by frequent references to the need to monitor turnover in personnel
books.   A   third related explanation     for   fins'   willingness    to confer

rents involves adverse selection considerations            (Weiss, 1980).    If

more able workers have higher reservation         wages than their less able

counterparts,    fins that    reduce wages may find that the average

ability of their work force declines so rapidly that unit labor
costs increase.     This explanation is consistent with the complaints
                                    17

of some managers that the "wrong" workers quit   in   good times.
     While each of these explanations can be formalized, they appear
insufficient to fully account for the observed pattern of wage

differentials.    A striking feature of this pattern is the similarity

in industry wage patterns for different occupational     groups.     It is

difficult to see why workers in industries with an especially great
need to motivate and retain operatives should also have an

especially great need to motivate and retain clerical workers.         The
similarity of wage patterns in different occupations along with the
observation    that monopoly power appears to influence wages, suggest

that firms for which production interferences are especially costly

may pay abnormally high wages even in non—union settings.
     This type of behavior can be justified on the grounds of "gift

exchange" theories of the type advanced by Akerlof (1984).         In these

models, a worker's effort depends on his perception of how fairly he

is being treated.    Perceived fairness in turn depends on how

profitable the firm is.    A related argument might hold that firms

pay high wages to "buy the peace", avoiding unions or collective
visible shirking of the kind that Mathewson (1969) and Mars (1982)

find in many industrial settings.    The "peace" may be worth more to
some firms than others.    A final explanation invokes expense

preference behavior on the part of managers, who may particularly at
low levels feel more loyalty to employees than shareholders.         If the

efficiency effects of wage increases described in previous
paragraphs    are important, it may not be very costly for firms to

raise wages.
                                    18



Conclusion
       The evidence in this section suggests that industry wage
differentials   for similar workers are substantial.   It appears that

these wage differentials    largely reflect rents earned by workers in

high wage industries.    No doubt, industry wage differences   result
from a number of sources.    Fortunately,   as we argue in the next

section, the implications of non—competitive wage differentials       for

trade policies are similar for a variety of underlying causes of the

differentials   as long as firms choose employment levels on their

labor demand curves.



III.   Wace Differentials and Trade Policies


       The basic argument linking labor market imperfections   and trade

policies has long been recognized by trade theorists (see for
example Bhagwati and Srinivasan    (1983) and Magee (1976)).    It has

been echoed, though in a less clear fashion, in the American debate

over industrial policies. If competitive     forces do not equalize

wages in different sectors and if firms operate on their labor
demand curves, then the marginal product of labor in different

sectors will not be equated, resulting in allocative inefficiencies.

Policies which raise employment in high wage sectors at the expense

of employment in low wage sectors will therefore increase allocative

efficiency.     This line of argument captures the thrust of industrial

policy arguments suggesting that countries can raise their workers'
                                     19

standards of living by encouraging    the growth of "high value added

industries".

     We begin by demonstrating that the interaction of trade

policies with wage differentials   has welfare consequences that are

likely to be more important to the profit shifting effects that have
been the focus of recent discussions of strategic trade policy.
Then we examine arguments against subsidies to employment in high

wage sectors based on rent seeking and equity considerations.        We

conclWde that on economic grounds there is a reasonably strong
welfare argument for measures that promote production in high wage

industries,    though any policy judgment must depend on an assessment
of how skillfully the government would manage its interventions.



Wage Differentials In A Closed Economy
     For simplicity,   consider a stylized economy with two sectors.12

Following the terminology of Doeringer and Piore (1971), we label

these sectors secondary and primary.      As we discuss below, the

primary sector pays higher wages and offers workers more responsible

jobs than the secondary sector.    Secondary sector output, taken as
the numeraire, is given by Y'=w0L.   The secondary sector labor
market is competitive so that workers employed in the secondary

sector receive a wage equal to their marginal product, w0.      Primary
sector output is given by the constant returns to scale production


          the cost of some complexity, the special assumption that
capital is not used in producing secondary sector output could be
relaxed.  It does capture the stylized fact noted in the previous
section that high wage sectors tend to be capital intensive.
                                             20

function    Y=F(K,L). The             demand for primary sector output is a

decreasing function of its price,            p=p(y,   p'<O.    We assume that the

wage differential,          d    in the primary sector is a nondecreasing

function of employment, d=d(L), d'0.13                It may depend positively
on the level of employment because workers' ability to extract rents

is increased when the demand for labor increases, or because the

costs of leaving a high—wage job is reduced when there are more

high—wage jobs       in.   the economy.

       Assume initially that the economy is closed and that the

capital stock is fixed.             Firms in the primary and secondary sector

product markets are assumed to act competitively.               Then the first

order condition:


(1)                          =
       p(Y)FL(K,L)               w0(l+d)

determines the level of primary sector employment.               This level of

primary sector employment is inefficiently low.               As Figure 4

illustrates,     a subsidy to employment in the. primary sector at a rate

just sufficient to offset the wage differential               (l/(l+d)) would

permit the economy to attain the first best allocation of              labor)4
Note that such a subsidy imcreases efficiency, even though it may

lead to a widening of inter—industry wage differentials.               We return

below to the question of whether or not it represents a Pareto

          See   Bulow and Summers (1986) for an explicit derivation of a
d(L   )   schedule  from an efficiency wage model.

     14The optimal subsidy will be set at
                                          d(')
level of primary sector employment where p(Y    whee L'
                                             )F(K,L  =
                                                         is the
                                                       w0.        )
     >
     0                 A
     ci         U-
     a)
     0           -ci
     4-
     9-
     LU
     0
     E
     0
(U   ci
1)
     LU
                       A
L
     ci
     0
     U)
     a-)   U-
     U-)
     0
     f)                V
                                       21

improvement.

     So far we have maintained the assumption of perfect competition

in product markets and the assumption that the capital stock in each

industry is fixed.     Relaxing these assumptions tends to strengthen
the case for policies directed at expanding the primary sector.              If

firms in the primary sector have market power, this is another

reason apart from wage premia why the social marginal product of
labor in the primary sector exceeds the social marginal product of
labor in the secondary sector.        Put more directly: there is an

efficiency case for subsidizing the variable inputs of a monopolist.
     Allowing for variable capital input strengthens the case for
subsidies to high-wage industries.          If wage differentials   do not

depend on the capital intensity of the primary sector, then the
appropriate policy instrument in the presence of noncompetitive wage
differentials    is a wage subsidy.    If wage differentials are an

increasing function of capital intensity as some rent—sharing
theories   would suggest, then there is a case for capital investment
subsidies to offset the "tax" levied by labor on capital

investments.

     How substantial are the potential gains from public policies
directed at offsetting the effects of inter—industry wage

differentials?    One way of answering this question is by comparing
the efficiency costs of inter-industry wage differentials           with other

distortions that have received more attention from economists.

Section II showed that the standard deviation of nonunion industry

compensation differences    after correcting for measured ability
                                      22

differences   was about 18%.    About 15% of private sector American

workers are covered by trade union agreements, and it is generally
estimated that their compensation is about 20% above those of other

workers.     If this were the only source of wage inequality, the

standard deviation of wages would be approximately      7%.   This

suggests that the allocative inefficiency attributable        to industry

wage effects is at least comparable to the efficiency costs arising
from union wage differentials.

     A different standard of comparison is the distortionary

consequence    of taxation.    Assuming that labor's share in output is

about three—quarters,    a 20% differential   in labor costs between two

sectors, will affect the product mix in the same way as a 60%

capital income tax, or a 15% sales tax. The former figure is more
than what is at stake in the much discussed distortion between

corporate capital and owner occupied housing.       Much smaller

differentials    in effective tax rates played a prominent role in the

recent US tax reform debate.       Discussions of sales taxes invariably

treat differences    of only a few percentage points in the rates on

included and excluded items as a serious problem.

      Inter—industry wage differences      appear to cause allocative

distortions greater than those resulting from trade unions or the
corporate income tax. A different way of demonstrating their
importance    is by evaluating the marginal social product of capital

in the primary sector in their presence.        The value of output

measured at pre—interventionprices in our stylized economy is given

by
                                           23



(2)   1 =   pF(K,L)       + w0Lm,



where L' +    L   = L   and L is the fixed stock of labor in the economy.

Differentiating     (2)    with respect to      K,   the primary sector capital
stock, and then using both the first order condition (1) and the

assumption that the primary sector production function displays
constant returns to scale, we obtain the result:


(3)   dY/dK   =   r(l+[ad/(l—a)(l+d)]),

where I represents the total value of national income, r is the

return received by the suppliers of capital, and              a   represents
labor's share in the primary sector.             Taking labor's share to be
3/4, and the wage differential to be 2D%, this implies that the

marginal product of additional capital in the primary sector is

inflated by 1/2 because of the preexisting wage differential.                  This

suggests that substantial gains may be achievable by targeting
investment incentives towards high wage sectors.



Wage Differentials in a Small Open Economy
      In the case of a small open economy, illustrated              in Figure 5,

the relative price of primary sector output is determined on
international markets and is assumed to be unaffected by the

domestic production mix.            The demand function p(1P) becomes

perfectly elastic.         This does not change the condition (1) or the
                                     24

desirability   of employment subsidies for the primary sector.

Opening up the economy does however strengthen the case for large
subsidies.     In a closed economy, subsidies to the primary sector

encounter diminishing returns as its output declines in value with
increased production.    This does not happen when the price of output
is set on world markets and is insensitive to the level of domestic
              15
production.
     There is a further point to be made.      As Figure 5 illustrates,

the marginal welfare gained per dollar of subsidy will be greater

the greater is the world price of primary sector output.       As the

world price of primary sector output expands, and so domestic

production    expands, the wage differential   increases, raising the
social gain to inducing further expansion of the primary sector.

This observation    resonates somewhat with discussions   of industrial

policy that claim that governments    should support "sunrise" export

industries    rather than "sunset" import competing industries.

     We have focused on the desirability of employment or production
subsidies for the high wage sector.       An obvious alternative is

protection,    through the exclusion of foreign competition.    As

illustrated in Figure 6, protection has the virtue of expanding the



      15we focus on the "small open economy case" to highlight the
implications of wage differentials for trade policy.    In the case
of open economies large enough to affect the prices at which they
buy and sell, there are traditional optimal tariff considerations as
well.   These suggest the desirability of taxing rather than
subsidizing exports when expanding exports can lead to at least a
moderate terms—of—trade deterioration.   In this case, our analysis
of employment subsidies is correct if it is assumed that optimal
tariffs (taxes) based on these traditional considerations are
already in place.
               Figure 5
Subsidies H Closed and Open Economies
 Wages
              autarky

                          S




  w

                        Employment

  Wages




   p

  w


                        L_ IF_JIJy
                          I          I   I._I   I
                  flgure   6

THe Coins and Losses        from Protection

 Wages




          8
  w

  w
              D


                   F       Employment



  Loss from                Cain from
      Trade                    Trade
                                    25

primary sector but the disadvantage of raising the consumer price of
the primary sector good.    It is clear from the figure that the

former effect is first order while the latter effect is second

order.   It follows that at least small movenents towards protection

will be welfare enhancing, though they will be less desirable than

primary sector employment subsidies. This is an illustration    of the

general principle discussed by Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1983), that
in the presence of distortions, policies can be ranked, with

instruments that most directly address distortions   being preferred.
     Discussions    of activist trade policies typically stress the

potential defect that they invite retaliation, which offsets any
initial benefits. This argument does not apply when policy options

are limited to subsidies directed at capturing    1abr market   rents.
In the model considered here, it is true that countries would prefer

that their subsidies to primary sector output not meet retaliation.

In our model, however, subsidies that are retaliated against by

similar subsidies are nonetheless likely to raise the welfare of
both countries.16    This is because they will drive the world economy

to a situation like subsidized first best optimum depicted in Figure

4.   Note further that subsidies beyond the point where the marginal

product of labor in the primary and secondary sectors are equated
are inefficient in both open and closed economies.



Gauging the Importance of Labor Rents
      Under most plausible estimates, the wage differential   effects


             point has also been made by Dickens and Lang (1988).
                                    26

stressed here are of greater importance for trade policy than the

product market monopoly rent shifting effects discussed in recent
work on strategic trade policy.     The social return to increased
investment in the presence of wage differentials     can easily be as

much as 50 percent greater than the private gain.      The point may be
illustrated more strongly by considering    two recent studies of

strategic trade policies-—Baldwin    and Krugman's (1987a,b) study of

European subsides to Airbus Industrie for the development of the
A300 jet; and Dixit's    (1988) study of trade in automobiles.
     Baldwin and Krugman construct a simple simulation model

incorporating both learning curve effects and strategic interactions

in aircraft industry.    Their data indicate that the subsidy had very
substantial   effects on the allocation of airplane production between

the United States and Europe.     It also reduced pricas in the

industry considerably.    The Baldwin-Krugman analysis suggests that
the subsidy program cost $1.47 billion in profits for the European
airline industry, and increased the consumer surplus of European

customers by $1.43 billion, leading to only a negligible change in

economic welfare.   Their analysis takes no account of the rents

gained by labor as it moved from lower—wage industries into the

high-wage airplane industry, however.     A policy   analysis should not

treat the rent component of the wage bill as a social cost of

production but as a component of the social surplus generated by the

industry.17



     17This point is well known from the development literature on
project evaluation (e.g. Sah and Stiglitz, 1985).
                                       27

    To estimate the "labor rent" effects of the Airbus program, we
assumed alternatively    that compensation   in the entire product chain

of airplanes was 25 percent higher than the economy average and that

it was 25 percent higher in only the final stage of production --

airline assembly.     Combining these figures with Baldwin and

Krugman's estimates of the diversion of sales towards the Airbus
consortium and information on the labor's share in        airplane

production permits a rough estimate of the labor rent shifting
effect of the Airbus subsidy of the A300.

     The results in Table     3   indicate that once labor rent

considerations    are recognized, the overall assessment of the Airbus

program for Europea-welfare turns from marginally negative to
strongly positive.      Even in the less favorable case, the subsidy

generates   a   welfare gain representing about half its cost.       The

estimated gain would be far greater, recognizing the high level of

unemployment     in Europe, if we assumed that some of those hired by

Airbus would otherwise have been unemployed.

     A   similar conclusion is suggested by Dixit's recent study of

the automobile industry.      He finds that allowing for labor rents in

the American automobile industry dramatically       alters the results of

his analysis based on imperfect competition       in the product market.

Policies promoting domestic production that appear undesirable
without taking account of labor market imperfections yield large

gains once the existence of these imperfections       is acknowledged.

     More careful empirical analysis of more specific incidents is
needed before firm judgments about the potential importance of labor
           Table 3: Labor Market Rents and the Effects of the
                Airbus A300 Program on European Welfarea



                                           Scenario

                             (1)             (2)                (3)
                          No labor     20% Labor rents   20% Labor rents
                           rents       at final          at all stages
                                                stages
                                        of production    of production




Change in present         +1.43           +1.43             +1.43
discounted value of
consumer surplus


Change in present          -1.47          -1.47             -1.47
discounted value
of profits


Change in present          0.00           +0.90             +1.84
discounted value
oE labor rents


Net change in welfare      -0.04          +0.86             +1.80


Notes:
aAll figures are in billions of dollars.  The computations assume a S
percent discount rate and cumulative production of 398 units over a 20
year product cycle.

bThe change in labor rents is computed as the change in the present
discounted value of shipments for Airbus calculated from the Baldwin-
Krugmsn simulation ($15.41 billion) times the ratio of employee
compensation to value of shipments in the X.I.S. aircraft industry in 1985
(0.291) times the share of rents in employee compensation (0.20).

cThe change in labor rents is computed in a manner analogous to that
described in note (b) with the share of employee compensation in value
added in the X.I.S. aircraft industry in 1985 (0.596) replacing the share
of employee compensation in value of shipments.

Saurces: Adapted from Table S of Baldwin and Krugman (1987b). The
changes in present discounted value of labor rents are based on the
authors own calculations.  Informstion on employee compensation, value of
shipments, and value added for the X.I.S. aircraft industry (SIC 3721) are
from the Bureau of Census, 1985 Annual Survey of Manufactures, Statistics
for Industry Groups and Industries.
                                       28

rent shifting can be made.     The examples here were selected by other

authors because of potentially important product market

imperfections.    It would be valuable to examine industries,     such as

steel, that are noted for large labor market imperfections.



Some Possible Objections

        Our analysis so far has assumed away rent seeking behavior.          At

least   two types of rent seeking need to be considered.       First, it     is
possible that wage differentials generate wait unemployment         of the

sort envisioned by Harris and Todaro        (1970).   In the extreme case

where the primary sector hires randomly each period from a pool of

waiting applicants, w(l—u)=w0 where u is the unemployment rate in
the primary sector.     In this case, there is no gain to increasing

primary sector employment, since for each job created in the primary
sector, u/(l—u) workers move from the low wage sector into

unemployment     (Harberger, l971))8    A more   plausible formulation of

wait unemployment would recognize that incumbent employees typically
retain the rights to their jobs each period so that only new

openings and those jobs where the incumbent worker has quit or been
terminated are available to be allocated to the unemployed.          Under
this scenario, if workers have positive discount rates and enter the

primary sector queue to the point where the utility of being in the
queue equals the utility of being employed in the low wage sector,


     18Since each new job created in the primary sector removes
11(1—u) workers from secondary employment and since w /(1—u) =
the social opportunity cost of labor for an additiona2 job in the
primary sector equals the marginal product of labor in the primary secto
                                      29

extra employment in the primary sector will generate less induced

unemployment than in the initial case considered.          Thus, a small

subsidy to the primary sector will still be desirable)9

Furthermore,    if workers are able to queue for high wage jobs from

low wage jobs, rent seeking through wait unemployment           may not be an

important problem.
     The second type of rent seeking behavior involves efforts to

create wage differentials.      Union organizing drives are an obvious

example.     If larger wage differentials    lead to larger employment

subsidies,    such rent seeking activity will be encouraged.         In this

case, subsidies to high wage industries, while increasing efficiency

ex—post may create large ex—ante inefficiencies        if they lead to more

resources being devoted to trying to push up wages.          We doubt that

this point is of vast practical importance.        Union organizing

budgets and employer resistance expenditures are trivial compared to

the rents earned by union workers.         Taking 20% of   he   workforce to

be unionized and    a 20% union compensation     effect implies that 4% of

wages, or about $75 billion a year represents rents. Union

organizing budgets in the U.S. certainly total far less than $1
billion.     Furthermore,   the evidence surveyed in the previous section

suggests that most wage differentials do not arise from organizing

activity.
     A   different line of argument against policies directed at

subsidizing    the primary sector stresses their anti-egalitarian

     19
        See Sah and stiglitz (1985) and the references therein for a
more detailed discussion of wait unemployment and the measurement of
the social opportunity cost of labor.
                                    30

consequences.     The essence of such policies is, after all,

subsidizing workers who are receiving relatively high wages.     The

argument is more subtle, however, than it at first appears.
Subsidies to the primary sector enlarge it, thereby raising the

probability    of secondary sector workers being able to move into the

primary sector.    Bulow and Summers (1986) demonstrate that small
subsidies to the primary sector are Pareto improvements relative to

laissez faire, in the special case where all workers are

homogenepus,    movements between sectors can be characterized by a
Markov process, and efficiency wage considerations lead to constant
lifetime utility differences    between workers in the two sectors.

More generally, efficiency enhancing subsidies will not produce
Pareto improvements, particularly    if there are some secondary sector
workers who have no chance of getting primary sector jobs because of
their lack of skill.     It is of course possible to argue that optimal

subsidies should be given to improve the allocation of output, and

then income redistribution    measures should be used to offset any

perverse distributional    consequences.20
     On balance, the arguments in this section suggast that there is

a legitimate economic argument in support of policies directed at

encouraging production in high—wage sectors of the economy.     Even
though such measures are likely to increase wage differentials,       they


     20The issue is a complex because policies that tax high wage
workers for the benefit of low wage workers will, at least in some
efficiency wage models, have perverse effects on the composition of
output by reducing the relative utility of primary sector workers.
Thus, income redistribution policies may undo the allocative effects
of subsidies to sectors with that pay wage premia.
                                        31

nevertheless may increase economic welfare.        Especially in nonunion
contexts, it appears unlikely that rent seeking losses will outweigh

the gains achievable through increasing high wage employment.



IV.   Wage Differentials and American Trade Policies
      The belief that international competition is profoundly

changing the economic landscape and leading to the
deindustrialization     of America is often expressed in debates over

American industrial policy.     The crude argument that the United
States is losing its manufacturing base to international       competitors
is often put forward as a justification for policies directed at

limiting imports or spurring exports.        In George Meany's picturesque

phrase, "you cannot have a healthy economy based on everyone doing

everyone else's laundry".
      The claim that the United States might lose its ability to

compete in all industries rests on confusion.        As long as foreigners

are unwilling to indefinitely     accumulate claims on American assets,

the United States must ultimately run a surplus.        The interesting

question for structural trade policy is therefore whether trade

balance with   a high   level of both exports and imports or with    alow
level of both exports and imports is preferable.

      To shed light on this issue, Tables 4 and 5 presents

information    on the characteristics    of American manufacturing

industries, distinguishing between "import" and "export" industries.

We focus only on manufacturing because of data limitations regarding
other sectors, and because manufacturing       accounts for the lion's
                                    32

share (about 2/3) of American trade.21    Thedata refer to      three-

digit census industries.    The number of import or export workers in

each industry is estimated as the product of the industry's total

number of employees and the fraction of total industry shipments

represented   by imports or exports.
     Table 4 lists the manufacturing industries with the highest

import and export shares.     Most of the export industries     rely

heavily on high technology, aircraft being a prominent example.          The

import industries are more mixed, ranging from footwear to office
machines to motor vehicles.     Particularly in the case of export

industries, it is striking that durable and capital goods play an

important role in merchandise    trade.

        Intraindustry trade is very important even at the three digit
level; the correlation between import and export shares was 0.06 in

1983.     To highlight the differences between import and export

workers, the first three columns of Table 5 compare the average

characteristics    of the most import and the most export intensive

industries with those of the entire manufacturing     sector.

        A clear pattern emerges from the Table.   Relative to the entire

manufacturing    sector, export industries look much more like the

primary sector firms described by Doeringer and Piore (1971), while
import industries look much more like secondary sector firms.          Wages

in export intensive industries are 12 percent above average after

adjusting for skill differences,    while wages in import intensive



     21See Dickens and Lang (1988) for consideration of the relation
between U.S. trade and wages outside of the manufacturing sector.
Table 4: High Import Penetration and Export Supply Ratio Three-Digit
         Censua Industries in U.S. Manufacturing -- 1983


      Industries Employing Top 10% of Workers by Import Penettation Ratio5

                                                       Log Wages    Employment
CIC   Industry                 M/(M+S)         X/S      Premium       (l000s)

381 Watches, Clocks, and       .511           .085      - .242         14.6
    Watchcsses
221 Footwear, Except Rubber    .511           .024      -   .174      119.6
222 Leather Products           .371           .041      -   .166       49.7
391 Jewelry and Misc.          .335           .084      -   .120      278.6
    Manufacturing
261 Pottery                    .332           .108      -   .142       37.5
321 Office and Accounting      .283           .148          .069       66.3
    Machines
390 Toys, Amusements, and      .260           .113      -   .095       96.4
    Sporting Goods
151 Apparel and Accessories    .214           .016      - .216       1014.9
351 Motor Vehicles             .204           .087          .174      658.6


         Industries Employing Top 10% of Workers by Export Supply Ratioc

                                                      Log    Wage   Employment
CIC   Industry                  X/S         M/(M+S)     Premium       (l000s)

352 Aircraft and Aircraft      .438           .051          .153      527.0
    Parts
312 Construction Machinery     .318           .059          .110      346.7
322 Electronic Computing       .263           .115          .083      354.4
    Equipment
310 Engines and Turbines       .252           .053          .227       95.6
371 Scientific Instruments     .235           .111          .020      264.4
361 Railroad Equipment         .208           .070          .194       25.0
191 Agricultural Chemicals     .183           .055          .035       45.9
192 Industrial Chemicals       .173           .081          .169      322.6

Notes:
tmThe employment weightsused in calculations for the Top 10% import workers
 are actual employment for the top 8 industries and 67,200 for motor vehicles.

bLog wage premiums are calculated from separate regressions on union and
nonunion ssmples from the Full Year 1983 CPS. The log wage premium for an
industry equals ([(UD + 0.192)*UCOV3+ NUD*(l-UCOV)(where UD is the estimated
industry wage premium for union workers, NIJD is the premium for nonunion
workers, UCOV is the fraction of workers in the industry covered by union
agreements, and 0.192 is the estimated union-nonunion wage differential fot
the Full Year 1983 CPS from Katz (1986).

cThe employment weights used in calculations for the Top 10% export workers
are actual employment for the top     7   industries snd 185,800 for industrial
chemicals.

Sources: NBER Trade-Immigrstion-Libor      Market Data Set and Dickens-Katz      (1987a)
         Industry Data Set.
     Table 5: characteristics of Typical laport and Export Workers in
                    U.S. l1anufacturing Industries - 1983




                            (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)      (5)
                          Typical    Top 10%        Top 10%   Typical     Typical
                          Manuf.     Imports        Exports   Import      Export
                          Worker                .             Worker      Worker


Average Hourly Wage        8.88       6.03          10.37      8.36        9.60
 for ProductionWorkers    (1.93)

Log Wage Premium           0.00       -
                                          .163        .116     -
                                                                   .022     .054
 for All Workers           (.115)

Log Wage Premium            0.00      -   .135        .128     -   .015     .059
 for Nonunion Workers       (.10)

Pct. Wage Premium           0.00      -   .214        .071     -   .051     .035
 for union Workers          (.12)

Percent Female             33.7      68.5           24.8      40.3        28.2
                          (18.5)
Percent Immigrants         S.l       17.0            6.6      10.0         7.3
                           (4.3)
Percent Black              10.3      12.3            7.1      10.7         8.7
                           (3.6)
Percent Unionized          29.8      27.4           28.0      30.1        29.7
                          (13.9)
R&D Expenditures as         2.9       1.1            8.7       3.1         5.5
 a Percent of Sales        (3.5)
Percent Production         68.2      79.8           52.1      70.9        62.4
 Workers                  (13.1)
Average Years of           13.1      12.0           14.1      12.9        13.5
 Schooling                 (0.8)
Value Added Per Worker     50.5      28.8           59.3      45.4        54.2
 (thousands of dollars)   (22.6)

M/(M+S) (in percent)        9.7      27.0            7.8      18.5        10.0
                           (8.2)
X/S (in percent)            9.0       4.4           30.6       9.0        18.5
                           (9.2)

columns (1), (2), and (3) are three-digit census industry averages weighted by
industry employment. Import and Export rankings based on 1983 trade data.
columns (2) and (3) present average characteristica of the top 10% of workers
by industry M/(M+S) and X/S respectively. colummn (4) presents three-digit
census industries weighted by industry employment times M/S. column (5)
presents three-digit census industries weighted by industry employaent times
X/S. The numbers in parentheses are standard deviations.
M = imports, X = exports, S = shipmentsof domestic producers.

Sources: Dickens-Katz 1983 Industry Data Set described in Dickens and Katz
(1987) and NBER Trade-Immigration-Labor Market Industry Data Set.
                                        33

industries    are 16 percent below average.    Roughly similar
differentials    are observed for both union and non—union workers.

The widely cited examples of automobiles and steel, where very high

wage industries face substantial import penetration and are almost
completely unable to export, appear to be atypical.       The general

pattern is that export intensive industries are the ones with
substantial   wage premia.
     Reflecting patterns of American comparative advantage, export
intensive industries in the United States also employ more skilled

workers and do more research and development than import intensive
industries.     Export intensive industries devote 8.7 percent of sales
to research and development, compared to 1.1 percent for import
intensive industries.     The average worker in export intensive

industry has 14 years of schooling, compared with 12 years for the

average worker in import intensive industry.       Import intensive

industries    also disproportionately    employ women, blacks and

immigrants,    whereas export industries employ these workers to less

than the average extent.

     The comparisons    in columns 4 and 5 of the characteristics     of

the industries employing typical export and import workers suggest

all of the same qualitative    conclusions as the more extreme

comparisons    of export and import intensive industries.    Industry

differences    are attenuated because export and import intensive

industries often coincide because of the importance of intraindustry

trade.   Nonetheless,   the wage differential between the typical

worker in import and export intensive industry is about      8 percent.
                                        34

       These results suggest that for the United States, policies

which succeed in promoting trade and increasing the volume of both

exports and imports will tend to raise welfare, by moving workers
from lower to higher wage industries.         The gains are potentially

significant.    For example, the estimates here suggest that

eliminating    a manufacturing trade deficit of $150 billion by raising

exports rather than by reducing imports would increase labor rents

by at least $12 billion.       If export intensive industries were

expanded relative to import intensive industries,         the gains could be

up to three times as great.



International    Comparisons

       We have already documented that the wage structure is very
similar in all countries.       It follows that there is no way in which

all countries can disproportionately         export goods produced with high

wage labor.     A reasonable conjecture is that one concomitant        of

increased economic development       is increased comparative      advantage in

the   production of primary sector goods.        To examine this

possibility,    Table   6 presents   evidence on the American wage premium

of import and export intensive industries for a number of countries,

along with information on the American wage premium associated with
the industries employing typical export and import workers.

       The data provide initial support for our conjecture about

patterns of economic development.        Korea imports goods produced by

high   wage industries and exports goods produced by low wage
industries.     This is not simply a consequence of their abundance of
    Table 6:     U. .S. Log Wage Premia of Typical Import and Export Workers
                      in Manufacturing in Nine Countries, 1983

                       (1)            (2)            (3)      (4)            (5)
                  Typical           Typical     Typical     Top 10%       Bottom 10%
Country           Manuf.                        Export     Net Export     Net Export
                                    Importb
                  Workera           Worker      Worker      Worker        Worker


Australia             .006           .019           .063     .132           .034


Chile             -   .024          - .000          .017     .013           .055


France                .016           .037           .053     .110           .020



Germany               .045           .021           .051     .145          - .106


Japan                 .002          - .012          .030     .134          - .113


South Korea       -.039              .020       -   .089    - .216          .077


Sweden                .030           .001           .035     .053          - .045


United Kingdom        .014           .013           .027     .082          - .128


United States         .000          - .004          .033     .051          - .170


Notes:
a. Three-digit ISIC US industry log wage premia weighted by each country's
industry employment.

b. Three-digit ISIC US industry log wage premia weighted by each country's
industry employment times M/S.

c. Three-digit ISIC US industry log wage premia weighted by each country's
industry employment times X/S.

This table utilizes data from 18 ISIC manufacturing industries: 321,             322,   323,
324,331, 332, 341, 342,      351,    355, 361, 362, 371, 372, 381, 382,   383,   384.

Sources: Trade flow data on an ISIC basis were provided by Robert Stern of the
University of Michigan. The U.S. industry log wage premium variable
aggregates using employment weights the variable described in note (b) of
Table 4 from 3-digit Census industries to ISIC industries. Employment data are
from the United Nations, Industrial Statistics Yearbook, 1984, volume .1, 1986.
                                    35

low skilled labor.    The wage premia used in these comparisons    are

estimated controlling for measured labor quality, and the evidence
cited in Section II suggests that they do not primarily reflect
unobserved aspects of skill.     Most of the developed countries appear

to export relatively high wage premium goods while importing

relatively low—wage goods.     It is interesting that the difference in

wage premiums between high and low net export industries is
particularly    pronounced in Germany and Japan.

     The observation that specialization in high wage industries is
correlated with per—capita income might be taken as evidence in
favor of policies encouraging    the growth of these industries.    Such

an inference would be premature, however.      It seems plausible that

improved technology, management,    or worker skills would lead

countries to shift towards capital intensive industries requiring

investment in job specific human capital and highly motivated

workers.   Moving workers from low to high wage industries is likely
to lead to increases in static allocative efficiency.       Whether or
not it would lead to increases in rates of growth is more

problematic.



Trends in American Trade

     Discussions of American competitiveness have differed on

whether the changing trade patterns of recent years are simply the

consequence    of aberrant exchange rate movements brought about

macroeconomic    policies and speculative   forces, or are instead the
result of long term structural deterioration.      A   central issue in
                                     36

the deindustrializationdebate is whether or not the United States

has suffered particularly    severe competitive    losses in "good

industries", variously defined as those that emphasize technology or

have high value added per worker.      The analysis in the preceding

section suggests that examining the relative performance       of high and

low wage industries probably provides the best way of getting at

this issue.

     Assuming fixed ratios of employment to shipments, Table 7
indicates how changing trade patterns have affected employment in

high and low wage industries.      Between 1960 and 1980, the number of

jobs displaced by imports was approximately equal to the number of

jobs created by exports.     Particularly during the l970s, increased

imports led to a reallocation     of labor out of the lowest wage jobs

in the manufacturing    sector.   Increased US exports led to increases

employment    in high wage sectors of the economy.     During the 1980s,
the fraction of workers employed in producing tradeable goods

declined as the trade deficit increased.       Between 1980 and 1984, the
last year for which we have data available, the increase in the

trade deficit was associated with a reduction of 1.4 million workers

producing traded manufacturing     goods.   Over 600,000 or 43% of these

workers worked in the quartile of industries that paid the lowest

wages.   This reflects the substantial      increase in import penetration

in industries    like apparel during the early l980s.

     These results conflict dramatically with popular stereotypes

suggesting that the United States is being forced away from cutting

edge industries.    We suspect that the popular misconception results
      Table   7: The Direct Impact of International Trade on Employment
                   By Wage Class, U.S. Manufacturing 1960-84


                                     Change in employment   (in thousands) from':

                                                                    Net Exports
Wage Premium Classb                  Imports        Exports


Overall Manufacturing

      1960-84                        -2621.3         1107.1           -1514.2
      1980-84                        -1248.0         -168.4           -1416.5
      1970-80                         -941.5          946.7               5.2
      1960-70                         -431.7          328.9            -102.9

Lowest quartile

      1960-84                        -1021.7           71.8            -950.0
      1980-84                         -576.2          -60.7            -636.9
      1970-80                         -307.6          113.3            -194.3
      1960-70                         -138.0           19.2            -118.8

Second quartile

      1960-84                         -457.2          323.0            -134.1
      1980-84                         -217.7           10.1            -207.6
      1970-80                         -177.5          242.8              65.3
      1960-70                          -61.9           70.1               8.2

Third quartile

      1960-84                         -547.8          271.5            -276.2
      1980-84                         -220.5          -70.1            -290.6
      1970-80                         -229.9          251.5              21.6
      1960-70                           97.4           90.1              -7.2

Highest Ouartile

      1960-84                         -594.7          440.8            -153.9
      1980-84                         -233.7          -47.6            -281.3
      1970-80                         -226.6          339.1             112.5
      1960-70                         -134.4          149.4              15.0

Notes:
aThe loss in employment from imports for industry i from period t to t' is
defined as        -      * (L/Q).] where M is imports and (L/Q). is the ratio
           [(M.,    M.5)
of employment to output in industry i in 1984. Imports and output are
measured in quantities with their nominal values deflated by the 4-digit SIC
industry shipments deflator from the Annual Survey of Manufactures.  The gain
in employment from exports is analogously defined with exports replacing
imports. The trade flow, employment, and output data is from the NBER Trade-
Immigration-Labor Market data set.

blndustries were ranked by the industry wage premium variable defined in note
(b) of Table 4 and placed into quartiles based on 1983 employment.
                                      37

from the fact that traded goods industries as       a whole pay higher
wages than the rest of the economy.        In a period when the trade
deficit rises, good jobs are lost.         But these jobs are likely to

come back when the trade deficit returns to balance.22        There

appears to be little evidence through 1984 of relative deterioration
in the high wage of portion of the American traded goods sector.

     These patterns should not be surprising.        Postulate that
"cutting edge industries" pay wage premia.        Following the discussion
of Kruginan and Baldwin   (1987)   assume that other nations are catching

up with the United States.     They then make incursions into the least

progressive    sectors of our economy, causing U.S. workers to move

towards high wage industries.


V.   Conclusion
     The analysis in the preceding sections suggests that

imperfections    in the labor market may have at least as much

significance    as imperfections   in product markets for trade policies.
Labor market rents earned by workers in high—wage industries are

very large relative to plausible estimates of monopoly profits.
Unlike the case of product market imperfections where optimal

policies are not robust to small changes in assumptions about
corporate strategies, the theoretical case for policies which
promote high wage premium industries is reasonably robust.        Given
that export industries    in the United States have considerably      higher
     22
       On the other hand, see Baldwin and Krugman (1986) for an
argument that transitory exchange rate shocks may permanently affect
an economy's ability to compete in some industries.
                                   38

wages than import competing industries even after controlling for
observed worker skill measures, our theoretical arguments suggest
that export promoting policies are much more likely to promote
economic welfare than import competing policies.

      There are of course a number of other considerations that must

be weighed before any policy judgments are made.       First, following

much of the literature, we have abstracted from the possibility      that

some industries generate technological externalities.      If such

externalities   are generated, and are limited by national boarders,

there is a strong case for encouraging the growth of externality

generating industries.    Second, if wages are very sensitive to the

rents earned by firms, it is possible that product market effects

are more important than we have suggested but show up as labor

market rents.    Third, we have ignored input—output    considerations   in

our   discussion implicitly assuming that all output is produced in
the industry making a given shipment.23    Fourth, we have ignored

political considerations that might lead activist policyTnakers to
take steps that reduce rather than increase efficiency once the

decision to undertake industrial policy was taken.

       Despite these limitations, we believe that our results

strengthen the economic case against import protecting policies and
for export promoting policies.    In future research, it would be

Useful to employ a general equilibrium model like those developed by


     23Dickens and Lang (1988) find that taking into account input-
output relations does not greatly affect one's conclusions
concerning the cross—sectional relations among wage premiums and
trade flows in the United States.
                                  39

Shoven and his collaborators to explore more precisely the impact of
various policies in the presence of non—competitive wage

differentials.   Of particular interest would be a reevaluation   of

the 1986 Tax Reform Act which appears to have heavily burden the

high—wage durable goods manufacturing sector of the economy.
                                 40

                            References


Akeriof, George A. "Gift Exchange and Efficiency Wages: Four Views.
American Economic Review 74 (May 1984): 79—83.

Baldwin, Richard and Paul Krugman. "Persistent Trade Effects of
Large Exchange Rate Shocks." NBER Working Paper No. 2017, Septexnber
1986.

Baldwin, Richard and Paul Krugman. "Industrial Policy and
International Competition in Wide—Bodied Jet Aircraft." NBER, Mimeo,
June 1987 (a).

Baldwin, Richard and Paul Krugman. "Modelling International
Competition in High Technology Industries: Lessons from Aircrafts
and Semiconductors." NEER Conference Paper, September 1987 (b).

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. and V.K. Ramaswami. "Domestic Distortions,
Tariffs and the Theory of the Optimum Subsidy."  Journal of
Political Economy 71 (1963).

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. and T.N. Srinivasan,   Lectures on International
Trade. Cambridge, Ma.: MIT Press, 1983.

Brander, James A. and Barbara J. Spencer. "International R&D Rivalry
and Industrial Strategy." Review of Economic Studies 50 (1983): 707-
22.

Brander, James A. and Barbara J. Spencer. "Tariff Protection and
Imperfect Competition." In H. Kierzkowski, ed., Monopolistic
Competition and International Trade. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1984.

Bulow, Jeremy and Lawrence H. Summers. "A Theory of Dual Labor
Markets with Application to Industrial Policy, Discrimination, and
Keynesian Unemployment." Journal of Labor Economics 4 (July 1986):
376—414.

Dickens, William T. and Lawrence F. Katz. "Inter—Industry Wage
Differences and Industry Characteristics." In K. Lang and J.
Leonard, eds., Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987 (a).

Dickens, William T. and Lawrence F. Katz. "Inter-Industry Wage
Differences and Theories of Wage Determination." NBER Working Paper
No. 2271, June 1987 (b).

Dickens, William T. and Lawrence F. Katz. "Further Notes on the
Inter—Industry Wage Structure." Mimeo, Harvard University,  August
1988.
                                 41

Dickens, William T. and Kevin Lang. "Why It Matters What We Trade."
In L. Tyson, W.Dickens and J. Zysman, eds., The Dynamics of Trade
and Employment. Cambridge, Ma.: Ballinger, 1988.

Dixit, Avinash. "Optimal Trade and Industrial Policy for the U.S.
Automobile Industry." In R. Feenstra, ed., Empirical Research in
International Trade. Cambridge, Ma.: MIT Press, 1988.

Doeringer, Peter and Michael J. Piore. Internal Labor Markets and
Manpower Analysis. Lexington, Ma.: D.C. Heath, 1971.
Freeman, Richard B. and Lawrence F. Katz. "Industrial Wage and
Employment Determination in An Open Economy." Paper presented at
NBER Conference on Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market,
September 1987.
Gibbons, Robert S. and Lawrence F. Katz. "Learning, Mobility, and
Inter—Industry Wage Differences." Mimeo, MIT, December 1987.

Hagen, E. "An Economic Justification for Protectionism."    Quarterly
Journal of Economics 62 (November 1958): 496—514.

Harberger, Arnold C. "On Measuring the Social Opportunity    Cost of
Labour." International Labour Review 103 (1971): 559—79.

Harris, J. and N. Todaro. "Migration, Unemployment and Development:
A Two—Sector Analysis.'t American Economic Review 60 (March 1970):
126—43.

Holzer, Harry, Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger. "Job Queues
and Wages: Some New Evidence on the Minimum Wage and Inter—Industry
Wage Structure." NBER Working Paper No. 2461, April 1988.
Katz, Lawrence F. "Efficiency Wage Theories: A Partial Evaluation."
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1 (1986): 235—76.

Krueger, Alan B. "Ownership, Agency, and Wages: An Empirical
Analysis." Mimeo, Princeton University, 1987.
Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers. "Reflections on the Inter—
Industry Wage Structure," in K. Lang and J. Leonard, eds.,
Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1987.

Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers. "Efficiency Wages and the
Inter-Industry Wage Structure." Econometrica 56 (March 1988): 259-
94.

Krugman, Paul. "The U.S. Response to Foreign Industrial Targeting."
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1984:1): 77—121.
                                 42

Krugman, Paul. Strategic Trade Policy and the New International
Economics. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1986.
                                                                U.S.
Krugman, Paul. and Richard E. Baldwin. "The Persistence of the 1-
Trade Deficit." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1987:1):
44.
                                                  in Factor Markets.
Magee, S.P. International Trade and Distortions
New York: Marcel Dekker, 1976.

Mars, Gerald. Cheats At Work. London: Unwin, 1982.

Mathewson, Stanley B. Restriction of Output Among Unorganized
Workers. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 1969.
                                                             and
Murphy, Kevin ?4. and Robert H. Topel. "Unemployment, Risk,and
           In K.  Lang and J. Leonard, eds., Unemployment      the
Earnings,"
Structure of Lpbor Markets. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Finis Welch. "The Structure of 1988.
                                                     Wages."    Mimeo,
Unicon Research Corporation, Los Angeles, February

Pencavel, John. An Analysis of the Quit Rate in American1970.
Manufacturing. Princeton: Industrial Relations Section,

Sah, RaaJ and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "The Social Cost of LaborEconomics
                                                            and
Project Evaluation: A General Approach." Journal of Public
28 (1985) : 135—61.

Salinger, Michael A. "Tobin's Q, Unionization, and of
                                                    the
Concentration—Profits Relationship." Rand Journal     Economics 15
(Summer 1984) 159—70.
              :




Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E. Stiglitz. "Equilibrium Unemployment As A
Worker Discipline Device." American Economic Review 74 (June 1984):
433—44.

Slichter, Sumner. "Notes on the Structure of Wages." Review of
Economics and Statistics 32 (1950): 80—91.

Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Equilibrium Wage Distributions." Economic
Journal 95 (September 1985): 595—618.

 Stiglitz, Joseph E. "The Causes and Consequences of the Dependence
 of Quality on Price." Journal of Economic Literature 25 (March
 1987) : 1—48.

Weiss, Andrew. "Job Queues and Layoffs in Labor Markets with
Flexible Wages." Journal of Political Economy 88 (June 1980): 526-
38.
