                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE POLITICAL SCAR OF EPIDEMICS

                                     Cevat Giray Aksoy
                                     Barry Eichengreen
                                        Orkun Saka

                                     Working Paper 27401
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w27401


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    June 2020




We thank Nicolás Ajzenman, Chris Anderson (discussant), Belinda Archibong, Sascha Becker,
Damien Bol, Ralph De Haas, Anna Getmansky (discussant), Luigi Guiso, Beata Javorcik, André
Sapir, Konstantin Sonin, Dan Treisman, and webinar participants at the Bank of Finland,
Comparative Economics Webinar series, EBRD, LSE and University of Sussex for helpful
comments. We are also grateful to Kimiya Akhyani for providing very useful research assistance.
Views presented are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the EBRD. All
interpretations, errors, and omissions are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Cevat Giray Aksoy, Barry Eichengreen, and Orkun Saka. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Political Scar of Epidemics
Cevat Giray Aksoy, Barry Eichengreen, and Orkun Saka
NBER Working Paper No. 27401
June 2020, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. I1,N0,Z28

                                          ABSTRACT

What political legacy can we expect from the Coronavirus pandemic? Drawing evidence from
past epidemics, we find that epidemic exposure in an individual’s “impressionable years” (ages
18 to 25) has a persistent negative effect on confidence in political institutions and leaders, but
not in other institutions or individuals. We find similar negative effects on confidence in public
health systems however, suggesting that the loss of confidence in political institutions and leaders
is associated with healthcare-related policies. In line with this argument, our results are mostly
driven by individuals who experienced epidemics under weak governments with less capacity to
act against the epidemic, disappointing their citizens. We provide evidence of this mechanism by
showing that weak governments took longer to introduce policy interventions in response to the
COVID-19 outbreak. These results imply that the Coronavirus may leave behind a long-lasting
political scar on the current young generation (“Generation Z”).

Cevat Giray Aksoy                                Orkun Saka
European Bank for Reconstruction                 University of Sussex
and Development                                  Business School
Broadgate, 1 Exchange Square                     Falmer, Brighton BN1 9RH
London EC2A 2JN                                  United Kingdom
United Kingdom                                   and LSE
aksoyc@ebrd.com                                  o.saka@sussex.ac.uk

Barry Eichengreen
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall 3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
eichengr@econ.Berkeley.edu
“Let me be blunt, too many countries are headed in the wrong direction. The virus remains public
enemy number one, but the actions of many governments and people do not reflect this. The only
aim of the virus is to find people to infect. Mixed messages from leaders are undermining the most
critical ingredient of any response: trust.”

(Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General's opening remarks at the media briefing on
COVID-19 - 13 July 2020, World Health Organization)



    1. Introduction


Epidemics are stress tests for governments. Public officials and institutions face the
challenge of assembling information and mounting effective interventions against
a rapidly spreading and potentially fatal disease. They must communicate that
information, describe their policies and convince the public of their trustworthiness.
Fukuyama (2020) argues that the keys to success in dealing with COVID-19 are
“whether citizens trust their leaders, and whether those leaders preside over a
competent and effective state.” By way of example, Rothstein (2020) ascribes the
greater success at containing the COVID-19 in Nordic countries compared to Italy
to greater trust in government.

Trust in government is not a given, however. Specifically, there is reason to ask
how epidemic exposure itself will affect such trust. On the one hand, there is the
“rally ‘round the flag hypothesis.” Trust in and support for political institutions and
leaders tend to rise in the wake of actual and potential disasters (Mueller 1970,
Baum 2002). 2 On the other hand, trust in government may decline because public
institutions and those charged with their operation fail to prevent or contain the
pandemic. And in both cases the persistence of the effect is unclear.

In this paper, we provide evidence on the effects of epidemics on trust in
government.3 We use data on trust and confidence in governments, elections, and

2 For example, Chanley (2002) shows that in the days after the 11 September 2001 attacks, public
trust in the U.S. government rose to levels not seen since the 1960s.
3
  There is limited evidence on other political impacts of epidemics and containment efforts.
Campante et al. (2020) find that heightened concern about Ebola led to lower voter turnout in the



                                                2
national leaders from the 2006-2018 Gallup World Polls (GWP) fielded in nearly
140 countries annually. 4 These are three related aspects of political trust. Questions
about confidence in government elicit opinions about the political institutions and
officials comprising government broadly defined. Questions about national leaders
(leaders at the time of the poll, which is not necessarily the same as the time of
epidemic exposure) elicit opinions about the head of state or government, namely
the individual with the most influence over and most clearly associated with the
actions taken by government. Questions concerning confidence in elections elicit
views of the integrity and efficacy of the process by which those leaders are chosen.
In practice, we obtain very similar results for all three dependent variables. We also
use the average and the first principal component of these variables as a way of
identifying their common element and again obtain very similar results.

We link individual responses to the incidence of epidemics since 1970 as tabulated
in the EM-DAT International Disasters Database. Building on work suggesting that
attitudes and behavior are durably molded in what psychologists refer to as the
“impressionable” late-adolescent and early-adult years (e.g. Krosnick and Alwin
1989, Giuliano and Spilimbergo 2014), we show that exposure to epidemics at this
specific stage in the life course durably shapes confidence in government, elections
and national leaders.



United States but no evidence of an anti-incumbent effect. Amat et al. (2020) show that following
the COVID-19 outbreak in Spain, citizens expressed a stronger preference for technocratic
governance and strong leadership. Bol et al. (2020) surveyed citizens of 15 European countries and
found that the imposition of lockdown was associated with a 2 percent increase in trust in
government. Another body of research examines the impact of trust in government on epidemics
and containment efforts. Marlow et al. (2007) show that trust in government is a predictor of flu
vaccine acceptance by mothers in the United States. Using survey evidence from Liberia during the
Ebola epidemic, Blair et al. (2017) report that respondents who expressed low trust in government
were less likely to take precautions in their homes or abide by government-mandated social
distancing.
4
  We group the terms confidence, trust, and approval under the general heading of trust. Confidence
is the belief that certain future outcomes will obtain. Trust is vesting confidence in specific
institutions or individuals for delivering those outcomes. Approval is a function of trust and other
factors, such as, in the present context, success in containing epidemics. Checkland, Marshall, and
Harrison (2004) and Smith (2005), also working in a public health context, argue that confidence is
something that is entrusted in systems (what we refer to here as institutions), whereas trust is vested
in individuals (in the present context, leaders). A further discussion of the relationship between trust
and confidence is Adams (2005).



                                                   3
The effects are substantial: an individual with the highest exposure to an epidemic
(relative to zero exposure) is 5.1 percentage points less likely to have confidence in
the national government; 7.2 percentage points less likely to have confidence in the
honesty of elections;5 and 6.2 percentage points less likely to approve of the
performance of the national leader.6 These effects represent the average treatment
values for the remainder of life. They decay only gradually and persist for two
decades. These adverse effects are unique to political institutions and cannot be
detected in the same individuals’ confidence in military, banks or media. Nor is the
loss of political trust paralled by the loss of in-group or out-group trust in the same
society. There is no evidence of a generalized decline in trust, in other words; our
findings pertain specifically to trust in political institutions and leaders.

Throughout, we control for other potentially confounding shocks that were
experienced by individuals at the time of the epidemic. These include economic
shocks (the growth and stability of the economy, inflation, GDP per capita and so
on) and social and political shocks (internal conflict, external conflict, corruption
scandals, democratic accountability, revolutions, assasinations, purges, riots, anti-
government demonstrations and so on). We further incorporate fixed effects
(country, year, age, cohort and country by year). We use the approach of Oster
(2019) to establish that our results are unlikely to be driven by omitted variables.7

The effects we identify are specific to communicable diseases, such as viruses, that
spread contagiously and where a timely and effective policy response is needed for
containment. For non-communicable diseases, we do not see the same impact of
impressionable-year outbreaks on subsequent views of the trustworthiness of

5
  Readers may recall some discussion of how confidence in the presidential primary election in
Wisconsin in 2020 might be affected by it occurring in the midst of COVID-19. Among the
mechanisms highlighted in this debate is the possibility that mail-in balloting and other
complications will slow the vote count and “invite a distrust of the election process” (Ad Hoc
Committee for 2020 Election Fairness and Legitimacy 2020).
6
  The respective averages of these three variables in our sample are 51 percent, 50 percent, and 50
percent.
7 The estimates suggest that for our results to be spuriously generated, the degree of selection on

unobservables relative to observables needed to be 12 to 25 times (depending on the outcome) as
important for the outcomes as the included control variables. This is unlikely, since we control
directly for various determinants of past and current political trust.



                                                4
governments and leaders. This suggests that our finding of significant and persistent
impacts reflects the success or failure of governmental authorities and agencies in
putting in place timely and effective measures against contagion.

We document that individuals exposed to epidemics in their impressionable years
are less likely to have confidence in the public health system and the safety and
efficacy of vaccination. The former is indicative of trust in the overall health
policies of the government, while the latter reflects attitudes toward pharmaceutical
interventions. These findings again suggest that the perceived adequacy of health-
related government interventions during epidemics is important for trust in
government generally.

The magnitude and persistence of the effect depends on the strength of the
government at the time of the epidemic. When individuals experience epidemics
under weak governments, the negative impact on trust is larger and more persistent.
This is consistent with the idea that such governments are less capable of effectively
responding to epidemics, hence leading to a long-term fall in political trust. We
substantiate this conjecture by considering this same conditioning factor,
government strength, in the context of COVID-19. We show that government
strength is associated with statistically significant improvements in policy response
time.

Finally, we show that our results are driven by the reaction to epidemic exposure in
democracies. In democracies, residents sharply and persistently revise downward
their political trust in the event of impressionable-year epidemic exposure. The
same is not true, however, in autocracies. Evidently, citizens expect democratic
governments to be responsive to their health concerns, and where the public -sector
response is not sufficient to head off the epidemic they revise their views in
unfavorable ways.8 In autocracies, in contrast, there may not exist a comparable

8
  Consistent with this, Economist (2020) discusses that democracies typically respond more
effectively to epidemics; our results suggest that when they disappoint this expectation, they are
more severely punished. Below we address and dismiss the alternative interpretation that
respondents in autocracies are more reluctant to volunteer a lack of trust or confidence in
government.



                                                5
expectation of responsiveness and hence little impact on political trust. In addition,
democratic regimes may find consistent messaging more difficult. Because such
regimes are open, they may allow for a cacophony of conflicting official views
(Associated Press, 2020). This may result in a larger impact on trust when things
go wrong.

Our data cover some 750,000 respondents in 142 countries, which speaks to the
generality of the findings. Our treatment variable, exposure to epidemics, is more
plausibly exogenous than the man-made shocks employed in previous literature.
Note that it is commonplace in the law to regard epidemics and pandemics as “Acts
of God” and to invoke escape clauses in contracts. The number of people affected
by a virus in different countries may still depend on country characteristic s. But
there is also a random component in natural infection and mortality rates across
different epidemics, which changes from virus to virus and thus brings randomness
to our setting. Ebola was more deadly but less contagious, for example, than
COVID-19. To be sure, trust in government may affect the severity of an epidemic
(as we note in our opening paragraph). But as we show below, our findings are
robust to using as the key explanatory variable a zero/one indicator for the
occurance of an epidemic rather than its intensity.

Section 2 reviews kindred literatures. Sections 3 through 5 describe our data,
empirical strategy, and model. Section 6 presents the baseline results, while Section
7 reports a battery of robustness checks. Sections 8 and 9 then offer evidence on
mechanisms and political behavior, respectively, after which Section 10 concludes.

    2. Literature


Our analysis connects up to several literatures. First, there is work in economics
on the determinants and correlates of trust. 9 Contributions here (e.g. Greif 1989,

9
  In addition, there is work in political science and psychology. Levi and Stoker (2000) survey work
in political science on how trust is conceptualized. They argue that trust is both relational and
conditional. By relational, they mean that it involves an individual making herself vulnerable to
another individual, group, or institution (such as government) that has the capacity to do her harm
or to betray her. By conditional, they mean that trust is placed in specific individuals and institutions



                                                   6
Alesina and La Ferrara 2000, Nunn and Wantchekon, 2011) tend to focus on trust
in other individuals (in-group and out-group trust) rather than trust in political
institutions and leaders. Exceptions are Becker et al. (2016), Algan et al. (2017),
and Dustmann et al. (2017). 10 Becker et al. (2016) show that the historical presence
of high-quality institutions (in regions previously governed by the Habsburg
Empire) is associated with greater trust in government agencies today. 11 Algan et
al. (2017) study the implications of the Great Recession for general trust and
political attitudes (as well as for voting for anti-establishment parties), using
regional data for Europe. They show that crisis-driven economic insecurity tends to
be associated with lack of political trust. Dustmann et al. (2017) use data from the
European Social Survey to identify economic and social characteristics associated
with lack of trust in national parliaments and the European Parliament. They find
that positive economic outcomes are important for trust in national parliaments, but
that voters look to other competences when evaluating the trustworthiness of the
European Parliament.

Another literature analyzes how past experience shapes attitudes and behaviors.
Malmandier and Nagel (2011) show that stock market returns experienced by an
individual affect his or her subsequent financial risk-taking. Krosnick and Alwin




over specific domains. Citizens may entrust their lives to their government during wartime or in a
public health emergency, for example, but not otherwise. Work in psychology proceeds along
similar lines. Thus, Mayer et al. (1995) also distinguish three dimensions of trustwo rthiness, which
they denote ability, benevolence, and integrity. By ability, they mean the perceived technical
competence of the trustee in a particular domain of interest. Perceptions of ability, therefore, consist,
as they put it, “of a subjective evaluation of the various skills and capabilities that may be needed
for the trustee to actually accomplish what it is being trusted to do.” Benevolence derives from the
extent to which the trustor believes the trustee is prepared to expend effort to protect the trustor.
Integrity refers to the perception that the trustee follows a set of internalized values acceptable to
the trustor. All three aspects may be relevant to the problem at hand.
10
   Other recent papers also analyze approval of leaders and governments, but they consider different
independent variables. Margalit (2011) shows that job losses from import competition depressed the
vote share of the incumbent president in 2004 and 2008 in the United States. Aksoy et al. (2018)
show that trade shocks affect political approval of governments and leaders, Guriev et al. (2019)
show that an increase in broadband mobile internet access reduces government approval, and Guriev
and Treisman (2019) find that approval of leaders is higher in non-democracies when media and
internet are restricted covertly, but approval ratings fall when citizens observe censorship.
11
   Specifically, they consider trust in the courts and police (one of which we also consider below).



                                                   7
(1989) and Osborne et al. (2011) show that partisanship and party affiliation are
affected by past experience and, once formed, remain stable for long periods.

Third, there is the literature, already noted, on the importance of the
“impressionable years” in durably shaping attitudes and values. A seminal study
pointing to the importance of this stage of the lifecycle is the repeated survey of
women who attended Bennington College between 1935 and 1939 (Newcomb
1943, Newcomb, Koenig, Flacks and Warwick 1967), among whom beliefs and
values formed then remained stable for long periods. An early statement of the
resulting hypothesis is Dawson and Prewitt (1969); Krosnick and Alwin (1989),
among others, then pinpoint the impressionable years as running from ages 18 to
25.12

When rationalizing the importance of the impressionable years, some scholars draw
on Mannheim’s concept of the “fresh encounter,” suggesting that views are durably
formed when late adolescents and early adults first encounter new ideas or events.
Others invoke Erikson (1968) to suggest that individuals at this age are open to new
influences because they are at the stage of life when they are forming their sense of
self and identity. Still others suggest that attitudes are pliable at this stage of the
lifecycle because views have not yet been hardened by confirmatory information
(Converse, 1976). Spear (2000) links the literature on the impressionable years to
work in neurology describing neurochemical and anatomical differences between
the adolescent and adult brain, suggesting that these neurochemical and anatomical
changes are associated with durable attitude formation. Niemi and Sobieszek
(1977, p.221 et seq) suggest that only in the late adolescent years have young people




12
   Some contributions to this literature suggest that attitudes toward, including trust in, other
individuals are instilled by parents at a very early age (see e.g. Erikson 1950; 1968), but that attitudes
toward institutions, such as the political institutions we analyze here, are instilled by one’s peers,
typica lly at the juncture where adolescent leaves the parental household. As we explain below, we
also checked whether epidemic exposure at a younger age had a significant effect on attitudes toward
political institutions (in general it did not). This is not to deny that the family is also an important
source of political ideas (the literature on political socialization surveyed by Niemi and Sobieszek,
1977, suggests that it in fact is), but to claim that extra-familial experience is also important.



                                                    8
developed “the cognitive capacity to deal with political ideas” and that the same
can be said to some extent of individuals in their university years (p.222).

In terms of applications, Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2014) establish that
experiencing a recession between the ages of 18 and 25 has a significant impact on
political preferences and beliefs about the economy. Using survey data from Chile,
Etchegaray et al. (2018) show that individuals in their impressionable years in
periods of political repression have a greater tendency to withhold their opinions,
compared to those who grew up in less repressive times. Farzanegan and Gholipour
(2019) find that Iranians experiencing the Iran-Iraq War in their impressionable
years are more likely to prioritize a strong defense. Akbulut-Yuksel, Okoye, and
Yuksel (2018) show that Germans in their impressionable years during the Nazi
expulsion of Jews are less interested in politics later in adulthood, compared to the
less exposed.

Finally, we should mention two recent papers. Aasve et al. (2020), who use the
approach of Algan et al. (2017) to study the impact of the 1918 -19 Spanish flu
pandemic on social trust. Analyzing the General Social Survey for the United
States, they find that individuals whose families emigrated to the United States from
a country with many Spanish flu victims display less trust in other people. 13 Fetzer
et al. (2020) use an experimental research design to establish that individuals’




13
  The negative impact on trust resembles our findings, although their focus is trust in other people
as opposed to trust in political institutions and leaders. Aasve et al. (2020) have only one epidemic
occurring at one point in time and an unusually small sample (36 observations at country-year level).
Historical data on excess mortality are less accurate than modern data and the fact that the 1918-19
Spanish Flu coincides with the end of the World War I complicates the causal inference.
Furthermore, as discussed below, we fail to detect any corresponding drop in trust towards out-
group or in-group individuals in our setting.



                                                 9
beliefs about pandemic risk factors are associated with Covid-19 are causally
related to their economic anxieties.

     3. Data


Our principal data sources are 2006-2018 Gallup World Polls (GWP) and the EM-
DAT International Disasters Database. GWP are nationally representative surveys
fielded each year starting in 2006 in about 150 countries, with responses from
approximately 1,000 individuals in each country. Our full sample (depending on
outcome variable) includes around 750,000 respondents in 142 countries.14

The outcome variables come from questions asked of all Gallup respondents about
their confidence in the national government, their confidence in the honesty of
elections, and their evaluation of the job performance of the incumbent leader:15 (i)
“In (this country), do you have confidence in each of the following, or not: … How
about the national government?” (ii) “In (this country), do you have confidence in
each of the following, or not: … How about the honesty of elections?” (iii) “Do you
approve or disapprove of the job performance of the leadership of this country?” 16
A visual summary of these variables is in Appendix Figure B.1-B.3.

GWP provides information on respondents’ age, gender, educational attainment,
marital status, religion, urban/rural residence, labor market status, and income.
Controlling for employment status and income allows us to measure the impact of
past epidemics on confidence in political institutions and leaders free of any direct
effect on material well-being.



14
   We drop observations for Nagorno-Karabakh, Northern Cyprus, Somaliland, and Puerto Rico, as
they are not international recognised independent states.
15
   We do not observe the respondent’s, leader’s or government’s position on the left or right of the
political spectrum. The political coloration of the government or leader could in principle be
incorporated into our setting.
16
   These questions are part of the Gallup “national institutions index.” If a respondent asks for
clarification or interpretation of the question, Gallup surveyors are trained to answer “However you
interpret the question,” or “It is whatever the question means to you.” If a respondent asks whether
there is a more neutral response option than “yes” or “no,” surveyors are trained to ask whether
“there is one that you lean more towards.”



                                                10
We also examine responses to three additional GWP questions: whether
respondents have confidence in the military; confidence in financial institutions or
banks; and confidence in media freedom. This helps to determine whether what we
are capturing is the impact of epidemic exposure on trust and confidence in political
institutions and political leaders specifically, as distinct from any impact on trust in
society, its institutions, and its leaders generally.

Data on the worldwide epidemic occurrence and its effects are drawn from the EM-
DAT International Disasters Database from 1970 to the present. 17 These data are
compiled from UN agencies, non-governmental organizations, insurance
companies, research institutes, press agencies, and other sources. The database
includes epidemics (viral, bacterial, parasitic, fungal, and prion) meeting one or
more of the following criteria:

        •        10 or more deaths;
        •        100 or more individuals affected;
        •        Declaration of a state of emergency;
        •        Calls for international assistance.

Our dataset includes 47 different types of epidemics and pandemics since 1970.
This includes large outbreaks of Cholera, Ebola, and H1N1 and also more limited
epidemics. Averaged across available years, H1N1, Ebola, Dysentery, Measles,
Meningitis, Cholera, Yellow Fever, Diarrhoeal Syndromes, Marburg Virus, and
Pneumonia were the top 10 diseases causing epidemic mortality worldwide. Many
of these epidemics and pandemics affected multiple countries. 18

137 countries experienced at least one epidemic since 1970. This includes 51
countries in Africa, 40 in Asia, 22 in the Americas, 19 in Europe, and 5 in Oceania.


17
   EM-DAT was established in 1973 a s a non-profit within the School of Public Health of the
Catholic University of Louvain; it subsequently became a collaborating center of the World Health
Organization. It also gathers historical information on epidemics that took place before it was
founded; however, those data are patchy and biased towards well-recorded epidemics. Hence we
only focus on epidemic cases that EM-DAT “live” collected after it was founded in early 1970s.
18
   Note that the EM-DAT International Disasters Database does not include data on non-
communicable diseases. We employ separate data on non-communicable diseases below.



                                              11
The most epidemic-prone countries in the dataset are Niger (25), Nigeria (25),
Congo (22), Cameroon (21), Mozambique (20), Sudan (20), Uganda (20) and India
(19). Advanced countries in our sample all experienced 5 or fewer epidemics.19


Each epidemic is tagged with the country where it took place. When an epidemic
affects several countries, the database contains separate entries for each country.
EM-DAT provides information on the start and end date of the epidemic, the
number of deaths and the number of individuals affected, where the number of
individuals affected is how many require assistance with basic survival needs such
as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical treatment during the
period of emergency. Figure 1 provides a visual summary. We aggregate all
epidemic-related information in this database at the county-year level and merge it
with Gallup World Polls.


In robustness checks, we employ a panel dataset on diseases from Institute for
Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) and a dataset on recent epidemics from Ma
et al. (2020). To explore underlying mechanisms, we use data from the Wellcome
Global Monitor, Google Trends, the European Center for Disease Prevention
Control, the Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center, and the Oxford COVID-
19 Government Response Tracker. 20


Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for the outcome variables, country
characteristics, and individual characteristics. Averaging across all country -years,
nearly 50 percent of respondents say they have confidence in elections, have
confidence in the national government, or approve of the performance of the
leader.21



19
   We do not provide the full country-year-epidemic list due to space constraints. Interested
readers can find the full list of epidemic cases used in our paper online:
https://www.dropbox.com/sh/cwe5n1ie8f4zmbl/AAAD9JdVnjXvQciAYX9ID7WOa?dl=0
20
   See Appendix A for additional details on these data sources and our construction of variables.
21
   There of course is very considerable heterogeneity within and across countries. For comparison,
72 percent respondents had confidence in the military, while only 60 and 54 percent had confidence



                                               12
    4. Empirical Model

To assess the effect of past epidemic exposure on confidence in government,
elections and political leaders, we estimate the following specification:


 Yi, c, t, a, b = β1Exposure to epidemic (18-25)icb + β2Xi                                               (1)

 + β3Number of people affectedct-1 + β4Cc + β5Tt + β6Aa + β7Bb + β8Cc*Age

 + εict


where Yictab is a dummy variable for whether or not respondent i of age a and
birthyear b in country c at time t approves or has confidence in an aspect of their
country’s political institutions or leadership. Responses to all three questions are
coded as dummy variables, with one representing a positive answer and zero
otherwise. We estimate linear probability models for ease of interpretation.

To measure the Exposure to epidemic (18-25), we calculate for each respondent the
number of persons affected by an epidemic as a share of the population, averaged
over the 8 years when the respondent was aged 18 to 25, consistent with the
“impressionable years” hypothesis. 22 Number of people affected controls for
whether or not the individual is also exposed to an epidemic contemporaneously.
This is also calculated as the number of individuals affected by an epidemic as a
share of the population in the country of residence in the year immediately prior to
the interview.23



in banks and financial institutions and in the media, respectively. We use responses to these
questions in placebo tests discussed below.
22
   The effect of an epidemic on younger cohorts may also depend on the nature of the virus (i.e.,
how lethal it is to the young). Unfortunately, EM-DAT does not contain information on the ages of
the affected or of those who died. In addition, our treatment variable cannot differentiate between
individuals who are themselves infected and individuals who may react to the infection of others.
Thus, we can only calculate the average treatment effect across all types of epidemics operating
through a combination of these channels.
23
   This variable is lagged to ensure that the independent variable is realized before the dependent
variable, since Gallup World Polls may interview individuals at any point in the year (not necessarily
at its end).



                                                 13
The vector of individual controls Xi includes indicator variables for urban residence
and the presence of children in the household (any child under 15), and dummy
variables for gender, marital status, employment status, religion, educational
attainment, and within-country-year income deciles. We control for income before
taxes in both log and log squared form. 24 It is possible that prior epidemic exposure
affects an individual’s responses partly by affecting his or her subsequent income.
But we can rule out that prior exposure affects an individual’s responses solely by
affecting his or her subsequent income by controlling for household income
separately. A sense of the relative importance of this and other channels can be
gained by comparing specifications with and without this income variable.25

We include fixed effects at the levels of country (Cc), year (Tt), and age (Aa). The
country dummies control for time-invariant variation in the outcome variable
caused by factors that vary cross-nationally. Year dummies capture the impact of
global shocks that affect all countries simultaneously. Age dummies control for the
variation in the outcome variable caused by factors that are heterogeneous across
(but homogenous within) age groups. We also include country-specific age trends
(Cc*Age) and cohort fixed-effects (Bb).

A fully saturated specification includes also country-year fixed effects, which
account for possible omitted country features that may change with time (such as
GDP per capita, population, political regime, etc.). 26 We cluster standard errors by
country and use sample weights provided by Gallup to make the data representative




24  These individual respondent controls are important, since epidemics may have an effect
depending on gender (Archibong and Annan, 2017) and a variety of other socioeconomic
characteristics. Note that the income measure includes all wages and salaries, rem ittances from
family members living elsewhere, and all other income sources. Gallup converts local income to
International Dollars using the World Bank’s individual consumption PPP conversion factor. This
makes income estimates comparable across countries.
25
   In later parts of our analysis, we also control for the past GDP growth during an individual’s
impressionable years, which should in principle take into account any epidemic-induced change in
income at the country and cohort level. We thank an anonymous referee for this suggestion.
26
   This forces us to drop contemporaneous epidemic exposure, because it is perfectly correlated with
the country-year effects.



                                                14
at the country level. Finally, we limit our sample to individuals born in the same
country in which they were interviewed by Gallup. 27

     5. Threats to Identification

One can imagine several potential threats to identification. First, estimates could be
driven by factors that are specific to each cohort, since our treatment categorizes
individuals in each country by year of birth. Some cohorts could have cohort-
specific attitudes toward political institutions and leaders or be more or less trusting
than others in general. Individuals born in the late 1940s and early 1950s, for
example, may vest less trust in political institutions and leaders because they
experienced the widespread protests against political repression in the late 1960s,
their impressionable years. We therefore include dummies for year of birth so as to
compare the individuals only within the same birth cohort. 28

Second, independent of the cohort effects, individuals may exhibit differential
behavior across the life cycle. They may become more (or less) trusting as they age,
for example. Political views and ideologies may change from more liberal when
young to more conservative when older (Niemi and Sobieszek 1977). Age-specific
factors may also matter if different generations were exposed to epidemics with
different probabilities; given advances in science and improvements in national
healthcare systems, one might anticipate that epidemics are less likely to be
experienced by younger generations. We therefore include a full set of age-group
dummies, which eliminates any influence on our outcome variables of purely age-
related and generational effects.




27
   We cannot guarantee that these individuals spent all of their impressionable years in their country
of birth, but any measurement error arising from this concern only stacks the cards against us by
lowering the precision of our estimates. Furthermore, to the extent that large epidemics push
individuals to migrate to other countries not affected by the same epidemic, we may have a
survivorship bias in our sample that leads us to underestimate the true effect of a past epidemic
experience.
28
   Including these dummies biases our estimates downward if epidemics are correlated across
countries and affect them simultaneously. In this case, any common effect of an epidemic on a
specific cohort will be subsumed by these cohort-specific dummies, and our treatment will pick up
the variation in past epidemics only when they were staggered across countries.



                                                 15
Generational trends in political attitudes could be heterogeneous across countries.
Some national cultures may be more flexible and open to change in individual
values and beliefs, leading to larger differences across generations. We therefore
include country-specific linear age trends.

Third, any relevant omitted variable that varies across countries and years can bias
estimates even when conventional country and year fixed effects are included
separately. This issue arises when we observe individuals’ attitudes toward national
political institutions and leaders. Because the identity of those leaders and the
structure of those institutions may change over time, it can be difficult to separate
these shifts in identity and structure from the treatment (i.e., the epidemic). For
instance, even when approval of a leader declines following an epidemic, we may
not capture this effect if the epidemic simultaneously triggers a change in the
identity of the leader, bringing in someone for whom approval levels are higher.

We address this by including dummies for each county-year pair. This eliminates
all heterogeneity in our outcome variables tracable to country-specific time-varying
factors, such as changes in the government or leader. Thus, the treatment only
compares individuals within the same country and survey year, ensuring that these
individuals face the same political institutions and leaders. This strategy also
mitigates concerns that the results are driven by other structural differences between
countries that are repeatedly exposed to epidemics and those that are not.

Fourth, in any study of the impact of past experience on current outcomes, the
underlying assumption is that the effect is durable and persistent. This is the essence
of the “impressionable years” hypothesis. To the extent that this is not the case
because the effect has a relatively short half -life, our empirical strategy will be
biased towards failing to reject the null hypothesis of no effect. We explore this by
tracing the impact of past epidemic exposure across different age groups and show
that the effect persists at least for two decades while decaying gradually as
individuals age. Hence, the full-sample estimates represent the average treatment
effect across the whole life cycle after the impressionable years.




                                          16
Fifth, although we fully saturate our specifications with fixed effects, there could
still be other past exposures correlated with epidemics. To address this concern, we
control for various past economic, political and social factors in the country in
question in the individual’s impressionable years. Including these controls for other
past conditions has no impact on the stability of our coefficients of interest. In
addition, we use the methodology developed by Oster (2019). The results suggest
that our findings are unlikely to be driven by unobserved variation.



   6. Results


Tables 2-4 report estimates of Equation (1). The dependent variables are a dummy
indicating that the respondent has confidence in the national government (Table 2),
a dummy indicating that the respondent approves of the performance of the
leadership of his or her country (Table 3), and a dummy indicating that the
respondent has confidence in the honesty of elections (Table 4). In all three tables,
Column 1 reports estimates with country, year, and age group fixed effects. Column
2 adds the logarithm of individual income and its square, demographic
characteristics, within country-year income decile fixed effects, and labor market
controls. Column 3 adds country-specific age trends, while column 4 adds cohort
fixed effects. Column 5 fully saturates the specification with country*year fixed-
effects, non-parametrically controlling for all potentially omitted variables that can
vary across countries and years.


Column 1 of Table 2 shows a negative and statistically significant relationship
between exposure to an epidemic in the individual’s impressionable years and
current confidence in the national government. In contrast, the measure of
contemporaneous epidemics is positive but statistically imprecise. Columns 2 to 4
show that the estimated effects change little as controls are added and that country-
specific age-trends seem to be necessary for precisely identifying the effect of past
epidemics in our setting.




                                         17
Column 5 restricts all variation to within country-year observations and reports
conservative estimates that are smaller in magnitude but still significant at 1 percent
level.29 In our preferred model (Column 4), an individual with the highest exposure
(0.032, that is, the number of people affected by an epidemic as a share of the
population in individual’s impressionable years) relative to individuals with no
exposure has on average 5.1 percentage points (-1.592*0.032) less confidence in
the national government after his or her impressionable years.30 Given that the mean
level of this outcome variable is 50 percent, the effect is sizable.


Tables 3 and 4 report results for approval of the performance of the leader and
confidence in the honesty of elections. The results on impressionable-year epidemic
exposure have the same sign, statistical significance, and magnitude (a 6.2
percentage point decrease in approval of the political leader and a 7.2 percentage
point decrease in the honesty of elections, where the mean outcome level is 50
percent).


How persistent are the effects?


We investigate persistence by estimating our baseline specification on the
subsample of individuals closest to their impressionable years (that is, ages 26 to
35) and then repeatedly rolling the age window forward in a series of separate
estimations. This permits us to observe how the coefficients change as we increase
the distance between the age range in which impressionable individuals had
exposure to epidemics and the age at which they are surveyed. If the effects are


29
   It makes sense that the point estimates shrink when we only compare individuals within the same
country and point in time. It is likely that both treatment and control groups in this setting must have
experienced the same epidemics but only in different parts of their life cycle (impressionable vs non-
impressionable years). Hence, to the extent that epidemics carry negative effects for other
experience windows, we are only estimating the differential impact on individuals who were in their
impressionable years during these epidemics, thus reducing the size of our point estimates.
30
   Because epidemics are rare events and our main independent variable of interest, Exposure to
epidemic (18-25), is skewed to the right, it may not be appropriate to use its standard deviation or
mean for understanding the effect size.



                                                  18
persistent, then the estimated coefficient should not change substantially as distance
increases between the time of exposure and time of observation.

Figure 2, based on Column 4 of Tables 2-4, shows the effect of epidemic exposure
on the outcome variables. The effects on the base subsample (i.e., 26-35) are more
than three times larger than the point estimates for the full sample, confirming that
the age groups closest to the experience window (i.e., 18-25) are disproportionately
affected (compared to other age groups).31 For this base sample, the median time
distance between the past experience window (median age: 21.5 years) and the
subsample (median age: 30.5 years) is 9 years, hence documenting the effect of past
epidemics in the medium term.

When the model is re-estimated on successively older subsamples, the magnitude
of the impact remains stable for the first six estimations following the base sample
before decaying gradually. It nearly vanishes when estimated on the subsample of
individuals aged 36 to 45, when the median distance between the experience
window and the subsample is 19 years. On this basis, we conclude that epidemic
experience during the impressionable years has persistent effects on political trust
that can remain evident for two decades of adult life. 32

Role of country characteristics

We consider the baseline specification (Column 4 of Table 2) for various country
subsamples. Each cell of Table 5 reports a separate regression. Each column shows
the coefficient estimates for our main variable of interest: average epidemic
exposure during the impressionable years. We report the baseline estimates for our
main outcome variables in the top row.



31
   We examine this specific point further below, where we compare impressionable year epidemic
exposure with exposure when individuals are younger and older than 18-25 (see Appendix Figure
B.4).
32
   We formally test the decay in the effect of epidemic exposure on political trust by interacting our
main treatment variable with respondents’ age. Appendix Table B.1 confirms the earlier figures
and shows that the negative effect of impressionable-period epidemic exposure is mitigated in later
ages.



                                                 19
The negative impact of epidemic exposure on confidence in the government and its
leader is larger in low-income countries, although the difference across groups is
not always statistically significant. This pattern is in line with evidence from Gómez
et al. (2020), who find that people in the low-income countries see their
governments more untrustworthy and unreliable in the context of public reactions
to the COVID-19 pandemic.

The negative impact of an epidemic also tends to be larger in countries with
democratic political systems; the difference in coefficients for democracies and
non-democracies is consistently significant at standard confidence levels. 33 An
interpretation is that respondents expect democratically-elected governments to be
responsive to their needs and are especially disappointed when such governments
do not respond in ways that prevent or contain an epidemic. In contrast, the effect
of prior epidemic exposure is insignificantly diff erent from zero in non-
democracies, where there may be no similar presumption of responsiveness. In
addition, democratic regimes may have more difficulty with consistent messaging.
Because such regimes are open, they may allow for a cacophony of conflicting
official views, resulting in a larger impact on confidence and trust. Either way, our
results are driven by respondents in democratic regimes. 34

These results go some way toward addressing the issue of external validity in the
context of COVID-19. The effects we report here are not limited to low-income
countries, autocratic governments, or fragile democracies – the kind of regimes that
are popularly associated with prominent epidemics such as Ebola. This suggests


33
   We classify political regimes based on the most recent Polity5 dataset. Countries with Polity
scores 5 and above are classified as democracies.
34
   This finding could also be explained by preference falsification, a phenomenon in which
individuals’ responses to public surveys might be affected by social desirability or implicit
authoritarian pressures (Kuran, 1987). Such biases could naturally arise m ore often in non-
democratic countries where survey participants feel the urge to hide their true beliefs, reducing the
heterogeneity across respondents within the same country and time point. In an unreported
robustness check, we dropped ten per cent of the highest-ranking observations (in terms of approval
of the leader) at the country-year level in our sample assuming that preference falsification -if exists-
would be prevalent especially on these observations. We obtain similar results implying that
preference falsification by itself is unlikely to explain the difference between democracies and
autocracies.



                                                  20
that our results may also have broader applicability to global pandemics such as
COVID.

     7. Robustness

In this section we report further analyses establishing the robustness of our findings.

Are the results driven by other past experience?

The literature suggests that economic conditions (Hetherington and Rudolph,
2008), social conflict (De Juan and Pierskalla, 2016), and corruption (Anderson and
Tverdova, 2003) also affect political trust. Appendix Tables B.2 and B.3 therefore
consider whether our results are driven by other omitted economic, social and
political exposures that individuals may have experienced in their impressionable
years.

In Appendix Table B.2 we include measures from the ICRG data set, which
captures 12 aspects of national economic and political conditions. 35 In particular,
we include the following 12 indices to account for past economic, political, and
social conditions: government strength, socio economic conditions, investment
profile, internal conflict, external conflict, corruption, military presence in politics,




35
   These are (1) government strength - an assessment both of the government’s ability to carry out
its declared programs and its ability to stay in office; (2) socioeconomic conditions - an assessment
of the socioeconomic pressures in a society that could constrain government action or fuel social
dissatisfaction; (3) investment profile - an assessment of factors affecting risks to investment not
captured by other political, economic and financial risk components; (4) internal conflict - an
assessment of political violence in the country and its actual or potential impact on governance; (5)
external conflict - an assessment of the risk to the incumbent government from foreign action,
including both non-violent external pressure and violent external pressure; (6) corruption - an
assessment of corruption in the political system; (7) military in politics – an assessment of the
military’s involvement in politics, even at a peripheral level; (8) religious tensions – an assessment
of whether a single religious group seeks to replace civil law by religious law and to exclude other
religions from the political and/or social process; (9) law and order – an assessment of the strength
and impartiality of the legal system and popular observance of the law; (10) ethnic tensions - an
assessment of the degree of tension within a country attributable to racial, national, or linguistic
divisions; (11) democratic accountability - a measure of how responsive government is to the people;
and (12) bureaucracy quality – an assessment of whether bureaucracy has the strength and expertise
to govern without drastic changes in policy or interruptions in government services.



                                                 21
religious tensions, law and order, ethnic tensions, democratic accountability and
bureaucracy quality.

In Appendix Table B.3, we control for GDP growth, GDP per capita, inflation rate,
political regime (Polity2 scores), assassinations, general strikes, terrorism/guerrilla
warfare, purges, riots, revolutions, and anti-government demonstrations during the
individual’s impressionable years. For all non-economic variables (excluding
Polity2), we use the CNTS dataset in order to capture as many aspects of political
conflict as possible. In both tables, we calculate the average values for each one of
these dimensions during the impressionable years of each individual. Including
these past experiences as controls makes for smaller samples, since ICRG and
CNTS cover only some of the countries and years in our main sample.

None of these additional controls has much impact on the coefficients for past
epidemics. Both the point estimates and statistical significance remain stable.36
Note that we cannot directly control for pre-epidemic levels of social and political
trust due to lack of data availability. 37 However, we do control for various factors
that can explain both social and economic trust, therefore it is unlikely that our
results can be explained by omitted variables bias or reverse causality.

Nevertheless, we follow the method proposed by Oster (2019) to shed light on the
importance of unobservables in Appendix Table B.8, where Panel A is based on
the models with past exposure controls as in Table B.2 and Panel B is based on the
models with past exposure controls as in Table B.3.



36
   In addition Appendix Tables B.4 and B.5 show that we get similar results if we were to control
for the pre-existing values in the past (i.e., ages 10-17) instead of impressionable years (i.e., ages
18-25) in order to make sure that the past controls themselves are not influenced by the epidemic in
the same experience window. Furthermore, our results remain qualitatively unchanged in Appendix
Tables B.6 and B.7 after controlling for both impressionable-year experiences and country*year
fixed effects at the same time (à la Model 5 in Tables 2-3-4).
37
    By interpolating the corresponding values across all historical waves of the World Values
Surveys, we have created a country panel dataset on various social and political trust variables for
the purpose of using them to control for pre-epidemic levels of trust in a country. However, due to
poor country-year coverage in the old editions of the WVS, the size of our main Gallup sample falls
by 95 percent to about 35,000 respondents. We, therefore, do not report the results as we lack
statistical power due to very sample size in these analyses.



                                                 22
We first reprint the baseline estimates for our main outcomes in the top row for
comparison purposes. The second row of each panel then presents the estimation
bounds where we define R max upper bound as 1.3 times the R-squared in
specifications that control for observables following Oster (2019). The bottom row
presents Oster’s delta, which indicates the degree of selection on unobservables
relative to observables that would be needed to fully explain our results by omitted
variable bias.

The results in Appendix Table B.8 show very limited movement in the
coefficients. The high delta values (between 12 and 24 depending on the outcome)
are reassuring: given the wide range of controls we include in our models, it seems
implausible that unobserved factors are 12 to 24 times more important than the
observables included in our preferred specification. 38

Are the results unique to political institutions and leaders?

It is important to establish that the relationship between epidemic exposure and
subsequent views of political institutions and leaders is not simply part of a broader
reassessment of social institutions and social trust (both in-group and out-group). If
exposure to past epidemics worsens attitudes toward all national institutions and
reduces social trust generally, it would be misleading to interpret the findings in
Tables 2-4 as the effect of the epidemic exposure specifically on trust in political
institutions and leaders narrowly defined.

We therefore estimate similar models for outcomes related to views of other
institutions. In Appendix Table B.9, outcome variables equal one if the individual
has confidence in the military (column 1), in banks and financial institutions
(column 2), and in media freedom (column 3); has relatives or friends to count on
– a proxy for in-group trust (column 4); and has helped a stranger in the past month
– a proxy for out-group trust (column 5). The first three variables represent the
confidence in non-political insitutions in the same country, while the last two

38
   The rule of thumb to be able to argue that unobservables cannot fully explain the treatment effect
is for Oster’s delta to be over the value of one.



                                                23
capture the potential change in individuals’ trust towards their in-group or out-
group peers. 39

There are no meaningful relationships between past epidemic exposure and any of
these variables, consistent with our hypothesis that loss of trust by individuals with
epidemic experience is specific to political institutions and leaders, and not a
reflection of the general loss of trust in society and its institutions.40

Are the results driven by non-comparable samples?

Not all Gallup respondents answered all three questions. Thus, the results could
conceivably be biased by heterogenous, non-comparable samples across the three
response variables. We therefore also consider only individuals who answered all
three questions. We construct a new variable (“political trust”) that measures the
average response of an individual across the three outcomes. We also construct a
dependent variable that is the first principal component of these three variables. The
results, reported in Appendix Tables B.10-B.11, confirm that our findings are
robust across overlapping samples and alternative measures of political trust. 41

Are the results unique to impressionable years?

One could argue that our treatment effect can be influenced by the potential
differential response in individuals who may have experienced the same epidemics


39
   As Gallup does not have direct questions on generalized (social) trust, we refer to these two
variables as the closest proxies to measure the in-group and out-group trust. Alternatively, using a
measure of individual donations or the civic engagement index in Gallup generates very similar
results.
40
   We understand that one could be concerned with media freedom in countries with low political
trust and its potentially negative relationship with individuals’ confidence in media. However the
media is not a political institution strictly defined, even though it can be influenced by politics. We
have no priors about how individuals might change their opinions about the media in the midst of a
health crisis. One could easily argue that individuals’ confidence in media may rise instead of falling
if it functions well as a transmitter of life-saving information during the epidemic. Our results show
that there is not much change in the long-term confidence in media, consistent with this - a priori -
ambiguous direction of the relationship.
41
   In Appendix Table B.12, we also compare our 3 main outcome variables as well as 4 placebo
outcomes (except the one on confidence in media which has a very small coverage in Gallup) over
the exact same group of individuals who have responded to all 7 questions. Again, we find that the
loss of political trust after past epidemic exposure is unmatched by any of the alternative outcomes.



                                                 24
not during their impressionable-years but in other close experience windows before
or after. Since these individuals will be categorised as counterfactuals in our setting,
their potential differential response may drive our estimates upwards or
downwards. In order to check this possibility, we re-estimate our specification with
a focus on these alternative windows.

Appendix Figure B.4 shows the effect of exposure in successive eight-year age
windows (analogous to the eight-year window of ages 18 to 25).42 The analysis
again considers our two composite dependent variables: the average of the three
outcome variables and the first principal component of the responses. In both cases,
the negative effect is only evident when epidemic exposure occurs in the
individual’s impressionable years. 43 This alleviates the concern in our setting that a
counterfactual individual who experiences the same epidemic a little earlier or later
than the impressionable age window may produce a differential response compared
to an individual who has not experienced any epidemics at any of these windows.44

Are the results robust to alternative data for epidemics?

We also analyze the recent large-scale epidemics reported in Ma et al. (2020),
which constructs a country panel dataset starting in the early 2000s. This list of
countries affected by post-2000 epidemics includes, at some point, almost all the
countries in the world. For instance, H1N1 in 2009 alone infected more than 200
countries.

Several aspects of this dataset make it less than ideal for our purposes. One is its

42
   We repeat the analysis only for the first four windows after birth to make sure we have age-wise
comparable samples across separate estimations. It is important to keep in mind that as we check
the later experience windows, respondents’ age at the time of the survey has to restricted to those
older than the corresponding experience window.
43
   We again find the same for the three individual response variables. Results are available upon
request. Additionally, we checked the alternative experience windows rolling them by one year from
10-17 ages to 18-25. We find that the effects increase in older-age windows and reach their
maximum during ages 16-23 before declining.
44
   This interpretation is especially valid for the base-sample estimates (i.e., ages 26-35) in Figure 2.
In this subsample, only possible past experience windows are from ages 2 to 25 and hence, given
the lack of response in earlier age windows, it can be argued that our treatment captures the
hypothetical difference between an individual who experienced epidemics in their impressionable
years and another who never experienced any epidemics at all.



                                                  25
short time span, which allows us to consider only individuals young enough to be
in their impressionable years between 2000 and 2018. 45 Another is that the dataset
does not contain country-specific intensity measures and thus only can be used in
dichotomous form. As will be clear later, epidemic intensity matters, in that only
large epidemics in EMDAT dataset have a significant impact on political trust. At
the same time, this list of recent epidemics buttresses our assumption of the
exogeneity of our treatment variable, since the occurrence/start of an epidemic (as
opposed to its intensity) is likely to be uncorrelated with country or cohort
characteristics.46

In Appendix Table B.13, where we utilize this dataset, exposure to an epidemic
(18-25) takes a value of 1 if the respondent experienced SARS, H1N1, MERS,
Ebola, or Zika in his or her impressionable years. The results for confidence in
elections and approval of the leader (as well as average and principal component
proxies for political trust) are robust to the use of these alternative data. In line with
our earlier results, the adverse impact of past epidemics is only evident in
democratic countries. These results thus provide further evidence that the causal
direction of the relationship runs from past epidemic experience to political trust
later in life.

Do countries with and without a pandemic display similar pre-trends?

As mentioned earlier, Ma et al. (2020) provide a comprehensive dataset of
pandemic events in this century. By creating an event-study setting around the dates
on which a pandemic was declared by the WHO for a specific country, we can
investigate whether countries experiencing pandemics exhibit the same pre-trends
as other countries. We can also analyse how quickly the overall level of political
trust changes after a pandemic.




45
   This also means that we must drop all observations in Gallup before 2008-9 to ensure that the first
impressionable-years cycle (2000-2007) is calculated before we apply this variable onto individuals.
46
   As we show below, there is no evidence of a differential pre-trend in political trust between
countries that were recently hit by an epidemic and those that were not.



                                                 26
To do this, we estimate the following model:


 Yi, c, t, a, b = β1LaggedPandemic ict + β2Xi                                                          (2)

 + β3Cc + β4Tt + β5Aa + β6Bb + β7Cc*Age + εict


LaggedPandemic is a dummy taking on a value of 1 if the WHO announced a
pandemic for the country c in the year immediately preceding survey year t and 0
otherwise. This variable is lagged by one year to ensure that all respondents in the
country experienced the pandemic (since Gallup surveys could be undertaken at
any point of a year). 47

Appendix Table B.14 shows that political trust starts declining immediately. In
Figure B.5, we re-estimate the model changing the timing of the variable of
interest. This helps to visualise the short-term response and also to check if the
countries that were struck by a pandemic and those that were not shared similar
trends in terms of their political trust levels before the pandemic hit the former. 48
Countries with and without a pandemic share a common trend in the pre -event
window; the divergence starts only after the pandemic hits. This supports the
exogeneity assumption we made in a previous section in which we employed the
occurence (rather than intensity) of recent epidemics as a shock to individuals’
impressionable years.

Whereas there is no pre-trend prior to an epidemic infecting a country for the first
time, the approval of the leader declines by more than 6 percentage points two years
after. This aggregagre effect is large. It is comparable to the lifetime effect that we
found for impressiomable-year exposures.



47
   Here we do not include the past epidemic exposure variable as we would like to capture the
response of the whole population, rather only those for whom we can calculate the past experience
window.
48
   We conservatively restrict the event window around the pandemic to plus/minus 2 years. This is
because different pandemic events in Ma et al. (2020) may hit the same country in a matter of couple
of years, which complicates the identification in larger event windows.



                                                27
Is the response specific to communicable diseases?

Poor public-policy responses to communicable diseases may have a powerful
negative effect on trust in political institutions because those diseases can spread
contagiously, making that policy response especially urgent. In contrast, non-
communicable diseases may develop over longer periods and be driven by
individual decisions and characteristics, such as lifestyles and demographics,
instead of or in addition to government policy. Hence non-communicable diseases
may not have equally powerful long-term effects on trust in political institutions.
If they do, such effects should be smaller.

Since the EM-DAT International Disasters Database does not include data on non-
communicable diseases, we use data from IHME for the period 1990 to 2016.49 The
communicable and non-communicable disease measures are population-adjusted
and expressed in terms of Disability Adjusted Life Years Lost (DALYs). 50 As
explained by Roser and Ritchie (2020), DALYs are a standardized metric allowing
for direct comparison and summing of the burden of different diseases.

We present results in Appendix Table B.15 for all countries in Column 1, for
democratic countries in Column 2, and for non-democratic countries in Column 3.
The top panel shows results for the outcome variable “confidence in the national
government,” the middle panel for “approval of the leader,” and the bottom panel
for the “confidence in honesty of elections.” Each column in each panel is a separate
regression in which we simultaneously include both types of past exposure
(exposure to communicable and non-communicable diseases, respectively).

There is a significant negative impact, as before, on confidence in the government
and in elections of past exposure to communicable diseases. In contrast, we find no

49
   Similar to the previous exercise, this dataset is more limited than the EMDAT data that spans a
much longer time period from the 1970s.
50
   Communicable diseases include diarrhea, lower respiratory disease, other common infectious
diseases, malaria & neglected tropical diseases, HIV/AIDS, and tuberculosis. Non-communicable
diseases include cardiovascular diseases, cancers, respiratory disease, diabetes, blood and endocrine
diseases, mental and substance use disorders, liver diseases, digestive diseases, musculoskeletal
disorders, and neurological disorders.



                                                28
statistically significant association between trust in these political institutions and
exposure to non-communicable diseases during the impressionable years. The
results thus confirm that the association we document is unique to communicable
diseases. It remains the case, as before, that the full sample results are driven by
respondents in democratic countries.

Are large epidemics different?

The effects we identify are larger for more severe epidemics. In Appendix Table
B.16, we re-estimate our baseline model where, instead of the continuous variable
reported in the top row, use indicators for the top 0.5 percent of exposures to
epidemics, the top 1 percent, the top 2 percent, and the top 5 percent, each in a
separate estimation. An epidemic exposure in the top 0.5, 1, or 2 percent of
exposures causes a significant fall in an individual’s confidence in elections, the
national government, and its leader. 51

Moreover, the magnitude of the effect linearly increases with more intense
experiences, which leads us to undertake the next analysis.

Are the results driven by the intensive or extensive margin?

In Appendix Table B.18, we distinguish the intensive and extensive margins of the
treatment. For the extensive margin, we mean whether the effect is due to any level
of epidemic exposure. To capture this, we construct a binary variable based on
whether the number of persons affected by epidemics during the individual’s
impressionable years is positive or zero. For the intensive margin, we limit the
sample to individuals with positive epidemic exposure in their impressionable




51
  Readers may wonder how many democracies are included among the top 2 per cent of most severe
epidemics. It turns out that there are more democracies than autocracies in this limited sample.
Democratic cases include Japan (1978), Botswana (1988), Bangladesh (1991), Peru (1991),
Mozambique (1992), Paraguay (2006) and Haiti (2010). In Appendix Table B.17, we estimate an
interacted model and find that the loss of political trust is larger in those experience windows during
which the epidemic-stricken country was relatively more democratic.



                                                 29
years. Approximately 55 percent of respondents in our surveys have no exposure
to epidemics when impressionable and hence are dropped.

Table B.18 shows that the treatment works via the intensive margin. It is not simply
being exposed to an epidemic that generates the effect; rather, conditional on being
exposed, the severity of the epidemic drives the results. When individuals with no
epidemic exposure are excluded from the sample, the estimated effects of past
exposure are, if anything, larger than in the full sample.

Falsification

We undertake two falsification exercises. Appendix Table B.19 focuses on the
GWP subsample of individuals aged 30 or above who migrated to the country of
interview in the previous 5 years. These individuals did not spend their
impressionable years in the country of the interview. For falsification purposes, we
assume that they did so (as opposed to spending those years in their country of
origin). Second, Appendix Table B.20 assigns all individuals in the full sample to
a random country for the calculation of their experience during impressionable
years while keeping all else the same as in Tables 2-3-4.

In both cases, we find no effect of these “made-up” and “randomly-assigned”
treatments on political trust.

Multiple hypothesis testing

We also conducted multiple hypothesis testing by employing a randomization
inference technique recently suggested by Young (2019). This helps to establish
the robustness of our results both for individual treatment coefficients in separate
estimations and also for the null that our treatment does not have any effect across
any of the outcome variables (i.e., treatment is irrelevant), taking into account the
multiplicity of the hypothesis testing procedure. The method builds on repeatedly
randomizing the treatment variable in each estimation and comparing the pool of
randomized estimates to the estimates derived via the true treatment variable. The




                                         30
results presented in Appendix Table B.21 show that our findings remain robust
both for the individual coefficients and the joint tests of treatment significance.

Excluding potential “bad controls”

One might worry that some of the individual characteristics (such as household income)
are themselves affected by epidemic related economic shocks. We checked for potential
“bad controls” (Angrist and Pischke, 2008) by excluding these individual characterisitics.
Doing so does not substantively change the point estimates for our variables of interest (see
Appendix Table B.22 ). 52

Robustness to Alternative Treatment Definitions

One might be concerned that large population may increase the intensity of the
epidemic as well as the intensity of the epidemic affecting the population counts
(through both mortality and immigration). We, therefore, checked the robustness of
our results using population unadjusted treatment variable: the number of
individuals affected by an epidemic averaged over the 8 years when the individual
was aged 18 to 25. The results presented in Appendix Table B.23 show that our
results are robust to this alternative definition.

Ruling Out Influential Observations

We rule out the importance of influential observations by plotting the coefficients
of our preferred specifications as one year is omitted at a time. Appendix Figure
B.6 shows that our coefficient estimates are quite stable even as a specific survey
year is eliminated from our main sample in each iteration.

We repeat a similar analysis with Appendix Figure B.7 in which we drop one
random country at a time in each estimation for 15 consecutive trials (for illustration
purposes) and again find that our estimates are not driven by any single country. 53


52
  We therefore keep these controls in our baseline specification to avoid omitted variable bias.
53
  Results are similar for dropping any country within our sample and available upon request. We
have also undertaken a dfbeta analysis (unreported here) on all three main outcome variables and
confirmed that the highest absolute dfbeta value among all observations in our sample is 0.04 and



                                              31
    8. Evidence on Mechanisms

Weak, unstable governments with limited legislative strength, limited unity, and
limited popular support presumably are less able to mount effective responses to
epidemics. If they are prone to disappointing their constituents, we would expect
the effects we identify to be strongest when the government in office at the time of
exposure is weak and unstable, other things equal. 54

To explore this hypothesis, we use ICRG data on government strength. These data
are widely used in economics (see, for example, Knack and Keefer, 1997; Chong
and Gradstein, 2007; Asiedu and Lien, 2011), political science and sociology (see,
for example, Evans and Rauch, 1999; Grundler and Potrafke, 2019; Souva et al.,
2008). They measure, for the period since 1984, the unity of the government, its
legislative strength, and its popular support.55 We expect weak governments to
perform poorly in epidemics, and conjecture that individuals will downgrade their
confidence in government and trust in its leaders more severely as a result.

We first calculate the average score for government strength in the individual’s
impressionable years. We then construct an indicator that takes the value of 1 for
this past experience if the observation is in the bottom half/tercile/quartile of
impressionable-year government strength index scores across all respondents.56 We
include this measure of impressionable-year government strength by itself in




thus much smaller than the standard threshold of 1.00 further alleviating the concerns about
influential outliers.
54
   There is vast literature in political science on how fragmented and weak governments (such as
multiparty coalitions) are “plagued” by agency problems that may distort the policymaking process
(Martin and Vanberg, 2005). An economic example of this phenomenon has been shown on
coalition governments leading to excessive public spending due to reduced electoral accountability
on the part of the government parties (Velasco, 2000; Bawn and Rosenbluth, 2006). Mian et al.
(2014) illustrate that governments become more polarized and weaker in the aftermath of financial
crises, which is likely to produce a deadlock in the parliament and decrease the chances of major
financial reform.
55
   Whereas in the ICRG dataset this index is labelled government stability, we refer to it as
government strength, since we think this is a better name for what is essentially the implementation
capacity of the incumbent government.
56
   It is crucial to include this variable categorically rather than in a continuous form to make sure
that it is unlikely to respond to changes in the pandemic experience.



                                                32
addition to interacting it with impressionable-year epidemic exposure to distinguish
epidemic-specific and general effects.

This leads to the following specification:


 Yi, c, t, a, b = β10 Exposure to epidemicicb x Government strength icb                  (3)

 + β9 Government strength icb + β0 + β1 Xict + β2 Exposure to epidemicicb

 + β3 Number of people affectedct-1 + β4 Cc + β5 Tt + β6 Aa + β7Bb + β8 Cc*Age + εict


The effect of exposure to an epidemic in Table 6 is more than twice as large if the
epidemic is experienced under a weak government. The point estimates on the weak
government dummy are small in magnitude and mostly statistically insignificant.
This suggests that we are identifying not a “weak government effect” per se but
rather the interaction with the effect of epidemic exposure in the presence of a weak
government.

Figures 3-5 show further evidence of the importance of government strength at the
time of the epidemic. We again restrict the observations to the 26-35 age range and
re-estimate the Equation (3) when rolling the age window forward. In each figure,
the top panel shows the estimates for the total effect on individuals experiencing
epidemics under weak governments, while the bottom panel shows the
corresponding estimates for individuals experiencing epidemics under strong
governments.

For all outcomes, the negative impact on trust is larger and more persistent for
respondents who experienced epidemics under weak governments. Again, this is
consistent with the notion that these individuals became and remained more
disenchanted with their country’s political institutions and leaders, insofar as those




                                               33
institutions and leaders failed to adequately respond to the country-wide public-
health emergency. 57

Health policy at the time of the epidemic

Governments’ pharmaceutical interventions, in particular their vaccination
policies, have played an important role in the prevention of contagious disease. 58
Using data from GWP and the Wellcome Global Monitor, we therefore analyze
whether attitudes regarding the health system and vaccination are affected by
exposure to an epidemic.

In the top panel of Table 7, the outcome is a dummy variable indicating that the
respondent has confidence in the national healthcare system (via GWP). 59 In the
second panel, it is a dummy indicating that the respondent agrees or strongly agrees
that “vaccines are effective.” In the third panel, it is a dummy indicating the
respondent agrees or strongly agrees that “vaccines are safe.” In the fourth panel,
it is a dummy indicating the respondents’ “children received a vaccine” that was
supposed to prevent them from getting childhood diseases such as polio, measles,
or mumps. In the final panel, it is whether the respondent agrees or strongly agrees
that “vaccines are important for children to have.” The specification is otherwise as
in Column 4 of Table 2.

The results show that here too opinions are affected negatively by impressionable-
year epidemic exposure. These results suggest that the same experience causing
individuals to lose confidence in society’s capacity specifically to deliver adequate
health outcomes also causes them to lose confidence in the political system and its

57
   An additional implication of Tables 3-6 is that even individuals experiencing epidemics under
strong governments display less political trust in the aftermath. This finding is consistent with a
model of learning where citizens may ex-ante over-trust their government (independent of whether
it is weak or strong) and where epidemics serve as stress tests that can reveal new (negative)
information about the government, thus correcting the initial optimism. That our findings are
generally stronger for less-educated people (see Table 5) supports such an interpretation.
58
   The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention lists vaccination as one of the “Ten Great
Public Health Achievements in the 20th Century” because of its impact on morbidity and mortality
(Barraza et al., 2018).
59
   The exact wording of the question is as follows: “In this country, do you have confidence in each
of the following, or not? How about healthcare or medical systems?”



                                                34
leaders more generally. In line with previous findings, Table 7 then shows that the
negative impact of epidemic exposure is larger in countries with democratic
political systems. 60

Again consistent with earlier findings, Table 8 shows that individuals exposed to
an epidemic in their impressionable years have more negative perceptions of health-
related government policies if the epidemic was experienced under a weak
government. Note that the sample is smaller since we use the Wellcome Global
Monitor (2018) and ICRG covers only part of the countries and years in in our main
sample. Despite much smaller sample size, 12 of the 15 interactions here are
significant at the 95% confidence level.

Evidence from COVID-19

Given the absence of internationally comparable data on policy interventions in
response to past epidemics, we examine the association of government strength
with policy interventions in the context of COVID-19.

To do so, we investigate the relationship between government strength, measured
as before, and the number of days between the date of first confirmed case and the
date of the first COVID-19 policy (i.e. non-pharmaceutical intervention: school
closure, workplace closure, public event cancellation, public transport closure, or
restrictions on within-country movement) on a large sample of countries. We also
provide case studies detailing the link between government strength and policy
interventions for France, South Korea and the United Kingdom in Appendix C.

Our sample consists of 78 countries that adopted non-pharmaceutical interventions
between January 1, 2020 and March 31, 2020. We estimate OLS models,
controlling for average Google search volume one week before the policy
intervention to account for the possibility that public attention to COVID-19



60
  These results are in line with Legido-Quigley et al. (2020), who argue that the integration of
specific services like vaccination into the health system as a whole amplifies the capacity to
absorb and adapt to health crises.



                                                35
accelerates the non-pharmaceutical response. We also control for (log) cumulative
own country cases one week before the policy, (log) cumulative own country deaths
one week before the policy, (log) GDP per capita, (log) urbanization rate, (log) total
population, (log) share of the population age 65 and above, Polity2 score, and a
dummy variable indicating whether a country experienced an epidemic since 2000.

Table 9 reports the results for the full sample in Column 1, for countries with
above-median Polity2 scores in Column 2, and for countries with below-median
Polity2 scores in Column 3. 61 Although we make no causal claims, we find that
government strength is associated with a statistically significant improvement in
policy response time: a one standard deviation (0.765) increase in government
strength reduces policy response time by three days. 62 This is a hint of why exposure
to epidemic leads to major negative revisions of confidence in governments and
trust in political leaders when governments are weak.

According to Column 2, a one standard deviation (0.765) increase in government
strength reduces the policy response time by four days in more democratic countries
(those with above-median Polity2 scores). In contrast, there is little evidence that
government strength reduces the policy response time in countries with below-
median Polity2 scores. It is sometimes suggested that more democratic countries,
where it is necessary to build a political and social coalition in support of restrictive
policies, found it more difficult to respond quickly to the outbreak of COVID-19,
compared to less democratic countries where “pseudo-democratic” leaders can
move unilaterally to limit traditional political and civil rights and short-circuit
democratic processes. 63 Evidently, government weakness is mostly a problem in
democratic societies, since this is there where it translates into a greater delay and
less timely intervention.



61
   We cannot split the sample into democracies vs. non-democracies because we have only 10
countries in the non-democracy sample. This is why we instead split the sample by below and above
the median polity score.
62
   Three days can make a substantial difference in the context of COVID-19, given the infection’s
high rate of reproduction when no non-pharmaceutical intervention is put in place.
63
   See for example the discussion in Diamond (2020).



                                              36
     9. Evidence on Political Behavior


Even if epidemic exposure in one’s impressionable years affects self-reported trust
in government, elections, and political leadership, it is not obvious that it also alters
actual behavior. For example, one might expect that less confidence in elections
leads individuals to vote less and take more political action through non -electoral
means, (by participating taking place in demonstrations, participating in boycotts
and signing petitions, for example).64


GWP lacks information data on such behavior. We therefore turn to the World
Values Survey (WVS) and the European Social Survey (ESS). We use all available
waves of the WVS covering the period 1981-2014, as administered in more than 80
countries, where we focus on the democracies. We also consider annual waves of
the ESS for the period 2002-2018 in over 30 countries. The WVS and ESS give us
as many as 103,000 and 171,000 responses, respectively, depending on the
question. We estimate our baseline model (Column 4 of Table 2) on several
outcome variables related to individuals’ political behaviour


Some of the results, in Appendix Table B.24, are consistent with the preceding
conjecture.65 ESS respondents with epidemic exposure in their impressionable
years are significantly less likely to have voted in recent national elections. Both
WVS and ESS respondents are significantly more likely to have attended or taken
part in lawful/peaceful public demonstrations. WWS respondents are significantly
more likely to have joined boycotts and signed a petition. These are the type the




64
   Early evidence in the context of the recent COVID-19 crisis suggests that the young generation
in US is more likely to sympathise with the George Floyd protests and more critical of the way US
government is handling the health crisis (Pew Research Center, 2020).
65
   Note that we are not describing the self-reported behavior of the same individuals who, we showed
above, self-reported less confidence and trust in elections, the national government, and the national
leader (where one might worry, there could be selective misreporting to minimize cognitive
dissonance). Rather, we are analyzing completely different data sets where respondents are asked
about actual political behavior and actions. This fact makes these additional findings especially
striking.



                                                 37
responses one would expect from individuals rendered less confident in elections
and other conventional governmental institutions.66


     10. Conclusion


In this paper we have shown that experiencing an epidemic can negatively affect
an individual’s confidence in political institutions and trust in political leaders, with
negative implications for this collective capacity. This negative effect is statistically
significant, large and persistent. Its largest and most enduring impact is on the
attitudes of individuals who are in their impressionable late-adolescent and early-
adult years when an epidemic breaks out.                      It is limited to infectious or
communicable diseases, where a government's success or failure in responding is
especially important. It is the largest in settings where there already exist doubts
about the strength and effectiveness of government.

We also find that epidemic exposure in one’s impressionable years matters mainly
for residents of democratic countries. Residents in democracies sharply revise
downward their confidence and trust in political institutions and leaders following
significant exposure, whereas the same is not true in autocracies. It may be that
citizens expect democratic governments to be responsive to their concerns and that
where the public-sector response is not adequate, they revise their attitudes
unfavorably. In autocracies, there may not exist a comparable expectation of
responsiveness. In addition, democratic regimes may find consistent messaging
more difficult. Because such regimes are open, they may allow for a cacophony of
conflicting official views, resulting in a larger impact on conf idence and trust.




66
  Other results are insignificant. There is no difference in the likelihood of never voting in national
elections among WVS respondents as a function of impressionable year epidemic exposure. Nor is
there any difference among WWS respondents in the likelihood of having joined unofficial strikes
or occupying buildings or factories. Our analysis of these variables is necessarily based on smaller
samples, which may account for the contrast. However, the majority of the results where we have
larger samples are consistent with the idea that not just self -reported trust but actual political
behavior are affected by epidemic exposure in the expected manner.



                                                 38
The implications are disturbing. Imagine that more trust in government is important
for effective containment, but that failure of containment harms trust in
government.67 One can envisage a scenario where low levels of trust allow an
epidemic to spread, and where the spread of the epidemic reduces trust in
government still further, hindering the ability of the authorities to contain future
epidemics and address other social problems. As Schmitt (2020) puts it, “lack of
trust in government can be a circular, self -reinforcing phenomenon: Poor
performance leads to deeper distrust, in turn leaving government in the hands of
those with the least respect for it.”




67
   A relevant study by Ajzenman et al. (2020) examines how political leader’s words and actions
affect people’s behaviour in the context of COVID-19 pandemic. The authors show that after
Brazil’s president publicly and emphatically dismissed the risks associated with the COVID-19
virus and advises against isolation, social distancing by residents in pro-government localities fall
relative to places in which pro-government sentiment is weaker.



                                                39
References

Aasve, A., G. Alfani, F. Gaondolfi and M. Le Moglie (2020), “Epidemics and Trust:
The Case of the Spanish Flu,” unpublished manuscript, Bocconi University.

Ad Hoc Committee for 2020 Election Fairness and Legitimacy (2020), “Urgent
recommendations in law, media, politics, and tech to advance the legitimacy of, and
the public’s confidence in, the November 2020 U.S. elections,” Peltason Center for
the Study of Democracy (April).

Adams, B. (2005), “Trust versus confidence,” Defence Research and Development
Canada Report CR-2005-203.

Ajzenman, N., T. Cavalcanti and D. Da Mata (2020). “More than words: Leaders’
speech and risky behavior during a pandemic,” unpublished manuscript.

Akbulut-Yuksel, M., D. Okoye and M. Yuksel (2018), “Social changes in
impressionable years and the formation of political attitudes,” unpublished
manuscript, Dalhousie University (February).
Aksoy, C. G., S. Guriev and D.S. Treisman, D. S. (2018). “Globalization,
government popularity, and the great skill divide,” NBER Working Paper no.
25062.

Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara (2000), “The determinants of trust,” NBER Working
Paper no.621.

Algan, Y., S. Guriev, E. Papaioannou and E. Passari (2017). “The European trust
crisis and the rise of populism,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2017(2):
309-400.

Amat, F., A. Arenas, A. Falcó-Gimeno, and J. Muñoz (2020). “Pandemics meet
democracy. Experimental evidence from the COVID-19 crisis in Spain,”
unpublished manuscript.

Angrist, J. D., and J.S. Pischke. (2008). Mostly harmless econometrics: An
empiricist's companion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Anderson, C. J., and Y.V. Tverdova (2003), “Corruption, political allegiances, and
attitudes toward government in contemporary democracies,” American Journal of
Political Science 47(1): 91-109.

Archibong, B. and F. Annan (2017). “Disease and gender gaps in human capital
investment: Evidence from Niger's 1986 meningitis epidemic.” American
Economic Review 107(5): 530-35.




                                        40
Asiedu, E., and D. Lien (2011), “Democracy, foreign direct investment and natural
resources” Journal of International Economics 84(1): 99-111.

Associated Press (2020), “Trump, US officials send mixed messages on COVID -
19 risk to Americans” (25 February), https://www.fox2detroit.com/news/trump-us-
officials-send-mixed-messages-on-covid-19-risk-to-americans

Baum, M. (2002), “The constituent foundations of the rally -round-the-flag
phenomenon,” International Studies Quarterly 46(2): 263-298.

Bawn, K. and F. Rosenbluth (2006), “Short versus long coalitions: electoral
accountability and the size of the public sector,” American Journal of Political
Science 50(2): 251-265.

Becker, S. O., K. Boeckh., C. Hainz and L. Woessmann, (2016), “The empire is
dead, long live the empire! Long‐run persistence of trust and corruption in the
bureaucracy,” Economic Journal 126(590): 40-74.

Blair, R., B. Morse & L. Tsai (2017), “Public health and public trust: Survey
evidence from the Ebola virus disease epidemic in Liberia,” Social Science
Medicine 172: 89-97.

Campante, F. R., E. Depetris-Chauvin R. Durante (2020), “The Virus of fear: The
political impact of Ebola in the US,” NBER Working Paper no.26897.

Bol, D., M. Giani, A. Blais, A. and P.J. Loewen, “The effect of COVID‐19
lockdowns on political support: Some good news for democracy? ” European
Journal of Political Research. Forthcoming.

Chanley, V. (2002), “Trust in government in the aftermath of 9/11: Determinants
and consequences,” Political Psychology 23(3): 469-483.

Checkland, K., M. Marshall and S. Harrison (2004), “Re-Thinking Accountability:
Trust versus Confidence in Medical Practice,” Quality and Safety in Health Care
13: 130-135.

Chong, A., and M. Gradstein (2007). “Inequality and institutions,” Review of
Economics and Statistics 89(3): 454-465.

Converse, P.E. (1976), The dynamics of party support: Cohort-analyzing party
identification, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Dawson, R. and K. Prewitt (1969), Political socialization, Boston: Little, Brown &
Co.




                                       41
De Juan, A., and J.H. Pierskalla (2016), “Civil war violence and political trust:
Microlevel evidence from Nepal,” Conflict Management and Peace Science 33(1):
67-88.
Diamond, L. (2020), “America’s COVID-19 disaster is a setback for democracy,”
The Atlantic (16 April),
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/04/americas-covid-19-disaster-
setback-democracy/610102/

Dustmann, C., B. Eichengreen, S. Otten, A. Sapir, G. Tabellini and G. Zoega
(2017), Europe’s trust deficit: causes and remedies, London: CEPR Press.

Economist (2020), “Out in the open: Covid-19 and democracy,” Economist (6
June): 77.

Erikson, E. (1950), Childhood and Society, New York: Norton.

Erikson, E. (1968), Identity, Youth and Crisis, New York: Norton.

Evans, P., and J. Rauch (1999), “Bureaucracy and growth: A cross-national analysis
of the effects of Weberian state structures on economic growth,” American
Sociological Review: 748-765.

Etchegaray, N., A. Scherman and S. Valenzuela (2018), “Testing the hypothesis of
‘impressionable years’ with willingness to self-sensor in Chile,” International
Journal of Public Opinion Research 31: 331-348.
Farzanegan, M. and H. Gholipour (2019), “Growing up in the Iran-Iraq war and
preferences for strong defense,” MAGKS Joint Discussion Paper Series in
Economics No.07-219, Philipps-University Marburg.
Fetzer, T., Hensel, L., Hermle, J., & Roth, C. (2020). Coronavirus perceptions and
economic anxiety. Review of Economics and Statistics, 1-36.

Fukuyama, F. (2020), “The thing that determines a country’s resistance to the
coronavirus,” The Atlantic (30 March),
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/03/thing-determines-how-well-
countries-respond-coronavirus/609025/

Giuliano, P., & A. Spilimbergo, (2013). “Growing up in a recession,” Review of
Economic Studies 81(2), 787-817.

Greif, A. (1989), “Reputation and coalitions in medieval trade: Evidence on the
Maghribi traders,” Journal of Economic History 49(4): 857-882.




                                       42
Gómez M, A. Ivchenko., E. Reutskaja and P. Soto-Mota (2020). “Behaviours,
perceptions and mental wellbeing in high-income and low/middle-income countries
at the beginning of COVID-19 pandemic,” unpublished manuscript.

Guriev, S., N. Melnikov and E. Zhuravskaya (2019). “3G internet and confidence
in government,” unpublished manuscript.

Guriev, S. and D. Treisman (2019), “The popularity of authoritarian leaders: An
empirical investigation,” unpublished manuscript.

Grundler, K., and N. Potrafke (2019), “Corruption and economic growth: New
Empirical Evidence,” European Journal of Political Economy 60, article 101810.

Hale, T., A. Petherick, T. Phillips and S. Webster (2020). “Variation in government
responses to COVID-19,” Blavatnik School of Government Working Paper no. 31.

Hetherington, M. J., and T.J. Rudolph (2008), “Priming, performance, and the
dynamics of political trust,” The Journal of Politics 70(2), pp.498-512.

Knack, S. and P. Keefer (1997). “Does social capital have an economic payoff? A
cross-country investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4): 1251-1288.

Krosnick, J. and D. Alwin (1989), “Aging and susceptibility to attitude change,”
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 57: 416-425.
Kuran, T. (1987), “Preference falsification, policy continuity and collective
conservatism,” Economic Journal 97(387): 642-665.
Legido-Quigley, H., Asgari, N., Teo, Y.Y., Leung, G.M., Oshitani, H., Fukuda, K.,
Cook, A.R., Hsu, L.Y., Shibuya, K. and Heymann, D., (2020), “Are high-
performing health systems resilient against the COVID-19 epidemic?,” The
Lancet, 395(10227): 848-850.

Levi, M. and L. Stoker (2000), “Political trust and trustworthiness,” Annual Review
of Political Science 3” 475-507.

Ma, C., J.H. Rogers and S. Zhou (2020). “Global economic and financial effects of
21st century pandemics and epidemics,” unpublished manuscript.

Malmandier, U. & S. Nagel (2011), “Depression babies: Do macroeconomic
experiences affect risk taking?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1): 373-416.

Mannheim, K. (1928), “The problem of generations,” Essays on the Sociology of
Knowledge, London, Routledge (translation 1952).




                                        43
Margalit, Y. (2011), “Costly jobs: Trade-related layoffs, government
compensation, and voting in US elections,” American Political Science Review,
105(1): 166-188.

Marlow, L., J. Waller & J. Wardle (2007), “Trust and experience as predictors of
HPV vaccine acceptance,” Human Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics 3(5): 171-
175.

Martin, L. W. and G. Vanberg (2005), “Coalition policymaking and legislative
review,” American Political Science Review: 93-106.

Mayer, R., J. Davis & F. Schoorman (1995), “An integrative model of
organizational trust,” Academy of Management Review 20(3): 709-734.

Mian, A., A. Sufi and F. Trebbi (2014). Resolving debt overhang: Political
constraints in the aftermath of financial crises. American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics 6(2): 1-28.

Mueller, J. (1970), “Presidential popularity from Truman to Johnson,” American
Political Science Review 64: 18-34.

Murray, C. J., R.M. Barber, K.J. Foreman, A.A. Ozgoren, F. Abd-Allah, S.F. Abera
and N.M. Abu-Rmeileh, (2015). “Global, regional, and national disability-adjusted
life years (DALYs) for 306 diseases and injuries and healthy life expectancy
(HALE) for 188 countries, 1990–2013: quantifying the epidemiological transition,”
The Lancet, 386(10009): 2145-2191.

Newcomb, T. (1943), Personality and social change: Attitude formation in a
student community, New York: Dryden.
Newcomb, T., K. Koenig, R. Flacks and D. Warwick (1967), Persistence and
change: Bennington College and its students after 25 years, New York: Wiley.
Niemi, R. and B. Sobieszek (1977), “Political Socialization,” Annual Review of
Sociology 3: 209-233.
Nunn, N., and L.Wantchekon (2011), “The slave trade and the origins of mistrust
in Africa,” American Economic Review 101(7): 3221-52.
Osborne, D., D. Sears and N. Valentino (2011), “The end of the solidly democratic
south: The impressionable-years hypothesis,” Political Psychology 32: 81-107.
Oster, E. (2019). Unobservable selection and coefficient stability: Theory and
evidence. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 37(2), 187-204.




                                       44
Pew Research Center (2020), “Younger adults differ from older ones in perceptions
of       news     about      COVID-19,       George        Floyd       protests,”
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/07/09/younger-adults-differ-from-
older-ones-in-perceptions-of-news-about-covid-19-george-floyd-protests/
(20 July).

Roser, M. and H. Ritchie (2020), “Burden of disease”. Retrieved from:
https://ourworldindata.org/burden-of-disease

Rothstein, B. (2020), “Trust is the key to fighting the pandemic,” Scientific
American (24 March), https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/trust-is-
the-key-to-fighting-the-pandemic/.

Schmitt, M. (2020), “In the wake of its COVID-19 failure, how do we restore trust
in government?” New America Weekly (23 April).

Smith, C. (2005), “Understanding trust and confidence: Two paradigms and their
significance for health and social care,” Journal of Applied Philosophy 22: 299-
316.

Souva, M., D.L. Smith and S. Rowan (2008), “Promoting trade: The importance of
market protecting institutions,” Journal of Politics 70(2): 383-392.

Spear, L. (2000), “Neurobehavioral changes in adolescence,” Current Directions
in Psychological Science 9(4): 111-114.

Velasco, A. (2000), “Debts and deficits with fragmented fiscal policymaking,”
Journal of Public Economics 76(1): 105-125.

Young, A. (2019), “Channeling fisher: Randomization tests and the statistical
insignificance of seemingly significant experimental results,” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 134(2): 557-598.




                                       45
Figure 1: Average Number of People (per million) Affected by Epidemics, 1970-2017




Notes: This figure shows the number of people affected by epidemics (per million), averaged across all available years.
Source: EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017, UN Population Database, 1970-2017, and authors’
calculations.




                                               46
          Figure 2: Effects of Epidemics in Impressionable Years over Subsamples with Rolling Age-Windows




Note: This figure shows the persistency of the effects on three main outcome variables by restricting the observations to
the respondents who are in the 26-35 age range at the time of the survey (Base sample) and then repeatedly rolling this age
window forward by one year for each separate estimation. The specification is Column 4 of Table 2 and only the estimated
coefficient on Exposure to epidemic (18-25) is plotted. Confidence intervals are at 95% significance level. Source: Gallup
World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                           47
Figure 3: Effects of Epidemics on Confidence in Government over Subsamples
with Rolling Age-windows (separately under weak and strong governments)




Note: This figure shows the persistency of the effects on three main outcome variables by restricting
the observations to the respondents who are in the 26-35 age range at the time of the survey (Base
sample) and then repeatedly rolling this age window forward by one year for each separate
estimation. The specification is Equation 3/Table 6. The lower panel only plots the coefficient on
Exposure to epidemic (18-25) whereas the upper panel plots the sum of the coefficients on Exposure
to epidemic (18-25) and its interaction with bottom quartile government strength dummy.
Confidence intervals are at 95% significance level.
Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                48
Figure 4: Effects of Epidemics on Approval of the Leader Over Subsamples
with Rolling Age-Windows (separately under weak and strong governments)




Note: This figure shows the persistency of the effects on three main outcome variables by restricting
the observations to the respondents who are in the 26-35 age range at the time of the survey (Base
sample) and then repeatedly rolling this age window forward by one year for each separate
estimation. The specification is Equation 3/Table 6. The lower panel only plots the coefficient on
Exposure to epidemic (18-25) whereas the upper panel plots the sum of the coefficients on Exposure
to epidemic (18-25) and its interaction with bottom quartile government strength dummy.
Confidence intervals are at 95% significance level.
Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                49
Figure 5: Effects of Epidemics on Confidence in Elections over Subsamples
with Rolling Age-Windows (separately under weak and strong governments)




Note: This figure shows the persistency of the effects on three main outcome variables by restricting
the observations to the respondents who are in the 26-35 age range at the time of the survey (Base
sample) and then repeatedly rolling this age window forward by one year for each separate
estimation. The specification is Equation 3/Table 6. The lower panel only plots the coefficient on
Exposure to epidemic (18-25) whereas the upper panel plots the sum of the coefficients on Exposure
to epidemic (18-25) and its interaction with bottom quartile government strength dummy.
Confidence intervals are at 95% significance level.
Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                50
Table 1: Sample Characteristics
                                                                          (1)
Variables                                                       Mean (Standard deviation)
Main dependent variables
Confidence in national government                                0.50 (0.50) – N: 760099
Confidence in honestly of elections                              0.51(0.49) – N: 736679
Approval of the leader                                           0.51 (0.49) – N: 719742
Have confidence in the health system                             0.62 (0.49) – N: 98283

Placebo outcomes
Have confidence in the military                                  0.72 (0.45) – N: 730156
Have confidence in the banks                                     0.59 (0.49) – N: 809972
Have confidence in the media                                     0.54 (0.50) – N: 190167

Individual-level characteristics
Age                                                                    41.58 (10.41)
Male                                                                    0.47 (0.49)
Tertiary education                                                      0.18 (0.38)
Secondary education                                                     0.50 (0.50)
Married                                                                 0.63 (0.48)
Urban                                                                   0.40 (0.49)
Christian                                                               0.57 (0.49)
Muslim                                                                  0.20 (0.40)

Country-level characteristics
Exposure to epidemic                                                   0.002 (0.0015)
Government strength                                                      7.33 (1.26)
Notes: Means (standard deviations). This table provides individual and aggregate level
variables averaged across the 13 years (2006-2018) used in the analysis. The sample sizes for
some variables are different either due to missing data or because they were not asked in every
year.




                                              51
Table 2: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Confidence in National Government
                                                (1)                      (2)                       (3)                      (4)                      (5)
Outcome ➔                              Have confidence in       Have confidence in        Have confidence in       Have confidence in       Have confidence in
                                       national government      national government       national government      national government      national government
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                 -1.073 *                 -0.924                   -1.614 ***               -1.592 ***                -0.508 **
                                             (0.594)                  (0.576)                   (0.265)                  (0.262)                   (0.219)

The number of people affected t-1              0.548                    0.739                    0.733                    0.740                       --
                                              (3.478)                  (3.484)                  (3.457)                  (3.452)

Country fixed effects                            Yes                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Year fixed effects                               Yes                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Age group fixed effects                          Yes                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Individual income                                 No                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Demographic characteristics                       No                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Income decile fixed effects                       No                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Labor market controls                             No                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Country*Age trends                                No                       No                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes
Cohort fixed effects                              No                       No                      No                      Yes                     Yes
Country*Year fixed effects                        No                       No                      No                       No                     Yes
Observations                                   760099                   760099                  760099                  760099                   760099
R2                                              0.138                    0.144                   0.145                    0.145                   0.182
Mean of outcome                                  0.50                     0.50                    0.50                     0.50                    0.50
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is a dummy variable indicating that the respondent has confidence in “national
government”. Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number of people affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their
impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring
basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy
for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational attainment (tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies
(Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, part-time employed, unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area
and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixed-effects are constructed by grouping individuals into deciles based on their
income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Individual income includes all wages and salarie s in the household, remittances from
family members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the World Bank’s individual
consumption PPP conversion factor, which makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are
clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                                     52
Table 3: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Approval of the Leader
                                                (1)                      (2)                      (3)                      (4)                       (5)
Outcome ➔                                 Approval of the          Approval of the          Approval of the          Approval of the           Approval of the
                                              leader                   leader                   leader                   leader                    leader
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                -1.521 ***               -1.501 ***               -1.916 ***               -1.957 ***                -0.583 ***
                                             (0.380)                  (0.369)                  (0.326)                  (0.330)                   (0.118)

The number of people affected t-1              0.201                    0.184                    0.141                     0.120                      --
                                              (2.696)                  (2.735)                  (2.710)                   (2.712)

Country fixed effects                             Yes                      Yes                     Yes                        Yes                      Yes
Year fixed effects                                Yes                      Yes                     Yes                        Yes                      Yes
Age group fixed effects                           Yes                      Yes                     Yes                        Yes                      Yes
Individual income                                  No                      Yes                     Yes                        Yes                      Yes
Demographic characteristics                        No                      Yes                     Yes                        Yes                      Yes
Income decile fixed effects                        No                      Yes                     Yes                        Yes                      Yes
Labor market controls                              No                      Yes                     Yes                        Yes                      Yes
Country*Age trends                                 No                       No                     Yes                        Yes                      Yes
Cohort fixed effects                               No                       No                      No                        Yes                      Yes
Country*Year fixed effects                         No                       No                      No                         No                      Yes
Observations                                    719742                   719742                  719742                    719742                    719742
R2                                               0.127                    0.132                   0.133                     0.133                     0.182
Mean of outcome                                   0.51                     0.51                    0.51                      0.51                      0.51
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is a dummy variable indicating that the res pondent approves “the job performance
of the leader”. Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number of people affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their
impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring
basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy
for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational attainment (tertiary education, seconda ry education), religion dummies
(Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, part-time employed, unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area
and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income d ecile fixed-effects are constructed by grouping individuals into deciles based on their
income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Individual income includes all wages and salaries in t he household, remittances from family
members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the World Bank’s individual consumption
PPP conversion factor, which makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the
country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                                     53
Table 4: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Confidence in Elections
                                               (1)                       (2)                      (3)                      (4)                      (5)
Outcome ➔                              Have confidence in        Have confidence in       Have confidence in       Have confidence in       Have confidence in
                                       honesty of elections      honesty of elections     honesty of elections     honesty of elections     honesty of elections
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                -1.643 **                 -1.481 *                -2.226 ***               -2.258 ***               -1.181 ***
                                             (0.794)                  (0.811)                  (0.341)                  (0.339)                  (0.273)

The number of people affected t-1             -3.734 *                 -3.582                   -3.645 *                 -3.625 *                     --
                                              (2.203)                  (2.187)                  (2.195)                  (2.182)

Country fixed effects                            Yes                      Yes                       Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Year fixed effects                               Yes                      Yes                       Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Age group fixed effects                          Yes                      Yes                       Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Individual income                                 No                      Yes                       Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Demographic characteristics                       No                      Yes                       Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Income decile fixed effects                       No                      Yes                       Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Labor market controls                             No                      Yes                       Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Country*Age trends                                No                       No                       Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Cohort fixed effects                              No                       No                       No                     Yes                      Yes
Country*Year fixed effects                        No                       No                       No                      No                      Yes
Observations                                   736679                   736679                   736679                 736679                    736679
R2                                              0.137                    0.144                    0.146                   0.146                    0.178
Mean of outcome                                  0.51                     0.51                     0.51                    0.51                     0.51
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is a dummy variable indicating that the res pondent has confidence in “honesty
of elections”. Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number of people a ffected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their
impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring
basic survival needs such as food, wa ter, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy
for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational attainment (tertiary education, seconda ry education), religion dummies
(Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, part-time employed, unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area
and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixed-effects are constructed by grouping individuals into deciles based on their
income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Individual income includes all wages and salaries in t he household, remittances from
family members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the World Ba nk’s individual
consumption PPP conversion factor, which makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are
clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.


                                                                                     54
Table 5: Heterogeneity
                                                       (1)                                           (2)                                           (3)
                                      Coefficient on Exposure to Epidemic            Coefficient on Exposure to Epidemic           Coefficient on Exposure to Epidemic
                                                    (18-25)                                        (18-25)                                       (18-25)
                                                (standard error)                               (standard error)                              (standard error)
Outcome ➔                            Have confidence in national government                Approval of the leader                 Have confidence in honesty of elections
Full sample                                    -1.592 *** (0.262)                             -1.957 *** (0.330)                            -2.258 *** (0.339)

Males                                             -1.153 ** (0.470)                             -1.351 ** (0.528)                              -2.014 *** (0.379)
Females                                          -2.042 *** (0.416) A                          -2.516 *** (0.545) A                            -2.551 *** (0.413)

Low-income countries                              -11.181 (7.577)                              -20.701 * (11.546)                             -11.753 *** (4.145)
High-income countries                            -1.212 *** (0.262)                            -1.503 *** (0.260) A                           -1.773 *** (0.343) A

Less than degree level                           -1.657 *** (0.285)                             -1.753 *** (0.295)                             -2.249 *** (0.330)
Degree level education                            0.658 (1.242) A                              -5.120 *** (1.328) A                             -1.071 (0.816) A

Rural                                             -1.518 *** (0.268)                            -1.377 *** (0.265)                             -1.967 *** (0.357)
Urban                                            -3.015 *** (0.781)A                           -6.195 *** (1.452) A                           -4.049 *** (0.893) A

Low-income HH                                      -0.226 (0.341)                                -0.112 (0.339)                                -2.527 *** (0.485)
Middle-income HH                                 -3.015 *** (0.781)                             -3.140 *** (1.008)                              -2.207 ** (0.869)
High-income HH                                    -0.854 * (0.457)                              -3.572 *** (0.455)                             -1.559 *** (0.389)

Democratic countries                             -1.884 *** (0.249)                             -1.587 *** (0.301)                             -2.514 *** (0.287)
Non-democratic countries                          3.097 (2.497) A                                2.061 (2.529) A                                0.880 (3.480) A

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. A indicates statistically significant
difference in each pair of means at p<.05. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup
World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                                        55
Table 6: The Role of Government Strength
                                                                           (1)                            (2)                               (3)
Outcome ➔                                                       Have confidence in national       Approval of the leader        Have confidence in honesty
                                                                      government                                                       of elections
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)*MedianGov.Strength                         -4.033 ***                         -1.092                       -2.987 ***
                                                                         (0.876)                          (0.849)                        (0.618)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                                              -0.235                         -3.018 ***                       -1.901 **
                                                                          (1.038)                         (1.044)                         (0.833)

MedianGov.Strength                                                        0.014 *                          0.015 *                         -0.000
                                                                          (0.008)                         (0.009)                         (0.007)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)*BottomTercileGov.Strength                    -3.919 ***                     -2.230 ***                      -4.863 ***
                                                                           (0.719)                        (0.629)                         (0.559)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                                              -1.048                         -2.514 ***                       -1.183 *
                                                                          (0.808)                         (0.693)                         (0.698)

BottomTercileGov.Strength                                                 0.013 *                         0.023 ***                        0.002
                                                                          (0.008)                         (0.008)                         (0.007)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)*BottomQuartileGov.Strength                   -3.578 ***                     -2.027 ***                      -4.643 ***
                                                                           (0.748)                        (0.542)                         (0.521)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                                              -1.289                         -2.657 ***                       -1.373 *
                                                                          (0.889)                         (0.640)                         (0.800)

BottomQuartileGov.Strength                                                -0.000                           0.010                           -0.002
                                                                          (0.008)                         (0.010)                         (0.008)

Observations                                                              422523                         394323                           412051
R2                                                                         0.136                           0.115                           0.136
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The specification is Equation 3. See Tables 2-3-4 for variable definitions. Results
reported in each column and panel come from separate models. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the
country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018, EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017, and the International Country Risk Guide.



                                                                                       56
Table 7: Impact of Exposure (Ages 18-25) on Attitudes towards Healthcare
                                             (1)                         (2)                          (3)
                                        Full-sample              Democratic countries        Non-democratic counties
 Outcome ➔                         Confidence in healthcare     Confidence in healthcare     Confidence in healthcare

 Exposure to epidemic (18-25)             -6.760***                    -6.543***                      -5.964
                                           (1.270)                      (1.649)                       (4.084)

 Observations                             95732                        72793                        22939
 R2                                        0.092                        0.098                        0.172
 Outcome ➔                          Vaccines are effective       Vaccines are effective       Vaccines are effective

 Exposure to epidemic (18-25)              -1.178**                    -1.699***                      -0.596
                                            (0.564)                     (0.554)                       (0.470)

 Observations                              81930                        52638                        25258
 R2                                        0.092                        0.072                        0.139
 Outcome ➔                             Vaccines are safe            Vaccines are safe            Vaccines are safe

 Exposure to epidemic (18-25)               -1.685                     -2.703***                      -0.618*
                                            (1.039)                     (0.672)                       (0.341)

 Observations                              81847                        52612                         25195
 R2                                        0.142                        0.117                         0.202
 Outcome ➔                           Children received a          Children received a           Children received a
                                          vaccine                      vaccine                       vaccine

 Exposure to epidemic (18-25)               -0.339                     -1.432***                       0.941
                                            (0.847)                     (0.417)                       (0.650)

 Observations                              67125                         42415                        21477
 R2                                        0.049                         0.056                        0.038
 Outcome ➔                         Vaccines are important        Vaccines are important       Vaccines are important
                                    for children to have          for children to have         for children to have

 Exposure to epidemic (18-25)               -0.525                       -1.037*                      -0.009
                                            (0.566)                      (0.549)                      (0.295)

 Observations                                 83666                       53623                         25928
 R2                                           0.091                       0.084                         0.110
 Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is a dummy variable indicating
 that: the respondent agrees or strongly agrees that “vaccines are effective” in the top panel; the respondent agrees or
 strongly agrees that “vaccines are safe” in the second panel; the respondent reports that their “children received a
 vaccine” that was supposed to prevent them from getting childhood diseases such as (such as polio, measles or
 mumps),” in the third panel; the respondent agrees or strongly agrees that “vaccines are important for children to
 have” in the bottom panel. Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number of people affected
 by an epidemic when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected
 refers to people requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring basic survival needs
 such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical assistance). Each specification inclu des country-fixed
 effects, year-fixed effects, demographic (a male dummy, a dummy for each age group, dummy variables for
 educational attainment (tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies (Christian, Muslim, and other
 religions), and labor market (full-time employed, part-time employed, unemployed) characteristics, within-country
 income-deciles, dummy variables for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child
 under 15). Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level.
 Source: the Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017, and Polity5.



                                                        57
Table 8: The Role of Government Strength and Attitudes toward Healthcare and Vaccination
                                                                     (1)                      (2)                    (3)                     (4)                      (5)
Outcome ➔                                                     Have confidence in          Vaccines are         Vaccines are safe     Children received a        Vaccines are
                                                                 healthcare                effective                                      vaccine            important for children
                                                                                                                                                                   to have
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)*MedianGov.Strength                    -16.783                    0.862                 -3.554 **             -3.253 ***              -3.084 ***
                                                                   (29.181)                  (0.981)                 (1.772)               (0.610)                 (0.777)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                                         1.071                  -3.112 ***              -2.033                  0.855                    0.806
                                                                   (35.099)                  (0.824)                (1.843)                (0.810)                  (0.777)

MedianGov.Strength                                                  0.023 **                 -0.013 *               -0.011                 -0.005                   -0.003
                                                                    (0.011)                  (0.007)                (0.009)                (0.004)                  (0.005)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)*BottomTerc.Gov.Strength               -19.117                  -1.815 **              -5.386 ***             -1.526 ***               -2.337 ***
                                                                   (27.583)                  (0.762)                (1.585)                (0.405)                  (0.797)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                                        -3.716                   -0.921                 -1.090                 -0.577                    0.056
                                                                   (26.485)                  (1.046)                (1.510)                (0.586)                  (0.585)

BottomTercileGov.Strength                                            0.001                   -0.004                 -0.006                 -0.005                   -0.007
                                                                    (0.009)                  (0.007)                (0.008)                (0.005)                  (0.006)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)*BottomQuar.Gov.Strength               -49.140 **               -2.142 ***             -5.987 ***             -1.926 ***                -2.058 **
                                                                    (23.329)                 (0.723)                (2.099)                (0.529)                   (1.024)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                                         8.549                   -1.057                 -0.776                 -0.350                   -0.179
                                                                   (20.633)                  (0.740)                (1.722)                (0.703)                  (0.776)

BottomQuartileGov.Strength                                           0.004                    0.005                 -0.002                 -0.001                   -0.002
                                                                    (0.010)                  (0.007)                (0.008)                (0.005)                  (0.005)

Observations                                                          49517                    49799                 49779                   38702                     50791
R2                                                                    0.110                    0.078                 0.133                    0.048                    0.091
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The specification is Equation 3. See Table 7 for variable definitions. Results reported in each column and panel
come from separate models. Results use the sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-
2017, the Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018, and International Country Risk Guide.


                                                                                     58
Table 9: Government Strength and Policy Response Time to COVID-19
                                                                                (1)                       (2)                              (3)
                           Sample ➔                                        Full-sample           Above Median Polity Score       Below Median Polity Score

Government strength                                                         -3.611**                     -5.357** A                         -.0837
                                                                              (1.731)                      (2.560)                         (2.077)
                                                                             [-2.764]                     [-4.231]                         [-0.062]

Continent fixed effects                                                          Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Country characteristics                                                          Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Average Google search volume one week before the policy                          Yes                           Yes                           Yes
(log) cumulative own country cases one week before the policy                    Yes                           Yes                           Yes
(log) cumulative own country deaths one week before the policy                   Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Observations                                                                      78                            39                           39
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. OLS regressions. Outcome variable is the number of days between the date of
the first confirmed case and the date of the first COVID-19 policy (i.e. non-pharmaceutical intervention: school closure, workplace closure, public event
cancellation, public transport closure, or restrictions on within-country movement) in the own country. Government strength is an assessment of both the
government’s ability to carry out its declared programs and its ability to stay in office. It ranges between 12 (maximum score) and 0 (minimum score) with
higher scores indicating better quality. Country characteristics include (log) GDP per capita, (log) urbanization rate, (log) total population, (log) share of
population age 65 and above, Polity Score, and a dummy variable indicating whether a country experienced any epidemic since 2000. We add 1 to every
country observation and then apply a logarithmic transformation. Bracket s report point estimates for one standard deviation (0.765) increase in government
strength index. Robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. A indicates statistically significant differences between the pair estimates. The
sample consists of 78 countries that ever-adopted non-pharmaceutical policy between 1/1/2020 and 31/03/2012. Source: EM-DAT, European Centre for
Disease Prevention Control, Google, Polity V, Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker, the International Country Risk Guide, World Bank.




                                                                                        59
Appendix A: Additional Data and Sources

International Country Risk Guide

Our data on institutional quality are from the International Country Risk Guide
(ICRG). This measures 12 political and social attributes for approximately 140
countries from 1984 to the present. We focus on government strength, which is an
assessment both of the government’s ability to carry out its declared programs and
its ability to stay in office. 68 Specifically, the index score is the sum of three
subcomponents: (i) Government Unity; (ii) Legislative Strength; and (iii) Popular
Support. In the original ICRG dataset, this measure is called as government
stability. Throughout the paper, we refer to government stability as government
strength as it captures the policy-making strength of the incumbent government.
Scores for government strength range from a maximum of 12 and a minimum of 0.

Wellcome Global Monitor

The Wellcome Global Monitor (WGM) is a nationally representative survey fielded
in some 160 countries in 2018. It is a global survey of how people think and feel
about key health and science challenges, including attitudes towards vaccines and
trust in doctors, nurses and scientists. WGM also provides information on
respondents’ demographic and labor market characteristics. We use the Wellcome
Global Monitor (WGM) to explore the mechanisms underlying our findings, and
specifically whether these run through attitudes and feeling about the public health
response to epidemics.

Google Trends

We use Google Trends data on searches to measure public attention paid to the
COVID-19 pandemic. More specifically, we collected data on the volume of
Google searches for “corona; korona; Wuhan virus; COVID; COVID-19,”
translating these search terms into the official language of each country. We


68
   Other institutional quality index measures cover democratic accountability, socioeconomic
conditions, investment profile, internal conflict, external conflict, corruption, military in politics,
religious tensions, law and order, ethnic tensions, and bureaucracy quality.




                                                 60
assemble these data on a daily basis at the country level for the period from January
1 through March 31, 2020. Observations are scaled from 0 (lowest attention) to 100
(highest attention). We exclude 21 countries where the internet is classified as “not
free” according to Freedom House (2019).

COVID-19 Related Cases and Deaths

We obtain daily data on the coronavirus related cases and deaths by country from
the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and the Johns
Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center (JHCRC). There are minor reporting
differences between the two sources. We use both datasets and create our measures
of cases and deaths using the maximum value reported in either dataset.

Government Policy Responses

We rely on the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker (OxCGRT) for
information on public policy responses to the outbreak (Hale et al., 2020).
Specifically, we use the information on the following responses: (i) closing of
schools and universities; (ii) workplace closures; (iii) public event cancellations;
(iv) closing of public transport; (v) restrictions on internal movement. We again
gather these data for the period between January 1, and March 31, 2020.

Communicable and Non-communicable Diseases

We distinguish communicable diseases (diarrhea, lower respiratory, other common
infectious diseases, malaria and neglected tropical diseases, HIV/AIDS,
tuberculosis, other communicable diseases) from non-communicable diseases
(cardiovascular diseases, cancers, respiratory disease, diabetes, blood and
endocrine diseases, mental and substance use disorders, liver diseases, digestive
diseases, musculoskeletal disorders, neurological disorders, other              non-
communicable diseases) using data from the Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation. These data are at the country-level data and cover the period 1990-
2016. These measures are population-adjusted and expressed in Disability Adjusted
Life Years Lost (DALYs), which is a standardized metric allowing for direct
comparison and summing of burdens of different diseases (Roser and Ritchie,




                                         61
2020). Conceptually, one DALY is the equivalent of one year in good health lost
to premature mortality or disability (Murray et al. 2015).

Country Characteristics

Data on GDP per capita and urbanization rate come from the World Bank. We
obtain the data on the total population and population by age from the United
Nations. Data on political regime characteristics are from the Polity5 Series, with
scores ranging from -10 to +10. We define 5 and above democracies.

Political Behaviour

We use the World Values Survey (WVS) and the European Social Survey (ESS) to
measure political behavior. We use all available waves of the World Values Survey
from 1981 to 2014. The dataset covers more than 80 countries and we use 6
variables to capture political behavior. In particular, questions aim to capture some
forms of political action that people can take and asked as follows: please indicate
whether you have done any of these things, whether you might do it or would never
under any circumstances do it: (i) attending lawful/peaceful demonstrations; (ii) the
respondent signing petition; (iii) joining in boycotts; (v) occupying buildings or
factories; (vi) joining unofficial strikes. We code “have done” and “might do” as 1
and zero otherwise. We also use the question on whether the respondent voted in
recent parliament elections.


Additional data on political behavior come from the 2002-2018 European Social
Surveys. These surveys are fielded biannually in over 30 European countries. The
key outcome variables we use come from questions asked to all ESS respondents:
(i) during the last 12 months, have you taken part in a lawful public demonstration?;
(ii) did you vote in the last national election? We code “yes” as 1 and zero
otherwise.




                                         62
The Cross-National Time-Series (CNTS) Data
We use the following variables from CNTS data to control for individuals’ past
domestic political experiences. The variable definitions are as follows: (i)
Assassinations: any politically motivated murder or attempted murder of a high
government official or politician; (ii) General Strikes: any strike of 1,000 or more
industrial or service workers that involves more than one employer and that is
aimed at national government policies or authority; (iii) Terrorism/Guerrilla
Warfare: any armed activity, sabotage, or bombings carried on by independent
bands of citizens or irregular forces and aimed at the overthrow of the present
regime. A country is also considered to have terrorism/guerrilla war when sporadic
bombing, sabotage, or terrorism occurs; (iv) Purges: any systematic elimination by
jailing or execution of political opposition within the ranks of the regime or the
opposition; (v) Riots: any violent demonstration or clash of more than 100 citizens
involving the use of physical force; (vi) Revolutions: any illegal or forced change
in the top government elite, any attempt at such a change, or any successful or
unsuccessful armed rebellion whose aim is independence from the central
government; (vii) Anti-government Demonstrations: any peaceful public gathering
of at least 100 people for the primary purpose of displaying or voicing their
opposition to government policies or authority, excluding demonstrations of a
distinctly anti-foreign nature.




                                        63
Appendix B: Additional Evidence and Analysis
Appendix Figure B.1: Share of Respondents Who Have Confidence in Honesty of Elections




Notes: This figure shows the share of respondents who have confidence in honesty of elections, averaged across all
available years. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018.


Appendix Figure B.2: Share of Respondents Who Have Confidence in National Government




Notes: This figure shows the share of respondents who have confidence in national government, averaged across all
available years. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018.




                                               64
Appendix Figure B.3: Share of Respondents Who Approve the Performance of the Leader




Notes: This figure shows the share of respondents who approve the performance of the leader, averaged across all
available years. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018.




                                               65
       Appendix Figure B.4: Effects of Epidemics in Alternative Treatment Years

       Panel A: Dependent variable is the average of all three outcome variables




       Panel B: Dependent variable is the 1 st principal component of responses




Notes: This figure shows the treatment effect for various age bands. That is, we calculate for each individual
the number of people affected by an epidemic as a share of the population, averaged over the 8 years when the
individual was 2-9 years old, 10-17 years old, 18-25 years old, and 26-33 years old. Each point estimate comes
from four separate models. Specification is Column 5 of Table 2. Confidence intervals are at 95% significance
level. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level.
Source: Ga llup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                       66
        Appendix Figure B.5: Short-term Effect of Epidemics on Political Trust




Note: Epidemic year corresponds to the year in which World Health Organisation (WHO) declared one of the
following pandemic/epidemic outbreaks for the country in which Gallup respondent resides: SARS, H1N1, MERS,
Ebola, or Zika. Specification is the same as in Equation 2. Confidence intervals are at 90% significance level. Results
use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World
Polls, 2006-2018 and Ma et al., 2020.




                                                           67
  Appendix Figure B.6: Robustness to Dropping One Year at a Time




Note: This figure shows the point estimates on Exposure to epidemic (18-25) variable on
three main outcome variables while dropping one sample year at a time. The specification
is Column 4 of Tables 2, 3 and 4. Only the estimated coefficient on Exposure to epidemic
(18-25) is plotted. Confidence intervals are at 95% significance level. Source: Gallup
World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                           68
  Appendix Figure B.7: Robustness to Dropping One Country at a Time




Note: This figure shows the point estimates on Exposure to epidemic (18-25) variable on
three main outcome variables while randomly dropping one sample country at a time. The
specification is Column 4 of Tables 2, 3 and 4. Only the estimated coefficient on Exposure
to epidemic (18-25) is plotted. Confidence intervals are at 95% significance level. Source:
Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                             69
Appendix Table B.1: Persistency of the Effect
                                                          (1)                                            (2)                                          (3)
       Outcome variable ➔                Have confidence in national government                 Approval of the Leader               Have confidence in honesty of elections

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                             -19.683 ***                                    -18.251 *                                    -17.498 **
                                                          (4.340)                                       (10.260)                                      (7.159)

Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)*Age                          0.464 ***                                     0.418 *                                       0.391 **
                                                          (0.104)                                       (0.250)                                       (0.167)

The number of people affected t-1                          0.649                                         0.039                                        -3.693 *
                                                          (3.432)                                       (2.698)                                       (2.174)

Country fixed effects                                       Yes                                           Yes                                           Yes
Year fixed effects                                          Yes                                           Yes                                           Yes
Age group fixed effects                                     Yes                                           Yes                                           Yes
Individual income                                           Yes                                           Yes                                           Yes
Demographic characteristics                                 Yes                                           Yes                                           Yes
Income decile fixed effects                                 Yes                                           Yes                                           Yes
Labor market controls                                       Yes                                           Yes                                           Yes
Country*Age trends                                          Yes                                           Yes                                           Yes
Cohort fixed effects                                        Yes                                           Yes                                           Yes
Observations                                              760099                                        719742                                        736679
R2                                                         0.145                                         0.133                                         0.146
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is a dummy variable indicating that the respondent has confidence in “honesty of elections”.
Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number of people affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years).
The number of people affected refers to people requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter,
sanitation, and immediate medical assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single,
married), educational attainment (tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies (Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed,
part-time employed, unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixed-effects are
constructed by grouping individuals into deciles based on their income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Individual income includes all wages and
salaries in the household, remittances from family members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the
World Bank’s individual consumption PPP conversion factor, which makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors
are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.


                                                                                         70
Appendix Table B.2: Robustness to Controlling for Other Economic and Political Shocks
                                            (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)
                                           Have               Have            Approval of        Approval of           Have             Have
Outcome ➔                              confidence in      confidence in        the leader         the leader       confidence in     confidence
                                          national           national                                               honesty of       in honesty
                                        government         government                                                elections       of elections
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)             -3.589 ***         -3.417***          -3.926 ***         -3.944***         -4.373 ***        -4.219***
                                          (0.585)            (0.787)            (0.487)            (0.746)           (0.636)          (0.0849)

The number of people affected t-1          0.847              0.876              0.872              0.698            -3.308 *         -3.354 *
                                          (3.183)            (3.019)            (2.419)            (2.218)           (1.851)          (1.701)

Government strength (18-25)                  --               -0.001               --              -0.012*               --             0.006
                                                             (0.005)                               (0.007)                             (0.005)

Socioeconomic conditions (18-25)             --              -0.018***             --              -0.007                --           -0.018***
                                                              (0.006)                              (0.007)                             (0.006)

Investment profile (18-25)                   --               0.007                --              0.010*                --             0.002
                                                             (0.006)                               (0.006)                             (0.006)

Internal conflict (18-25)                    --               -0.007               --              -0.013**              --             -0.002
                                                             (0.005)                                (0.006)                            (0.005)

External conflict (18-25)                    --               0.002                --              -0.001                --             0.006
                                                             (0.005)                               (0.006)                             (0.004)

Corruption (18-25)                           --               -0.009               --              -0.010                --             -0.005
                                                             (0.010)                               (0.010)                             (0.009)

Military in politics (18-25)                 --              0.021**               --              0.019*                --             0.010
                                                             (0.009)                               (0.011)                             (0.009)

Religious tensions (18-25)                   --               -0.003               --              -0.005                --             -0.003
                                                             (0.011)                               (0.014)                             (0.010)

Law and order (18-25)                        --              0.030**               --              0.045**               --           0.041***
                                                             (0.015)                               (0.017)                            (0.014)

Ethnic tensions (18-25)                      --               0.011                --               0.013                --             0.005
                                                             (0.008)                               (0.010)                             (0.007)

Democratic accountability (18-25)            --               -0.005               --              -0.009                --           -0.016**
                                                             (0.007)                               (0.010)                            (0.006)

Bureaucracy quality (18-25)                  --               -0.017               --              -0.024                --             -0.022
                                                             (0.016)                               (0.021)                             (0.014)

Observations                               422523             422523             408564            408564             412051           412051
R2                                          0.136              0.137              0.139             0.140              0.137            0.137
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Results use
the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018, EM-DAT
International Disaster Database, 1984-2017, and ICRG 1984-2017.




                                                                         71
Appendix Table B.3: Robustness to Controlling for Other Economic and Political Shocks
                                            (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)
                                           Have               Have            Approval of        Approval of           Have             Have
Outcome ➔                              confidence in      confidence in        the leader         the leader       confidence in     confidence
                                          national           national                                               honesty of       in honesty
                                        government         government                                                elections       of elections
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)             -1.879 ***         -1.743 ***         -2.274 ***         -2.204 ***        -2.519 ***       -2.185 ***
                                          (0.502)            (0.632)            (0.515)            (0.576)           (0.348)          (0.544)

The number of people affected t-1         3.118 **           3.077 **            1.634              1.478            -1.900 **        -1.825 **
                                          (1.374)            (1.381)            (1.540)            (1.505)            (0.800)          (0.811)

Assassinations (18-25)                       --               0.006                --               0.008 *              --            0.002
                                                             (0.005)                               (0.004)                            (0.005)

General Strikes (18-25)                      --               0.010                --               0.012                --            0.005
                                                             (0.007)                               (0.009)                            (0.007)

Terror./Guerrilla Warfare (18-25)            --              -0.023 *              --               -0.015               --           -0.024 **
                                                             (0.012)                               (0.020)                             (0.011)

Purges (18-25)                               --               0.021                --               0.035 *              --            0.019
                                                             (0.015)                               (0.018)                            (0.015)

Riots (18-25)                                --              -0.003                --               -0.000               --           -0.001
                                                             (0.004)                               (0.006)                            (0.003)

Revolutions (18-25)                          --               0.014                --               -0.006               --           0.019 *
                                                             (0.013)                               (0.014)                            (0.011)

Anti-gov. Demons. (18-25)                    --              -0.002                --               -0.001               --           -0.001
                                                             (0.002)                               (0.002)                            (0.002)

GDP Growth (18-25)                           --               0.001                --               0.002                --            0.001
                                                             (0.002)                               (0.002)                            (0.001)

GDP Per Capita (18-25)                       --              -0.000                --               0.000 *              --           -0.000
                                                             (0.000)                               (0.000)                            (0.000)

Inflation (18-25)                            --               0.000                --               0.000                --            0.000
                                                             (0.000)                               (0.000)                            (0.000)

Polity (18-25)                               --              -0.001                --               -0.001               --            0.001
                                                             (0.002)                               (0.002)                            (0.002)

Observations                               429204             429204             398284            398284             415441           415441
R2                                          0.134              0.134              0.123             0.123              0.159            0.159
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Results use
the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018, EM-DAT
International Disaster Database, 1970-2017, and CNTS 1970-2017.




                                                                         72
Appendix Table B.4: Robustness to Controlling for Other Economic and Political Shocks (Ages 10-17)
                                            (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)
                                           Have               Have            Approval of        Approval of           Have             Have
Outcome ➔                              confidence in      confidence in        the leader         the leader       confidence in     confidence
                                          national           national                                               honesty of       in honesty
                                        government         government                                                elections       of elections
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)             -3.478***           -2.205*            -5.000***          -3.627***         -4.496***        -3.839***
                                          (1.182)            (1.153)             (0.813)            (1.040)           (1.132)          (1.002)

The number of people affected t-1           0.795             1.060              0.426              0.315             -3.149*         -3.017**
                                           (3.111)           (2.672)            (2.351)            (1.957)            (1.667)          (1.258)

Government strength (10-17)                  --               0.002                --              -0.017**              --             0.010
                                                             (0.007)                               (0.008)                             -0.007

Socioeconomic conditions (10-17)             --              -0.010                --               0.006                --            -0.011
                                                             (0.009)                               (0.012)                             -0.008

Investment profile (10-17)                   --              -0.005                --               -0.002               --            -0.012
                                                             (0.009)                               (0.012)                             -0.008

Internal conflict (10-17)                    --              -0.003                --               -0.003               --            -0.011*
                                                             (0.007)                               (0.007)                             -0.006

External conflict (10-17)                    --              -0.008                --              -0.019***             --            -0.002
                                                             (0.006)                                (0.007)                            -0.006

Corruption (10-17)                           --              -0.009                --               -0.015               --            -0.015
                                                             (0.015)                               (0.015)                             -0.015

Military in politics (10-17)                 --              0.035*                --               0.034*               --             0.016
                                                             (0.014)                               (0.017)                             -0.012

Religious tensions (10-17)                   --              -0.036**              --              -0.051**              --           -0.034**
                                                              (0.017)                              (0.020)                             -0.015

Law and order (10-17)                        --              0.037**               --              0.059***              --           0.049***
                                                             (0.019)                               (0.022)                             -0.016

Ethnic tensions (10-17)                      --               0.015                --              0.033**               --             0.012
                                                             (0.011)                               (0.016)                             -0.012

Democratic accountability (10-17)            --               0.001                --               -0.007               --             0.004
                                                             (0.013)                               (0.016)                             -0.012

Bureaucracy quality (10-17)                  --              -0.036*               --              -0.048**              --             -0.03
                                                             (0.019)                               (0.024)                             -0.019

Observations                                274953            274953              257901            257901            268600           268600
R2                                           0.135             0.137               0.113             0.116             0.135            0.137
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Results use
the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018, EM-DAT
International Disaster Database, 1984-2017, and ICRG 1984-2017.




                                                                       73
Appendix Table B.5: Robustness to Controlling for Other Economic and Political Shocks (Ages 10-17)
                                            (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)               (6)
                                           Have               Have            Approval of        Approval of           Have             Have
Outcome ➔                              confidence in      confidence in        the leader         the leader       confidence in     confidence
                                          national           national                                               honesty of       in honesty
                                        government         government                                                elections       of elections
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)             -1.622 ***         -1.639 ***         -2.465 ***         -2.811 ***         -2.657 ***       -2.748 ***
                                          (0.349)            (0.537)            (0.419)            (0.596)            (0.277)          (0.430)

The number of people affected t-1         3.236 **           3.230 ***           1.501              1.378            -2.348 ***       -2.277 ***
                                          (1.254)            (1.197)            (1.279)            (1.205)            (0.647)          (0.645)

Assassinations (10-17)                       --               0.006                --               0.016                --           0.012 **
                                                             (0.010)                               (0.013)                            (0.005)

General Strikes (10-17)                      --              0.028 **              --              0.047 ***             --           0.022 **
                                                             (0.013)                               (0.012)                            (0.010)

Terror./Guerrilla Warfare (10-17)            --              -0.042 *              --              -0.061 **             --            -0.004
                                                             (0.025)                                (0.027)                           (0.022)

Purges (10-17)                               --               0.012                --               0.010                --             0.02
                                                             (0.022)                               (0.021)                            (0.019)

Riots (10-17)                                --               -0.001               --              -0.014                --            -0.005
                                                             (0.006)                               (0.008)                            (0.005)

Revolutions (10-17)                          --             -0.054 ***             --              -0.039 *              --           -0.037 **
                                                             (0.019)                               (0.022)                            (0.015)

Anti-gov. Demons. (10-17)                    --               -0.005               --               0.003                --            0.001
                                                             (0.007)                               (0.005)                            (0.005)

GDP Growth (10-17)                           --               0.003                --               0.004                --            0.004 *
                                                             (0.002)                               (0.003)                            (0.002)

GDP Per Capita (10-17)                       --              -0.000                --               0.000                --            -0.000
                                                             (0.000)                               (0.000)                            (0.000)

Inflation (10-17)                            --               0.000                --               0.000                --            0.000
                                                             (0.000)                               (0.000)                            (0.000)

Polity (10-17)                               --               -0.001               --              -0.004                --            -0.003
                                                             (0.002)                               (0.003)                            (0.002)

Observations                                315587            315587              293751            293751            306094           306094
R2                                           0.126             0.127               0.116             0.117             0.158            0.159
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Results use
the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018, EM-DAT
International Disaster Database, 1970-2017, and CNTS 1970-2017.




                                                                     74
Appendix Table B.6: Robustness to Controlling for Other Economic and Political Shocks and Country*Year Fixed Effects
                                              (1)                (2)                (3)              (4)               (5)             (6)
                                             Have               Have          Approval of the    Approval of          Have            Have
Outcome ➔                                confidence in      confidence in         leader          the leader       confidence      confidence
                                            national           national                                          in honesty of   in honesty of
                                          government         government                                             elections       elections
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)               -0.613 **          -0.577 **          -0.502 **         -0.529 **      -1.269 ***      -1.293 ***
                                           (0.253)            (0.286)             (0.197)           (0.259)        (0.191)         (0.192)

Government strength (18-25)                    --               0.002                --            0.006 ***          --            0.002
                                                               (0.002)                             (0.002)                         (0.002)

Socioeconomic conditions (18-25)               --              -0.002                --            -0.001             --           -0.003
                                                               (0.002)                             (0.002)                         (0.002)

Investment profile (18-25)                     --               0.002                --             0.002             --            0.001
                                                               (0.002)                             (0.002)                         (0.002)

Internal conflict (18-25)                      --              -0.002                --            -0.001             --            0.003
                                                               (0.002)                             (0.002)                         (0.002)

External conflict (18-25)                      --               0.001                --             0.002             --            0.002
                                                               (0.002)                             (0.002)                         (0.002)

Corruption (18-25)                             --              -0.005 *              --            -0.003             --           -0.003
                                                               (0.003)                             (0.003)                         (0.003)

Military in politics (18-25)                   --              -0.002                --            -0.000             --            0.002
                                                               (0.003)                             (0.003)                         (0.003)

Religious tensions (18-25)                     --               0.002                --            0.007 **           --           -0.003
                                                               (0.003)                             (0.003)                         (0.004)

Law and order (18-25)                          --               0.003                --            -0.004             --            0.006
                                                               (0.004)                             (0.004)                         (0.004)

Ethnic tensions (18-25)                        --               0.002                --             0.000             --           -0.002
                                                               (0.003)                             (0.002)                         (0.003)

Democratic accountability (18-25)              --              -0.002                --             0.001             --          -0.009 ***
                                                               (0.002)                             (0.003)                         (0.003)

Bureaucracy quality (18-25)                    --               0.009                --            0.011 *            --           0.009 *
                                                               (0.006)                             (0.006)                         (0.005)

Observations                                 422523             422523               408564         408564          412051          412051
R2                                             0.174             0.174                0.166          0.166           0.170            0.170
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 5 of Table 2 country*year fixed effects. See
notes to Table 2. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World
Polls, 2006-2018, EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1984-2017, and ICRG 1984-2017.




                                                                     75
Appendix Table B.7: Robustness to Controlling for Other Economic and Political Shocks and Country*Year Fixed Effects
                                              (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)             (5)             (6)
                                             Have                Have            Approval of      Approval of         Have            Have
Outcome ➔                                confidence in       confidence in        the leader       the leader      confidence      confidence
                                            national           national                                           in honesty of   in honesty of
                                          government          government                                            elections       elections
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)               -0.630 ***          -0.607 ***         -0.765 ***       -0.623 ***      -1.346 ***      -1.198 ***
                                            (0.184)             (0.217)            (0.158)          (0.200)         (0.159)         (0.205)

Assassinations (18-25)                         --              -0.001                 --             0.000              --          -0.004
                                                               (0.003)                              (0.002)                         (0.003)

General Strikes (18-25)                        --               0.002                 --            -0.000              --          -0.003
                                                               (0.004)                              (0.005)                         (0.004)

Terror./Guerrilla Warfare (18-25)              --              -0.002                 --            -0.006              --         -0.015 ***
                                                               (0.006)                              (0.004)                         (0.005)

Purges (18-25)                                 --              0.025 *                --             0.025              --           0.007
                                                               (0.013)                              (0.018)                         (0.016)

Riots (18-25)                                  --              -0.003                 --             0.000              --          -0.001
                                                               (0.002)                              (0.002)                         (0.002)

Revolutions (18-25)                            --              0.016 **               --             0.009              --          0.021 ***
                                                               (0.007)                              (0.007)                         (0.007)

Anti-gov. Demons. (18-25)                      --               0.001                 --            -0.001              --           0.001
                                                               (0.001)                              (0.001)                         (0.001)

GDP Growth (18-25)                             --               0.000                 --            0.001 **            --           0.000
                                                               (0.001)                              (0.001)                         (0.001)

GDP Per Capita (18-25)                         --              -0.000                 --            0.000 **            --           0.000
                                                               (0.000)                              (0.000)                         (0.000)

Inflation (18-25)                              --               0.000                 --             0.000              --           0.000
                                                               (0.000)                              (0.000)                         (0.000)

Polity (18-25)                                 --              -0.001                 --             0.000              --           0.001
                                                               (0.001)                              (0.001)                         (0.001)

 Observations                                 429204             429204              398284          398284          415441          415441
 R2                                            0.134              0.170               0.171           0.171           0.192           0.192
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 5 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Results use
the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018, EM-DAT
International Disaster Database, 1970-2017, and CNTS 1970-2017.




                                                                      76
Appendix Table B.8: Robustness to Omitted Variables Bias
                                                           (1)                                 (2)                              (3)
                                               Have confidence in national                                             Have confidence in
           Outcome variable ➔                                                        Approval of the Leader
                                                      government                                                       honesty of elections
Panel A: Estimation model: Columns 2, 4 and 6 of Appendix Table B.2, which controls for various past economic and political shocks

        Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                           -3.417 ***                             -3.944 ***                         -4.219 ***
                                                                (0.787)                                (0.746)                            (0.849)

        Bounds on the treatment effect                      (-3.417, -3.844)                      (-3.944, -4.120)                   (-4.219, -4.635)
           (δ=1, Rmax=1.3*R)

         Treatment effect excludes 0                              Yes                                    Yes                               Yes
            Delta (Rmax=1.3*R)                                   11.60                                  24.24                             19.02

Panel B: Estimation model: Columns 2, 4 and 6 of Appendix Table B.3, which controls for various past economic and political shocks

        Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                           -1.743 ***                             -2.204 ***                        -2.185 ***
                                                                (0.632)                                (0.576)                           (0.544)

        Bounds on the treatment effect                      (-1.743, -1.943)                      (-2.204, -2.317)                   (-2.185, -2.556)
           (δ=1, Rmax=1.3*R)

         Treatment effect excludes 0                               Yes                                  Yes                                Yes
             Delta (Rmax=1.3*R)                                   12.72                                21.34                              12.34
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Bounds on the Exposure to Epidemic (18 -25) effect are calculated using Stata
code psacalc, which calculates estimates of treatment effects and relative degree of selection in linear models as proposed in Oster (2019). Delta, δ,
calculates an estimate of the proportional degree of selection given a maximum value of the R -squared. Rmax specifies the maximum R-squared which
would result if all unobservables were included in the regression. We define Rmax upper bound as 1.3 times the R-squared from the main specification
that controls for all observables. Oster’s delta indicates the degree of selection on unobservables relative to observables t hat would be needed to fully
explain our results by omitted variable bias. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source:
Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                                      77
Appendix Table B.9: Placebo Outcomes
                                            (1)              (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)
Outcome ➔                                  Have             Have            Have         Have relatives   Have helped
                                       confidence in    confidence in   confidence in     or friends to   to a stranger
                                        the military       banks           media            count on
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)              -0.542           0.147           -0.652            0.290           0.021
                                         (0.442)          (0.193)          (0.610)          (0.851)         (0.281)

The number of people affected t-1         2.210            0.118          -10.208 **       -1.134**          -1.390
                                         (3.284)          (2.038)          (4.817)          (0.456)         (1.796)

Country fixed effects                         Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Year fixed effects                            Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Age group fixed effects                       Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Individual income                             Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Demographic characteristics                   Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Income decile fixed effects                   Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Labor market controls                         Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Country*Age trends                            Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Cohort fixed effects                          Yes            Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes
Observations                                730156         809972          190167           902066          889981
R2                                           0.141          0.136           0.104            0.122           0.074
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is a dummy variable indicating
that the respondent has confidence in “military”; “banks and financial institutions”; “media freedom”. The
specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard
errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster
Database, 1970-2017.




                                                       78
Appendix Table B.10: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (Ages 18-25) on the Average of All Three Outcome Variables
                                               (1)                       (2)                      (3)                      (4)                      (5)
Outcome ➔                              Average of all three      Average of all three     Average of all three     Average of all three     Average of all three
                                        outcome variables         outcome variables        outcome variables        outcome variables        outcome variables
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                -1.365 **                 -1.248 **                -1.855 ***               -1.867 ***               -0.705 ***
                                             (0.565)                   (0.539)                  (0.264)                  (0.264)                  (0.155)

The number of people affected t-1             -0.854                   -0.779                   -0.801                   -0.803                       --
                                              (3.086)                  (3.065)                  (3.056)                  (3.051)

Country fixed effects                           Yes                       Yes                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes
Year fixed effects                              Yes                       Yes                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes
Age group fixed effects                         Yes                       Yes                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes
Individual income                               No                        Yes                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes
Demographic characteristics                     No                        Yes                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes
Income decile fixed effects                     No                        Yes                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes
Labor market controls                           No                        Yes                       Yes                      Yes                       Yes
Country*Age trends                              No                        No                        Yes                      Yes                       Yes
Cohort fixed effects                            No                        No                        No                       Yes                       Yes
Country*Year fixed effects                      No                        No                        No                       No                        Yes
Observations                                 636156                    636156                     636156                  636156                     636156
R2                                             0.169                     0.178                     0.180                   0.180                      0.230
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is a n average of all three main dependent variables: “honesty of elections”;
“confidence in national government”; “approval of the leader”. Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number of people affected by an
epidemic when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people requiring immediate assistance
during a period of emergency (that is, requiring basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical assistance). Demographic
characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational attainment (tertiary
education, secondary education), religion dummies (Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, part-time employed,
unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Inc ome decile fixed-effects are
constructed by grouping individuals into deciles based on their income relative to other in dividuals within the same country and year. Individual income includes
all wages and salaries in the household, remittances from family members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes . Gallup converts local income to
International Dollars using the World Bank’s individual consumption PPP conversion factor, which makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the
Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006 -2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster
Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                                     79
Appendix Table B.11: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (Ages 18-25) on the 1st Principal Component of Responses
                                               (1)                      (2)                      (3)                      (4)                      (5)
Outcome ➔                               the 1st Principal        the 1st Principal        the 1st Principal        the 1st Principal        the 1st Principal
                                         Component of             Component of             Component of             Component of             Component of
                                           Responses                Responses                Responses                Responses                Responses
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                -4.672 **                -4.269 **                -6.361 ***               -6.400 ***               -2.378 ***
                                             (1.932)                  (1.841)                  (0.914)                  (0.913)                  (0.531)

The number of people affected t-1            -2.619                   -2.353                   -2.424                  -2.431                      --
                                            (10.804)                 (10.730)                 (10.694)                (10.677)

Country fixed effects                            Yes                     Yes                      Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Year fixed effects                               Yes                     Yes                      Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Age group fixed effects                          Yes                     Yes                      Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Individual income                                No                      Yes                      Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Demographic characteristics                      No                      Yes                      Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Income decile fixed effects                      No                      Yes                      Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Labor market controls                            No                      Yes                      Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Country*Age trends                               No                       No                      Yes                    Yes                      Yes
Cohort fixed effects                             No                       No                       No                    Yes                      Yes
Country*Year fixed effects                       No                       No                       No                     No                      Yes
Observations                                  636156                   636156                   636156                 636156                   636156
R2                                              0.169                   0.178                    0.180                  0.180                    0.230
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is the 1st Principal Component of responses to the main dependent variables:
“honesty of elections”; “confidence in national government”; “approval of the leader”. Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number
of people affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people requiring
immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical
assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy f or each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational
attainment (tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies (Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment s tatus (full-time employed, part-
time employed, unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixed-
effects are constructed by grouping individuals into deciles based on their income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Individual
income includes all wages and salaries in the household, remittances from family members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup converts
local income to International Dollars using the World Bank’s individual consumption PPP conversion factor, which makes it comparable across all countries.
Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT
International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.



                                                                                     80
Appendix Table B.12: Robustness to Using Comparable Samples (i.e. sample of individuals who have responded to all 7 questions)
                                               (1)              (2)                (3)                 (4)                (5)                (6)                 (7)
Outcome ➔                               Have confidence    Approval of the   Have confidence    Have confidence    Have confidence    Have relatives or    Have helped to a
                                           in national        Leader          in honesty of      in the military     in the banks    friends to count on      stranger
                                          government                            elections

The number of people affected (18-25)       -0.570 **         -0.420 ***        -1.282 ***          -0.374            0.598 **             0.454               -0.095
                                             (0.242)           (0.112)           (0.224)            (0.291)           (0.249)             (0.577)              (0.239)

Observations                                 558299            558299             558299            558299           558299             558299              558299
Country fixed effects                          Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes                  Yes
Year fixed effects                             Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes                  Yes
Age group fixed effects                        Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes                  Yes
Individual income                              Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes                  Yes
Demographic characteristics                    Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes                  Yes
Income decile fixed effects                    Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes                  Yes
Labor market controls                          Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes                  Yes
Country*Age trends                             Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes                  Yes
Cohort fixed effects                           Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes                  Yes
Country*Year fixed effects                     Yes               Yes                Yes              Yes               Yes                Yes                  Yes
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country
level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                                    81
Appendix Table B.13: Robustness to Alternative Epidemic Exposure Measure - Exposure to SARS, H1N1, MERS, Ebola, or Zika
                                                 (1)                          (2)                          (3)                         (4)                         (5)
                                       Coefficient on Exposure      Coefficient on Exposure      Coefficient on Exposure     Coefficient on Exposure     Coefficient on Exposure
                                        to Epidemic (18-25)           to Epidemic (18-25)         to Epidemic (18-25)         to Epidemic (18-25)         to Epidemic (18-25)
                                           (standard error)             (standard error)             (standard error)            (standard error)            (standard error)
Outcome ➔                                Have confidence in          Approval of the leader        Have confidence in         Average of all three          the 1st Principal
                                        national government                                       honesty of elections         outcome variables              Component of
                                                                                                                                                                Responses
Sample: Democratic countries                    -0.022                      -0.044 *A                   -0.041 **A                   -0.038 **                  -0.132 **A
                                                (0.020)                      (0.024)                     (0.017)                      (0.019)                    (0.066)

Observations                                   106530                       102838                       103551                       94695                       94695
R2                                              0.137                        0.108                        0.135                       0.171                       0.171

Sample: Non-democratic countries                 0.029                       0.029 *                      0.022                       0.030 *                     0.104 *
                                                (0.021)                      (0.016)                     (0.022)                      (0.016)                     (0.056)

Observations                                      47796                        44273                          45566                      37849                      37849
R2                                                0.187                        0.183                          0.192                      0.254                      0.253
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Exposure to epidemic (18 -25) takes a value of 1 if the respondent experienced SARS, H1N1, MERS,
Ebola, or Zika when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years). Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Results use the Gallup sampling
weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. A indicates statistically significant difference in each pair of means at p<.05. Source: Gallup World Polls,
2006-2018 and Ma et al., 2020.




                                                                                        82
Appendix Table B.14: Contemporaneous Effects of Pandemic on Political Trust
                                                   (1)                                (2)                                (3)
Outcome ➔                               Have confidence in national           Approval of the leader         Have confidence in honesty of
                                              government                                                              elections
Lagged pandemic                                 -0.028 *                             -0.037 **                         -0.015
                                                (0.016)                               (0.018)                          (0.018)

Country fixed effects                                Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
Year fixed effects                                   Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
Age group fixed effects                              Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
Individual income                                    Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
Demographic characteristics                          Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
Income decile fixed effects                          Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
Labor market controls                                Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
Country*Age trends                                   Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
Cohort fixed effects                                 Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
Country*Year fixed effects                           Yes                                 Yes                                 Yes
Observations                                       987864                             931469                               950827
R2                                                  0.142                               0.131                               0.147
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Equation 2. Results use the Gallup sampling weights
and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and Ma et al., 2020.




                                                                                      83
Appendix Table B.15: Impact of Communicable and Non-Communicable Diseases on the Political Trust
                                               (1)                 (2)                 (3)
Sample ➔                                  Full-sample     Democratic countries  Non-democratic
                                                                                    counties
Outcome ➔                             Have confidence in   Have confidence in  Have confidence in
                                      national government national government national government

Exposure to communicable dis. (18-25)                    -0.368**                   -0.426**                    -0.054
                                                          (0.152)                    (0.213)                    (0.209)

Exposure to non-communicable dis. (18-25)                  0.175                      0.132                      0.037
                                                          (0.303)                    (0.407)                    (0.373)

Observations                                            389882                     267544                     109651
R2                                                       0.157                      0.125                      0.182
Outcome ➔                                            Approval of the            Approval of the            Approval of the
                                                         leader                     leader                     leader

Exposure to communicable dis. (18-25)                     -0.111                     -0.152                     -0.043
                                                          (0.179)                    (0.263)                    (0.252)

Exposure to non-communicable dis. (18-25)                  0.123                      0.125                      0.184
                                                          (0.336)                    (0.545)                    (0.369)

Observations                                            370749                     256154                     100751
R2                                                       0.140                      0.099                      0.177
Outcome ➔                                          Have confidence in         Have confidence in         Have confidence in
                                                   honesty of elections       honesty of elections       honesty of elections

Exposure to communicable dis. (18-25)                    -0.515***                  -0.533**                    -0.032
                                                           (0.176)                   (0.243)                    (0.207)

Exposure to non-communicable dis. (18-25)                 0.553*                      0.525                      0.191
                                                          (0.305)                    (0.379)                    (0.373)

Observations                                                377838                     259328                     106387
R2                                                            0.147                     0.130                      0.194
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Exposure to communicable diseases (18-25)
takes a value of 1 if the respondent experienced communicable diseases (diarrhea, lower respiratory, other common
infectious diseases, malaria & neglected tropical diseases, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, other communicable diseases).
Exposure to non-communicable diseases (18-25) takes a value of 1 if the respondent experienced non-communicable
diseases (cardiovascular diseases, cancers, respiratory disease, diabetes, blood and endocrine diseases, mental and
substance use disorders, liver diseases, digestive diseases, musculoskeletal disorders, neurological disorders, other non-
communicable diseases). Both measures are population-adjusted and expressed in terms of Disability Adjusted Life
Years Lost (DALYs), which is a standardized metric allowing for direct comparison and summing of burdens of
different diseases. Conceptually, one DALY is the equivalent of one year in good health lost due to premature mortality
or disability. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and
robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. A indicates statistically significant difference in each pair of means
at p<.05. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, 1990-2016




                                                          84
Appendix Table B.16: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (Ages 18-25) on Political Trust by Exposure Thresholds
                                                                  (1)                             (2)                                 (3)
                                                            Coefficient on                   Coefficient on                     Coefficient on
                                                          Dummy Variable                    Dummy Variable                    Dummy Variable
                                                           (standard error)                 (standard error)                   (standard error)
Outcome ➔                                                Have confidence in               Approval of the leader             Have confidence in
                                                         national government                                                 honesty of elections
Baseline - Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)                        -1.592 ***                       -1.957 ***                         -2.258 ***
                                                                (0.262)                          (0.330)                            (0.339)

Top 0.5 per cent (exposure to epidemic, 18-25)                -0.144***                        -0.131***                          -0.147***
                                                               (0.041)                          (0.038)                            (0.054)

Top 1 per cent (exposure to epidemic, 18-25)                   -0.097**                         -0.084**                          -0.112***
                                                                (0.038)                          (0.040)                           (0.034)

Top 2 per cent (exposure to epidemic, 18-25)                   -0.054**                         -0.051**                          -0.061***
                                                                (0.024)                          (0.023)                           (0.023)

Top 5 per cent (exposure to epidemic, 18-25)                     0.001                             -0.007                             -0.014
                                                                (0.016)                            (0.021)                           (0.014)
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. Results reported in each panel come from
separate models. Threshold dummies in each row are defined based on the continuous treatment variable (Exposure to Epidemic, 18-25). See notes to
Table 2. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and
EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                                     85
Table B.17: The Role of Democracy at the Time of the Epidemic
                                                                            (1)                             (2)                              (3)
 Outcome ➔                                                       Have confidence in national        Approval of the leader       Have confidence in honesty
                                                                       government                                                       of elections
 Exposure to epidemic (18-25) * Democracy (18-25)                        -4.199 **                           -3.624                      -3.379 **
                                                                          (1.685)                           (3.143)                       (1.592)

 Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                                              -1.504 ***                      -2.112 ***                      -2.110 ***
                                                                            (0.420)                         (0.419)                         (0.406)

 Democracy (18-25)                                                           0.007                           -0.003                          0.015
                                                                            (0.010)                         (0.011)                         (0.010)

 Observations                                                              523072                          489155                           504686
 R2                                                                         0.140                           0.127                            0.154
 Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The specification is Equation 3. See Tables 2 -3-4 for variable definitions. Results
 reported in each column come from separate models. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level.
 Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018, EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017, and the Polity5 dataset.




                                                                                        86
Appendix Table B.18: Impact of Exposure to Epidemics (Ages 18-25) on Political Trust – Intensive and Extensive Margins
                                             (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                (5)                  (6)
                                      Intensive margin     Intensive margin     Intensive margin    Extensive margin     Extensive margin     Extensive margin
Outcome ➔                             Have confidence      Approval of the      Have confidence     Have confidence      Approval of the      Have confidence
                                         in national            leader            in honesty of        in national           leader            in honesty of
                                        government                                  elections         government                                 elections
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)              -2.779 ***           -3.241 ***           -3.329 ***            -0.001             -0.009 ***            0.001
                                           (0.519)              (0.735)              (0.505)             (0.003)              (0.003)             (0.003)

The number of people affected t-1          -0.004                -0.450             -3.463                0.773                0.138               -3.574
                                           (4.959)              (4.043)             (2.779)              (3.457)              (2.718)              (2.182)

Observations                              351733              340226              342209               760099                 719742                736679
R2                                         0.138                0.119              0.133                 0.145                  0.133                0.146
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For intensive margin, the sample is restricted to respondents with any epidemic
experience in their impressionable years, and models are re-estimated as in Column 4 of Table 2. For extensive margin, Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) is re-
defined as a dummy taking the value of 1 when the continuous version is positive and zero otherwise ; and models are re-estimated over the full sample as in
Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup
World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                                     87
Appendix Table B.19: Impact of “Made-up” Exposure on Immigrants’ Political Trust
                                                   (1)                      (2)                          (3)                      (4)                          (5)
Outcome ➔                                  Have confidence in       Approval of the leader       Have confidence in        Average of all three         the 1st Principal
                                          national government                                    honesty of elections      outcome variables             Component of
                                                                                                                                                           Responses
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                     -0.919                     -5.915                     -0.205                     -1.475                     -5.229
                                                 (2.100)                    (3.601)                    (2.639)                    (1.688)                    (5.994)

The number of people affected t-1               -10.238                    -13.867                    -13.788                     -6.929                    -24.679
                                                (15.302)                   (15.535)                   (16.258)                   (11.686)                   (41.658)

Observations                                       4639                       4306                      4118                        3611                     3611
R2                                                 0.229                      0.229                     0.282                      0.322                     0.321
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per
capita number of people affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people
requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring basic survival needs such as food, water, she lter, sanitation, and immediate medical
assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational attainment
(tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies (Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, part-time employed,
unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixed-effects are constructed by
grouping individuals into deciles based on their income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Indiv idual income includes all wages and salaries in
the household, remittances from family members living elsewhere, and all oth er sources before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the World
Bank’s individual consumption PPP conversion factor, which makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the Gallup s ampling weights and robust standard errors
are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006 -2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                                      88
Appendix Table B.20: Impact of “Randomly-Assigned” Exposure on Political Trust
                                                   (1)                      (2)                          (3)                      (4)                          (5)
Outcome ➔                                  Have confidence in       Approval of the leader       Have confidence in        Average of all three         the 1st Principal
                                          national government                                    honesty of elections      outcome variables             Component of
                                                                                                                                                           Responses
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                      0.210                     -0.250                     -0.238                     -0.040                     -0.109
                                                 (0.390)                    (0.488)                    (0.439)                    (0.389)                    (1.348)

The number of people affected t-1                 0.734                      0.320                     -3.609 *                   -0.625                     -1.802
                                                 (3.450)                    (2.660)                    (2.157)                    (2.996)                   (10.483)

Observations                                      668022                     632661                    647417                     559274                    559274
R2                                                 0.146                      0.133                     0.145                      0.180                     0.180
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per
capita number of people affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people
requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring basic survival needs such as food, water, she lter, sanitation, and immediate medical
assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational attainment
(tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies (Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, part-time employed,
unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixed-effects are constructed by
grouping individuals into deciles based on their income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Indiv idual income includes all wages and salaries in
the household, remittances from family members living elsewhere, and all oth er sources before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the World
Bank’s individual consumption PPP conversion factor, which makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the Gallup s ampling weights and robust standard errors
are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006 -2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                                      89
Appendix Table B.21: Multiple Hypothesis Testing
                                                   (1)                        (2)                       (3)
Outcome ➔                                  Have confidence in                                   Have confidence in
                                                                    Approval of the leader
                                          national government                                   honesty of elections
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                   -1.592 ***                  -1.957 ***               -2.258 ***
                                                (0.262)                     (0.330)                  (0.339)

The number of people affected t-1                 0.740                      0.120                     -3.625 *
                                                 (3.452)                    (2.712)                    (2.182)

Country fixed effects                               Yes                        Yes                       Yes
Year fixed effects                                  Yes                        Yes                       Yes
Age group fixed effects                             Yes                        Yes                       Yes
Individual income                                   Yes                        Yes                       Yes
Demographic characteristics                         Yes                        Yes                       Yes
Income decile fixed effects                         Yes                        Yes                       Yes
Labor market controls                               Yes                        Yes                       Yes
Country*Age trends                                  Yes                        Yes                       Yes
Cohort fixed effects                                Yes                        Yes                       Yes
Observations                                      760099                     719742                    736679
R2                                                 0.145                      0.133                     0.146
Mean of outcome                                     0.50                       0.51                      0.51
Randomization-c p-values                          0.020 **                  0.007 ***                  0.007 ***
Randomization-t p-values                          0.006 ***                 0.007 ***                  0.007 ***
Randomization-c p-values (joint test of treatment significance)                                                                  0.008 ***
Randomization-t p-values (joint test of treatment significance)                                                                    N/A
Randomization-c p-values (Westfall-Young multiple testing of treatment significance)                                             0.013 **
Randomization-t p-values (Westfall-Young multiple testing of treatment significance)                                             0.003 ***
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Randomization-t technique does not produce p-values for the joint test
of treatment significance. Results are derived from 100 iterations. Specification is Column 4 of Tables 2 -3-4. Results use the Gallup sampling
weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level.
Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017




                                                                                        90
Appendix Table B.22: Robustness to Excluding Potentially Bad Controls
                                                         (1)                          (2)                           (3)                          (4)
Outcome ➔                                        Have confidence in           Have confidence in            Have confidence in           Have confidence in
                                                national government          national government           national government          national government
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                          -1.073 *                    -1.733 ***                    -1.728 ***                    -0.506 **
                                                      (0.594)                      (0.262)                       (0.258)                      (0.223)

The number of people affected t-1                    0.548                         0.576                        0.581                             --
                                                    (3.478)                       (3.453)                      (3.450)
Observations                                        760099                        760099                       760099                        760099
Outcome ➔                                     Approval of the Leader        Approval of the Leader       Approval of the Leader        Approval of the Leader
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                       -1.521 ***                    -1.933 ***                   -1.991 ***                    -0.580 ***
                                                    (0.380)                       (0.313)                      (0.316)                       (0.123)

The number of people affected t-1                      0.201                        0.177                        0.151                            --
                                                      (2.696)                      (2.675)                      (2.679)
Observations                                         719742                        719742                       719742                       719742
Outcome ➔                                       Have confidence in            Have confidence in           Have confidence in           Have confidence in
                                                honesty of elections          honesty of elections         honesty of elections         honesty of elections
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                         -1.643 **                    -2.322 ***                   -2.367 ***                   -1.117 ***
                                                      (0.794)                      (0.362)                      (0.355)                      (0.255)

The number of people affected t-1                     -3.734 *                      -3.775 *                    -3.754 *                          --
                                                      (2.203)                       (2.211)                     (2.198)
Observations                                          736679                        736679                      736679                        736679
Country fixed effects                                    Yes                           Yes                         Yes                          Yes
Year fixed effects                                       Yes                           Yes                         Yes                          Yes
Age group fixed effects                                  Yes                           Yes                         Yes                          Yes
Country*Age trends                                       No                            Yes                         Yes                          Yes
Cohort fixed effects                                     No                            No                          Yes                          Yes
Country*Year fixed effects                               No                            No                          No                           Yes
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the
country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                                    91
Appendix Table B.23: Robustness to Alternative Treatment (i.e., Population Unadjusted Number of Affected People)
                                               (1)                      (2)                         (3)                       (4)                        (5)
Outcome ➔                             Have confidence in the    Approval of the Leader      Have confidence in        Average of all three        the 1st Principal
                                          government                                        honesty of elections       outcome variables       Component of Responses
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                -0.081 ***                 -0.100 **                -0.090 ***                 -0.091 ***                 -0.313 ***
                                             (0.029)                    (0.043)                  (0.014)                    (0.030)                    (0.105)

The number of people affected t-1             0.139 **                 0.223 ***                   0.035                    0.136 ***                  0.479 ***
                                              (0.060)                  (0.068)                    (0.039)                   (0.048)                    (0.170)

Country fixed effects                            Yes                       Yes                       Yes                     Yes                         Yes
Year fixed effects                               Yes                       Yes                       Yes                     Yes                         Yes
Age group fixed effects                          Yes                       Yes                       Yes                     Yes                         Yes
Individual income                                Yes                       Yes                       Yes                     Yes                         Yes
Demographic characteristics                      Yes                       Yes                       Yes                     Yes                         Yes
Income decile fixed effects                      Yes                       Yes                       Yes                     Yes                         Yes
Labor market controls                            Yes                       Yes                       Yes                     Yes                         Yes
Country*Age trends                               Yes                       Yes                       Yes                     Yes                         Yes
Cohort fixed effects                             Yes                       Yes                       Yes                     Yes                         Yes
Observations                                   770836                   731758                     746610                  644795                      644795
R2                                              0.149                    0.135                      0.146                   0.184                       0.184
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country
level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.




                                                                                    92
Appendix Table B.24: Evidence on Political Behaviour
                                                              (1)                          (2)                     (3)                         (4)
                                                        WWS - Attending                                    ESS - Taken part in a
Outcome is ➔                                             lawful/peaceful
                                                                                WWS – Never voted in
                                                                                                              lawful public          ESS - Voted in recent
                                                                                 national elections                                    national elections
                                                         demonstrations                                      demonstration

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                                 16.412*                    5.488                    53.041**                  -134.497**
                                                             (9.736)                   (7.014)                   (12.811)                   (59.276)

                                                            -14.926                    -0.005                     10.109                   -270.948**
The number of people affected t-1
                                                            (19.588)                   (0.011)                   (127.553)                  (116.562)

Observations                                                 103681                       32448                   171889                    128836
R2                                                            0.127                       0.101                    0.051                     0.110

                                                        WWS - Signed a            WWS - Joined in           WWS – Occupied              WWS - Joined
Outcome is ➔
                                                          petition                  boycotts               buildings or factories      unofficial strikes

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)                                18.944**                   19.322**                   -2.481                    -4.982
                                                            (7.811)                    (9.176)                    (5.330)                   (8.972)

The number of people affected t-1                           -16.000                     -1.362                    -7.416                     21.980
                                                            (25.386)                   (18.196)                  (13.027)                   (15.969)

Observations                                                 103851                     101088                     39440                      71851
R2                                                            0.226                      0.198                     0.081                      0.132
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%.. Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number of people
affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18 -25 years). The number of people affected refers to people requiring
immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical
assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married),
educational attainment (tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies (Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time
employed, part-time employed, unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under 15).
Income decile fixed-effects are constructed by grouping individuals into deciles based on their income relative to other individuals within the s ame country
and year. Results use the sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country-wave level. Source: World Values Survey (WVS), 1981-
2014; European Social Survey (ESS), 2002-2018); and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.



                                                                                     93
Appendix C: Case Studies on the Association of Government Strength with
Policy Interventions in the Context of COVID-19

Appendix Figures C.1-C.3 show COVID-19 related developments in South Korea, France,
and the United Kingdom. We choose these countries because they followed very different
trajectories in terms of public attention, policy interventions, and the spread of the virus. South
Korea, France, and the United Kingdom are broadly similar in terms of their GDP per capita,
urbanization, and population age structure (median age in all three countries is roughly 41).
But they differ in terms of government strength: the ICRG score is 8.25 for Sou th Korea, 7.5
for France, and 6 for the United Kingdom. 69

The figures show the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases and deaths, public attention to
COVID-19 as measured by Google Trends, and the date of the first non -pharmaceutical
intervention (school closure, workplace closure, public event cancellation, public transport
closure, or restrictions on within-country movement in the own country). We also report the
number of days between the date of the first confirmed case and the date of the first COVID-
19 non-pharmaceutical intervention.

In South Korea, public attention rose rapidly after the first domestic case. The government
responded within 11 days of the first case with domestic interventions aimed at curbing the
epidemic. In France and the UK, in contrast, public attention remained low for several weeks
after the first reported case. In France, domestic restrictions were imposed only after 36 days,
while the UK government waited 45 days before imposing the first restrictions. These slow
reactions were associated with rapid growth in confirmed cases and deaths in both countries.
Simple comparisons among countries are complicated by the existence of other influences,
such as past exposure to epidemics. 70 Still, these comparisons are suggestive of the idea that
government strength is positively associated with the speed of response to the outbreak.


69
   The relatively low score for the UK may come as a surprise to readers but it is worth noting that: (i) it registered
a significant fall since the Brexit Referendum (8.46 was the 2015 score); (ii) ICRG’s government strength score
include points for government unity, legislative strength and popular support. That the UK has had minority and
coalition governments may therefore account for its ranking. Recent anecdotal evidence also reflects the low
government strength score of the UK. For example, As the Economist wrote in June, 2020: “The painful
conclusion is that Britain has the wrong sort of government for a pandemic—and, in Boris Johnson, the wrong
sort of prime minister. Beating the coronavirus calls for attention to detail, consistency and implementation, but
they are not his forte.” See:
https://www.economist.com/leaders/2020/06/18/britain-has-the-wrong-government-for-the-covid-crisis
70
   Thus, it has been suggested that Asian countries responded quickly because of their past experience with Avian
flu.

                                                          94
Appendix Figure C.1: COVID-19 Related Developments in South Korea
ICRG Government Strength score: 8.25




Note: This figure shows daily measures of public attention to COVID-19 measured as the share of Google searchers (left axis) and the
number of COVID-19 cases and deaths (right axis), as well as the dates of the first case, first death, and first policy in South Korea. Source:
Google Trends (1/1/2020-31/3/2010), JHCRC (1/1/2020-31/3/2010), and ICRG (2018).




                                                                                       95
Appendix Figure C.2: COVID-19 Related Developments in France
ICRG Government Strength score: 7.5




Note: This figure shows daily measures of public attention to COVID-19 measured as the share of Google searchers (left axis) and the
number of COVID-19 cases and deaths (right axis), as well as the dates of the first case, first death, and first policy in France. Source:
Google Trends (1/1/2020-31/3/2010), JHCRC (1/1/2020-31/3/2010), and ICRG (2018).




                                                                                     96
Appendix Figure C.3: COVID-19 Related Developments in the United Kingdom
ICRG Government Strength score: 6




Note: This figure shows daily measures of public attention to COVID-19 measured as the share of Google searchers (left axis) and the number
of COVID-19 cases and deaths (right axis), as well as the dates of the first case, first death, and first policy in the United Kingdom . Source:
Google Trends (1/1/2020-31/3/2010), JHCRC (1/1/2020-31/3/2010), and ICRG (2018).




                                                                                       97
