NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MANAGEMENT

OF A

COMMON CURRENCY

Alessandra Casella
Jonathan

Feinstein

Working Paper No. 2740

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH

1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1988

is part of NBER's research program in International Studies.
opinions expressed are those of the authors not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
This research
Any

NBER Working Paper #2740
October 1988

MANAGEMENT OF A

COMMON

CURRENCY

ABSTRACT

This

counpaper presents a simple general equilibrium model of two

tries using a common currency. The goal is to study how the monetary
arrangement influences the optimum financing of a public good.
If the two countries are allowed to print the common currency
autonomously, they will finance their fiscal spending with money,
oversupplying the public good and crowding out the private sector.
The possibility to export part of the inflation creates a distortion
in incentives such the resulting equilibrium is strictly welfare inferior to the one prevailing under flexible exchange rates.
If the management of the common currency is deferred to an international central bank, each country will try to use domestic policy variables (taxes) to manipulate in its favor the actions of the bank.
With no independent domestic taxes, the bank can improve welfare.
However, its policies naturally support the larger country, and to induce the smaller one to participate requires giving it a disin the
proportionately large, politically unrealistic, representation

bank's objective function.

Alessandra Casella
Economics Department
University of California
Berkeley, California 94720

Jonathan Fejnstein
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, California 94305

Common Currency -

2

Introduction
The possibility of European monetary integration has been frequently discussed in
the past few decades; see for example the volumes edited by Fratianni and Peeters (1979),
Johnson and Swoboda (1973), Salin (1984), and Masera and Triffin (1984) . Much of
the debate derives from the theory of optimum currency arms originally proposed by
Mundell (1961) and extended by McKinnon(1963) (see also a useful recent discussion in
Wood (1986)). More generally, Fischer (1983) provides an enlightening commentaryon
the problems involved. While interesting issues have emerged, the literature has remained
informal, with few attempts to provide a systematic foundatii __ which to base arguments
for and against common currency.
Our purpose in writing this paper is to present a formai two auntry general equilibrium framework in which the questionof alternativemonetzysystems can be addressed,
in the spirit of Helpman (1981) and Helpman and Ftazin (122) We are especiallyinterested in contrastingthree monetary regimes, flexible exchange rates, a commoncurrency
whose management is
issued autonomously by both countries, and a common
delegated to a jointly controlled central bank. Flexible exchangerates are the appropriate
reference case, since they will prevail whenever either country deviates from the common
currency agreement. We keep our model very simple, especially in that we assume complete information and consider only the case of two countries. As an added simplification,
we summarize each country's welfare in terms of a single representative citizen. The citizen possesses a parametericutility function which depends on both the home and foreign
goods, which are different, and on the home country government's provision of a public
good. Money is needed to help finance the public good, which alternatively can be financed
through lump sum taxation.
Broadly stated, we find that establishinga common currency area is difficult, because
each country views such a system as a means of exploiting the other. These pervasive
free rider problems tend to reduce both countries' welfares. often below that which they
achieve under flexible exchange rates. Of course, these difficulties are of the same nature as
those studied in the literature on international policy coordination, from Hamada (1976)

rrey

onwards.
More specifically, when the two countries maintain a ocnmon currrency which each
can print, the free rider problem leads to an equilibrium tlaiitt is strictly dominated by the
flexible exchange rate case. In our model this result is &las true, but more generally

Common Currency -

3

it will be true when governments weigh the utility of future generations sufficiently. We
argue, therefore, that such a regime is not enforceable, since both countries would have
an incentive to deviate by issuing a national currency. This first result suggests that the
organization of a jointly controlled central bank is crucial for a common currency, and
we devote much of the paper to this case. Unfortunately, even here coordination can be
difficult. When the countries maintain control over taxation the central bank is unable
to improve over the flexible exchange rate system: each country uses its tax policy to
manipulate the Bank, hoping thereby to strengthen its position vis-a-vis the other, but in
the process attenuating Bank effectiveness. With no taxes, the Bank can improve welfare.
However, ifthe influence of each country on the decisions of the central bank is proportional

to the country's relative wealth, an agreement is attainable only if the two economies are
either comparable or extremely asymmetrical in size.
As mentioned, the model is very simple and we do not claim these results to be
general. Nonetheless, the incentive effects which arise are likely to be important in evaluating a variety of suggestions for monetary integration. Our results also suggest that
considerably more attention should be addressed to the specific organizationalfeatures of
a jointly controlled central bank. In particular the following seem relevant: the mechansim
design literature; the application of Groves' mechanisms as a way for the central bank to
coordinate countries' fiscal interventions;and the political forces lying behind the Bank's
charter and decision-making body.

Model Specification
The world is comprised of two countries, Red and Blue (R and B). Each period,
citizens of each country are born with a fixed endowment of their respective good; Red
are born with 9, Blue with (2 — 9). When young, the citizens sell their endowmenton a
competitive market in their home country. When old, they spend the proceeds from their
previous period's sales on purchases of both the domesticand the foreign good; they then

return home, consume, and exit the economy.1 All transactions happen through money.
In addition to the private goods, the consumers' utility depends on the provision
of a public good (as in Kehoe (1987)). While demand for the public good might be
independentof events in the private sector (for example military spending), we prefer to
think of it as directly related to the trading process itself. Thus for example the Red

Common Currency - 4

Blue markets may be situated on the border between the two countries; to arrive at
the markets consumers travel on roads maintained by their respective govenments. If the
roads are in poor condition, purchased goods depreciate substantially before consumption
and

is possible.
More formally,

Up = O.5log(Cftjj) + O.5log(Cajtt)

= O.5log(CB) + O.51og(C)

C denotes
t

j

consumption of good i by a citizen of country in timeperiod t, and for each

period

CRIt

= rRR

CBR

= FBR

r>0

= FBg

CRB

= FR8

b> 0

with R, (B1) being the quantity of good R (B) purchased by a citizen of country j during
t, and F3 representing provision of the public good by the government of country in the

j

period.
The government supplies the public good by collecting resources from the private
sector. This can be done either in the form of direct lump sum taxation of the citizens'
endowments (denoted Tj, = R, B ), or throughthe expenditureof fiat moneyon the
domestic market (M,,j = R, B ). For each period we define

j

F3 = 7,

+ m3

where

inj =
with p, the nominal price on market j.2
Depending on the monetary regime between the two countries, we can solve for
the equilibrium prices on the private markets as a function of the governments' policies.
This results in country specific indirect utility functions, which the governments in turn
maximize over the variables T3 and M3.
The interest of this simple model rests precisely in the interactionbetween the two
governments' policies. Each country's welfare function depends on foreign choices of taxes
and money, and lack of cooperation leads to suboptimal equilibrium.

Common Currency-

5

In thenext sections we study different forms of monetary (and fiscal) linkages between
the countries; we are interested in which types of linkages lead to effective coordination
of the governments' actions and achieve the highest welfare outcomes. We focus on three
possible regimes: flexible exchange rates, a common fiat currency printed autonomously
by the two governments, and delegation of monetary policy to a common central bank.3

Flexible Exchange Rates
Each country issues its own currency which must be used on the local market. Exchange rates are perfectly flexible and there are no transactionscosts.
In period I the red consumer maximizes

= r1og(rft) + O.5log(R4rjt) + O.5log(Bat)

(1R)

subject to the budget constraint
PRtRRE

where

+ etPBtBRi = PR(t_1)(RR(t_i) + RB(t_l) + ma(g_fl)

(2R)

e is the exchange rate (defined as units of Red Currency required in exchange for

one unit of Blue Currency), PR,(z—i) is the nominal price on the Red market last period,
and mRt is the real money spent by the Red government on the Red market. (The lefthand-side of equation (2R) gives the nominal income earned by a red consumer through
the previous period sale of his endowment.)
Similarly a Blue consumer maximizes
UBf

= b1og(r) + O.5lo9(B3g) + O.51og(Ra)

(1B)

subject to

epB5 +pRtRB = efpa(t_l)(BB(_l) + Bg_1) + ma(t_s))

(2B)

Equilibium conditions on the two markets are

9—Tg =Rpj+R+mt
2—9—Tm

=Bm+BRt+rnnt

(3R)
(3B)

Cmmon Currency - 6

functions
(where recall that 9 and 2—8 are the initial endowments),ading to the demand
RRI

—

=

BRt

PRt

— 8

P(—!(2
Rj=—

8—

BB= PB(f_i)(2 PBt

etPBI

2pis

2pRt
—

—

= PR(t—!(

—

TB(_j))

4)

CtPBj

PR

—PB

Substituting these demands in (3R) and (3B) deternüs the market clearing price

2—9—
PRt
Pt=—=
—L
etpBt
and the equilibriumrelationshipbetween the two instini
2—8— TB(j_l)

1—
2(1

+ lrBt)(2 —9-- F8)

where (1 + irt) =

+

(5)

rt

(6)

Z(H-(—Tiu)

reqii that the nominal amount spent

Equilibrium on the Red Currency market
last period (by Red and Blue consumers and the
private demand for Red currency this period:4
PRtRBt + PRtRRt

d ernment)

equal the nominal

= Pj_i)(mR(_i) + Re_i + RB(t_1))

(7)

With the budget constraint (2R) this implies
pp.Rm =

(8)

the equality of cross currency nominaldemands. Su titnnting from the expressions for the
equilibrium price (5) and the demand functions we
1

+

1

+ 7rBt

—
—

T_1 • 2— —
— rR
9—

9 —

2

—

(9)

TB(t_1)

Finally, (9) and (6) can be solved for the two infla±ik rats:
9

l+Rt

—

1+Tr

9—

T8_1

2—9—Fm

(10)

Demands for the Red and Blue goods are then giviPn

= (9 —/,2

(11R)

Common Currency - 7

and

B81

= BRI = (2—9— r8)/2

(11B)

and the utility functions can he written

= rlog(F) + O.5log(O — rRl) + O.5log(2 — 9 — Fm)

—

log(2)

(12R)

= blog(r81)

—

log(2)

(12B)

O.ölog(2 —

+ O.ölog(9 — F31)

9—

Each government chooses the path {Tjt, vnt} that maximizes the discounted sum of

its citizens' utilities:
max

{T m}

=E
1=0

£ is the discount rate reflecting the length of the governments' horizon.
The interactionbetween the governments may therefore be formulated as a dynamic
game, possessing multiple equilibria. Since instantaneousutilities only depend on contem= U1(T1, m1)), we can easily solve for one possible
poraneous policy variables (i.e.
equilibrium of this game: the "static" equilibriumin which dynamic interactions are neglected, reducing the dynamic case to a sequence of repetitions of the "one-shot" (single
period) game. The static solution is a perfect equilibrium of the full dynamic game.
Maximization of CT31 over F31 and Uet over F81 yields optimal expenditure policies,
which are constant over time:
where

U

2r9

2b(2 —

8= 1+2b9)

(13)

Two points are noteworthy. First, whether a country's public good is financed by taxes
or by flat money is irrelevant. An increase in the proportion financed by money increases
inflation, while leading at the same time to a proportionate depreciation of the exchange
rate. Thus the higher nominal wealth of the country's citizens does not translate into a
higher share of world resources. Second, the governments' decisions are independent of
one another, even though each country's citizens' utility depends on the other country's
policy; this finding is special to the simple Cobb-Douglas utility form we have specified.
Since each government neglects the effect of its public expenditure on the other
country's welfare, the non-cooperative Nash equilibrium we have derived is not Pareto
optimal. In fact, the two countries spend too large a fraction of their resources on the
public good. The intuition is straightforward. An increase in government expenditure

Common Currency -

the supply of goods for private consumption. While residents are compensated by
the additionalsupply of the public good, foreigners, in our model, do not benefit from it in
any way. A central planner, maximizing the sum of the two country's welfare (URt + U2),
reduces

would set
.——
R1+
—

r

B

—

b(2—6)

1+b

SimulationMethodology
Each of the models presented has been simulated over a range of parameter values.
We concentrate on variation in two parameters: 6, which measures the relative size of
Red as opposed to Blue; and r (with b fixed) which measures Red's relative desire for the
public good (the size of the public sector). To calibrate these parameters, considerthe lefthand-side of Table 1, which lists the European countries which are members of the EEC,
together with their GDP (in ECU units) and the share of GDP devoted to government.
The right-hand-sideof Table 1 depicts the ranges of 6, i-, and 6 chosen. The variable &
ranges from 1.0 (equal size) through 1.25 and 1.50 to 1.75 (7 to 1 size differential), while
his fixed at 1/2 (government's share is then one third) and r ranges over 1/4,1/2, and 1.

Simulation of Flexible Exchange Rate Regime
Figure 1 illustrates Red and Blue utility under flexible exchange rates as a function
of the relative endowment (6), for different values of r (Red's need for the public good).
As 6 increases, the share of world resources owned by the Blue country falls, and so does
Blue welfare. As the weight of the public good in Red utility, r, increases, so does the
intervention of the Red government in the Red market. This implies a decrease in the
proportion of Red goods available for private consumption,and therefore a loss of utility
for Blue nationals.
In the Red country, an increase in 6 increases national wealth, but reduces relative
world supply of the Blue good. The two effects tend to counteract each other, the first
dominating for & close to one and the second becoming progressively more important, until
Red utility begins to fall for 6 approximately larger than 1.5. The relevance of this second
effect is smaller, as expected, when the publicgood plays a larger role in utility (r higher).

Table

I

Calibration of Modal Parameters

European Statistics

Government
Share

Belgium
Denmark
W. Germany
Greece

Spain
France

Ireland

Italy
Luxembourg

(1984)

(1984)

96.9
68.7
783.8
42.7
198.5
623.3
22.2
445.3

17.4
25.9
13.6
19.0
12.3
16.4
19.0
19.4
15.7
16.8

4.4

157.9
24.4
540.3
United Kingdom

Netherlands
Portugal

Parameter Values
Government
Share

1.0 (equal)
1.25 (1.67 to
1.50 (3 to 1)
1.75 (7 to 1)

1/4 (20%)

1)1/2
1

(33%)
(50%)

21.9

Taken from Eurostat: Basic Statistics of the European Community.
of the European
Luxenbourg: Office for Official Publications
Communities, 1987.

FIgure

1

Utilities Under Flexible Exchange Rates
Blue utility
UB
—1.

.3

1/4
1/2

1.0

1.25

1.50

1.75

b—1/2

2.00

0

Red Utility

-1 .0-

f—il4
r—I

-2.0

r— 1/2

-3.0

1

1.0

1.25

1.50

I

1.75

I

2.00

e

b—1/2

-

Common

Common Currency

Currency-

Printed by Both Countries

Suppose now that the two countries use the same currency, and that each country
maintains a central bank and can print as much of the currency as it likes. This seems the
natural setting for the case of perfectly substitutable currencies studied in the literature
(see for example Kareken and Wallace (19S1))6, and is to be distinguished from the case
of a common currency printed by a joint central bank.
Derivation of the demand functions is identical to the flexible exchange rate case
with set equal to 1 for all t. Substitution of (4) in the two goods markets' equilibrium
conditions yields the equilibriumrelative price:

e

Pt

= Pm
— = 2—8—F3

8—F

Pat

and inflation rates:
1+

—8—
7r = (1/2) [8—8 T_1) + (8(9 —FR(t))(2
Fm)(2 9 —
—

1+rat(1/2)
Demands can

(14R)

—

2 — 9 — B(t—i)

2—9—

+ (2

8 — F8(1))(9 —
(2—9— r3)(9 —
—

(142)

then be written

= (9— r)(8 — TRO_fl)(2 —9 — FB(t_t)) •

(15)

= (2 — 9— I'Bt)(O — Tft(ti))(2 —9 — ['n(t_i)) •
= (2—9— r3)(8 — Fft(t))(2 —9— TB(t_l)) •
= (9 — r)(9 — Fp(j_i))(2

—9 — TB(C_fl)

•

where

=
Instantaneous

(2—9— T30_i))(9

—

r1_11) + (2— 9 — FB1_11)(9

—

utilites are given by
Upj = rlog(Fft)
log(2 —

+ log(O — Tg(_l)) + O.Slog(& —

9 — t'B(j_l))

+ O.Slog(2

—8—

r)+

F) + log(Lt)

(16R)

Conim,n Currency - 10

UBt

+ log(2 —9— TB(1..l)) + O.5log(2

blog(rB()

log(8 — rR(_l))

—8--

(16B)

r) + log()

+ O.5log(9 —

The utility of a consumer at time t now depends both on contemporaneous and last
period government policies. However, the problem is greatly simplified by the additively
separable form of the utility function. At time t, a government maximizing the present
discountedsum of its citizens' utilities can isolate the terms depending on its period t policies. Redefining this sum as the government payoff of the "one-shot" game, the repetition
of the static solution yields once more a perfect equilibrium for the dynamic problem, in
which each period policy is independentof the previous period choice.
Taking into consideration only the relevant terms, the red government will act at
time so as to maximize the expression

rlog(Rj) + O.5log(8

—

I'rn) + 6[log(8 —

TRI)

+ log(At+i)]

(17R)

subject to the constraint FR = mkt + TRt. Similarly, the blue government maximizes
blog(FBt) + O.5log(2

—8 —

FBt) +

[iog(

— 8—

TRt) + !og(At+i)]

(17B)

subjectto FBI = mm + TBI.
In contrast to the flexible exchange rate regime, the policy mix between money and
taxes is now relevant to welfare. The first important observationis that, in this framework,
the optimal level of taxes is zero in both countries. Collecting revenues through seignorage
has a positive effect on the relative wealth of nationals next period, because the world
inflationrate rises less than proportionately. Since this is not true for taxes, all government
expenditure will be completely financed by fiat money.
In fact the equations (17R) and (17B) can he written

rlog(F1) + O.5log(& — FRt) — 6log [(2 —8— F81) +

8

(2
(9
—

blog(F81) + O.5log(2 —8

FBI) — 6log [(8 —

—

TBI)

T1)

(8—

F) + (.9(8 8— T81) (2
TR1)

8—

—

—

FBI)]

For given FRI and F81 each function is strictly decreasing in domestic taxes.
Setting T81 = TRI = 0 for all t, the governments' problems may be rephrasedas:
max rlog(mj)+ .5log(8 — fliRt)

+ [iog() — log[8(2 — 8— mm) + (2

—

&)(8

—

mm)]

Common Currency-

Ii

(18)
max blog(ma) + .Slog(2 —8—mat)

+ 5 [iog(2 —8)-— log[(2 — 9)(8 — mm) + 9(2—8—mat)]

with mRt and mat each restricted to the unit interval.
The nature of the solution dependson the value of 5 (the length of the governments'
horizon). If S is equal to zero (the governments do not consider future generations'utilities),
then optimal policy is identical to the flexible exchange rate considered above.
mRt =

2r8
1

+ 2r
—

8)
mat= 25(2
1+25

Utilities are also equal to the flexible exchange rate case. However, as S increases (as
the governments give more weight to future generations'utilities), the optimum amount of
money becomes larger since its only partial effect on world inflation allows each government

to increase the purchasing power of its future citizens. At the same time, utilities become
lower, as the Nash equilibrium yields ever higher world inflation. Eventually, for S equal to
one (the governments care equally about current and future generations), this monetary
regime fails to possess a Nash equilibrium: for any amount of currency issued by the foreign
government, the home government desires to supply more.
In the simple case 8 = 2—9 = 1, the first order conditions associated with optimization problems (18) are:

r =

mm
b

2(1

=

mm)

1

+

5

(2— mat — mm)
5

+

=
—
—o

(2 — mat — mat)
and r = S = 0.5, these expressions can be further simplified:
mm

If S = 1

1
—

2(1 — mat)

mat =

mat — 2
2mat

—3

(19)

mm —2
mat =
2mat — 3
Examination of the equations (19) demonstrates that the two reaction functions do not
intersect within the relevant range [0, 1]X[0, 11.

Cornon Currency

- 12

,

of we were unable to obtain a simple closed form solution,
and we checked our intuition with numerical simulations. The results of the simulations,
confirming the expected outcome, are depicted in Figure 2. The conclusion does not depend
on the symmetry of this simple example. Different endowments (9 1) or different needs
for the public good (r b) did not alter the qualitative nature of our result.7
The important point established by this exercise is that, at least in our model, independent printing of a common currency by national central banks is strictly dominated
by the flexible exchange rate regime, and is not, therefore, a viable institutional arrangement. Each country ha.s an incentive to deviate, printing a new currencyand requiring its
exclusive use on the domestic markets.
The source of this result lies in two effects. The first one relates to the distortion
caused by non-cooperation between the two governments in the flexible exchange rate
regime. In our model, the two public sectors in a Nash equilibrium with national currencies
are too large. The second effect is the free-rider problem connected with the shift to a
common money. If 8 is different from zero, such a shift implies an ever higher level of
spending by the governments (this is quite general, and does not depend on our specific
assumptions). When the two effects are added, the result, or course, is that the institution
of a common currency exacerbates the already present distortion and leads to a decrease in
welfare. While our result remains true in models in which flexible exchange rates achieve
the first best, in a more general setting the welfare comparison would depend on 8. We
believe that it is always possible to identify a 8 < 1 such that welfare under flexible
exchange rates is inferior to welfare under common currency and national central banks if
and only if 8 < 8 In our model, 6 = 0.
For different values

Common Central Bank
Suppose now that the two countries have agreed on the institution of a common
central bank to whom decisions concerning the fiat currencyare deferred. The central bank
acts to maximize the weighted sum of the utility of its members, with the weightsreflecting
the proportional representation of each country. The Bank determines the paths over time
of three quantities, aggregate world money supply, the fraction of that amount spent on
each market, and the distribution of seignorage (which may differ from the distribution of
money purchases on the two markets) between the two countries.

flgure2
Common Currency, NationalCentral Banks
Utilities as a Function of the DiscountRate
The Case S Equal to 1.0, rand b Equal to ).5

Blue and Red
Utility
flexible exchange rates

-3.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0
S

Common Currency - 13

to
Competition betweenthe two countries now emerges indirectly,in the struggle masome
to
the
"common
agency"
relationship
nipulate Bank policy, in fact, the setup bears
framework of Beraheim and Whinston(1986), although we assume that all Bank actions
are observable, and, as an initial simple example, that full information about each coun-

try's parameters is common knowledge. We also, for the time being, assume that the
of its endowment
weight of each country in aggregate welfare is proportional to the size
("proportionalrepresentation");we may think of these weights as the countries' relative
on
bargaining powers. While this arrangement is ad hoc, it is a reasonable reference point
which further extensions can be built.
The central bank maximizes
S1

[OURI

+ (2 — 8)UBI]

with respect to {sRt, sm, mR,, mTh} and the constraints that sm + SBI equal rnft + mBt =
are seignorage revenues
rn1 and that mat not exceed 8 and m1 not exceed 2—9. Here
distributed to country z in period t and rn,1 is the real amount of fiat currency spent on
market

i

during t.

In general, the two countries can supplement Bank action with their own fiscal and
monetary interventions. However, as the earlier analysis showed, in the case of common
currency, free and independent issuing of money by the two governments results in lower
welfare. This remains true when the governments'decisions coexist with a central bank.8
More interesting, and relevant, is the case in which each government retains its right
to collect taxes from its nationals, while monetary policy is fully delegated to the central
bank. Quite suprisingly, it is possible to prove that in this regime it is optimal for the
central bank to set new money issues to zero. The two countries will completely finance
themselves through taxes, and will achieve exactly the same welfare as in the flexible
exchange rate case.
The intultion is as follows. For any positive amount of real money injected into
the domestic market, an increase in taxes implies a reduction in the availability of the
domestic good in the private sector, and hence a rise in its relative price (relative to the

other country's good). This requires a higher level of nominal money from the Bank to
achieve the same real money injection, thereby increasing nationals' relative wealth.
In other words, if mR and mB are positive, each governmentchooses a level of
expenditure that is larger than in the flexible exchange rate case, in the effort to exploit

Common Currency - 14

central bank policy to its own purposes. In equilibrium, this implies a welfare loss. If
instead mR and mB are botb set to zero by the central bank, it is easy to show (by
comparing equations (16) and (12)) that the current problem is identical to the flexible
exchange rate case.
Slightly more formally, the conclusion follows from proving that, for any n-z1, the
marginal utility of taxes in country .j is higher in the common currency regime than in

the flexible exchange case. Substituting the demand functionsgiven in (4), we obtaln the
discounted sum of the citizens' utility,
dW

—
—

d(jlog(r)
8[0

05dogXt)

d2

dT1

dT

d(log(X(+i)) +

dT

dT

which may be evaluated as
dWj

dT

.i

m1 +

d(1og(1+ir)

05d(1o(9—m3t—T31)

dT1
—

51d(log(6,

dT

I')

—

(20)

d(log(1 +

In the flexible exchange rate regime, lrjt is given by equation (10); in the common currency
regime by equation (14). Examinationof these equations demonstrates that d(los+) is
the same in both, whereas d(1og(1+,1,+n) is larger in the flexible exchange rate regime for
all rn1 different from zero. Since all other terms in equation (20) are the same across the
two regimes, the result follows.5
In our model, if the governments retain their fiscal powers, not only is the central
bank incapable of improving coordination between the two countries, but in addition any
action it takes serves only to introduce incentives driving the countries further away from
a first-best outcome. Once again, the unqualifiedstrength of this result depends on the
specific assumptions of the model (the direction of the distortion in the flexible exchange
rate regime; the lump-sum character of the taxes and their effect on the terms of trade).
The point we want to stress is general, however, and, we believe, important: the presence
of a common currency, even under the control of a central planner. is the source of
additional potential distortions. In a world which is not Pareto optimal, the final outcome
would then depend on second-best types of arguments.

Common Currency . 15

Consider now the extreme case in which the two governments are not allowed to
collect taxes. The only resources available for the supply of the public good are, in each
country, those ditributed as seignorage by the central bank.
Since the central bank maximizes weighted aggregate social welfare, its choices will
clearly constitute a first best arrangementin this case; what is less clear is how the coun-

tries' weights translate into individual country utility, particularly as compared with the
earlier monetary regimes.
are given by equation (16), setting TR and
The instantaneousutilities URt and
for
convenience:
TBt to zero. They are rewrittenhere

U

Uj1 = rlog(sju) + O.5log(2
log(O)

—

9—

m)+

(16R)

+ log(2 — 9 — mB(t_1)) + O.5log(9 — mRt) + 1og()

U = blog(søt)+ O.5log(2

—

9—

m)+

log(2 — 9) + log(8 — m,(t_l)) + O.5log(&

—

(16B)

mRt) + log(z.t)

where
(2— 6)(9

—

mR(t_1>)

+ (2—9— mB(t_1))&

As above, the central bank maximizes the weighted sum of discountedutilities.
If 9 = 2 — 9 = 1, the optimal choice for the central bank is characterized by
following equations:

the

s = —mt
r+b
b

=

TflBt

mt

=

2(r + b)

+ b+2
(Note that does not enter these expressions.) The total amount of money is spent on the
two markets in equal proportions, while the division of seignorage is determined by the
relative need for the public good.
For 9
1 (and c c 0), we have not been able to obtain a closed form solution,
and we present the results of numerical simulations. In Figure 3 the welfare of the two
countries is depicted as a function of the relativesize of the endowments and of the weight
of the public good in Red utility (for = .910). As 9 increases, the Blue country becomes
c5

r

Common Currency -

16

poorer and has less influence on the decisions of the central bank. As expected, its utility
declines. The Blue country's utility is also lower the higher is r, since a higher r implies a
proportionallylower Blue share in the division of seignorage. This second effect becomes
more important the larger is 8.
As in the flexible exchange rate case, the Red utility increases with 8, until the
negativeeffect of the Blue good's scarcity starts to dominate the positive impact of larger
national wealth and larger bargaining power. The relative importance of the negative
effect (scarcity of the Blue good) is lower the larger is the weight of the public good in
Red utility, since a larger r gives added relevance to Red's increased bargaining power in
the sharing of seignorage revenues.

Welfare Comparisons
It is now possible to compare utility levels across different monetaryregimes, as functions of the parameters. Since the common currency— national central banks arrangement
is strictly dominated by the flexible exchange rate case, we havealready argued that such a
regime cannot be sustainedin our model. In addition, we haveprovedthat when the countries agree on a common currency and a common central bank, but retain fiscal powers,
the equilibrium reduces identically to the one characterizing flexible exchange rates. The

interesting comparison is thereforebetween the latter regime and the case in which, with
a common currency, the financing of the public good is entirely deferred to the common
central bank.
In Figure 4, the welfares of the two countries under the two regimes are drawn as a
function of 8, the relativeendowment of the Red. When 8 is close to one the two countries
have similar wealth and similar bargainingpower. The central bank case then achieves a
first best allocation which is preferred to flexible exchange rates by both the Blue and the
Red. However, as 8 increases the bargaining power of the Blue country falls (recall that
representationis proportional). By the time the Red country is 25% bigger than the Blue
(8 equal to 1.125)Blue prefersthe flexible exchange rate regime: it will deviate, issuing its
own currency and requiring the currency to be used on the Blue market, thereby moving
the world economy back to the flexible exchange rate regime.
The relative attractiveness of the two regimes dependsin a predictableway on Red's
relative need for the public good (see Figure 5). As r falls (diminished need) Blue's

Pun3
Utilities underCentral Bank
(MoneyOnly)
The Cue $ Equal to .9

(a)

Blue utility
UB

r=1/4

r.1/2

b=1/2

r-1
1.0

1.25

1.50

2.00

1

a

(a)

Red Utility

rr1/2

UR

1

• .0-

-3.0-

1

r..1/4

-

.0

1

.25

1.50

1.75

2.00

a

b—1/2

Comparizon of Utilities Under
flexible Exchange Rates and Central Bank

TheCase$Equalto.9,randbEqualto.S
Blue utility
UB

-1.0.

-2.
flexible exchange rates

central bank

1.25

1.0

1.50

a

Red Utility
UR

-1 .0-

central baak

-2.0flexible exchange

-3.0-

1

.0

1

.25

1

.50

1.75

2.00

8

rates

Comparisonof UWitle. Under
flexible Exchange Rates and Central Bank
Dependence on Need for the Public Good
TheCase$ Equal to9,bEqual to3e Equal to 1.0

Blue utility

central bank

exib1e exchange rates
-3.0-

I

0.0

0.25

I

0.50

I

0.75

1.00
r

Red Utility
UR

flexible exchangerates

-3.0I

0.0

0.25

I

0.50

I

0.75

1

1.00
r

FIgze6
Zone of Participation

Central Bank
cMoney Only)

TheCase 5Equalto.9,randbEqualtoi

Red
2.
Weighting

1.75

1

1

.7'

.5'

Common Currency - 17

preference for the central bank increases, and so does the difference in bargaining power
necessary for the Blue government to abandon the central bank agreement. As for the Red
country, an increase in B has, in both regimes, the two opposite effects discussed above. In

the central bank case, the growing scarcity of the Blue good is partially compensated by
Red's increased bargaining power.
What is especially interesting is the finding that proportional representation,in
which a country's influence on the Bank is proportional to its size, is not a feasible system
for even modest deviations of B from one. Figure 6 explores this issue further, plotting
the "zone of participation" for the central bank money only case. The shaded region is,
for each 9, the range of weights for which both countries find the central bank preferrable
to the default flexible exchange rate regime. The forty-five degree line corresponds to
proportional representation and the horizontal axis to a one country — one vote system.
As noted above, by the time 9 reaches 1.125, proportional representation is not in the
feasible (participation) zone. Even though belonging to the union would eliminate the
externality, the small country would enjoy less of the public good than under flexible
exchange rates, and would face worsened terms of trade in the private markets. These two
negative effects disappear as the asymmetry between the two countries widens.
Therefore we reach the (not implausible) conclusion that a common central U-nk
might be relatively easy to establishin a world of either equal or highly unequal trading
partners, but not otherwise.

Extensions
We believe the model presented here couldbe usefully extendedin several directions.
First, we could investigate more fully the mechanism design problem facing the two countries in the creation of an "optimal" central bank. Since the sharing of power is crucial to
the willingness of countries to participate, devising an appropriate system of representation
seems to be a crucial issue.
Second, the extension of our model to a multi-country world would be nontrivial.
The incentives to join or abandon the union, and the choice of policy, presumably held

in common by all members, towards outsiders are examples of important questions that
would require analysis.
Third, we can study optimal policy in a world of uncertainty. What we specifically
in
have mind is a situation where the Red country knows r and the Blue b, but neither

Common Currency -

18

country knows the other; by assumption the central bank observes neither r or b, and
must solicit each from the respective countries, designing incentives which ensure these
are reported truthfully. We would guess that it will be difficult for the central bank to do
better in this case than in the perfect information examplewe have presented.
Finally, there is a more fundamental point that needs to be addressed. While the
model we built can be used to study the potential for policy coordination in different monetary regimes, it does not address an important aspect of the current European debate.
Specifically, nowhere does it demonstrate (derive endogenously) a need amongst the countries for a common currency, and more generally, common institutions, such as common
Snancial and bank laws. This problem is general and very important. Welfare improving
Irade between agents requires efficient communication,and this requirement becomesmore
rrucial as the economy grows, with technology becoming more sophisticated and fields of
specialization narrower. Traders who "speak a different language" will not only suffer
transactions costs, but will increasingly lose opportunities and information. Eventually,
they might remain confined to a secluded, low productivity corner of a global market. We
are currently developing analyses which address these points.11

Common Currency -

19

Footnotes
We thank participants in the Castelgandolfo Conference on European monetary
systems held during June 16-17, 1988, and especially our discussants Torsten Persson and
Guido Tabellini. for comments.
1Simple technical assumptions can give rise to the described sequence of transactions. Suppose, for example, that each good comes in a specific variety and each consumer
has specific preferences. Then a competititivemarket will be needed to provide optimal

matching.
2lii this formulation governments are prohibitedfrom purchasing goods on the foreign
market, and of course they can only tax their own nationals.
3For completeness, we have also solved the model for the case in which the two
countries use the same currency, but this is supplied monopolisticaliy by one of the two.
Imagine that the Red currency is needed for transactionson both markets. We write here
this solution as a future reference, for comparison with results obtained later in the text.
The Red government alone can print the currency, and spends it on the Red market to
finance the public good. It can be proved that the Red government will never resort to
direct taxation. The two instantaneousutility functions are then:

= rlog(mR1)+O.5log(6_mR)+log(O)—O.5log(2—O—TB)—Iog(2&—mR(l_1))
(1AR)
UBi

= blog(TB)+.5log(2—9_T8)+log(9—m(1_l))+O.5log(9—mm)_Iog(2O—mjqt_l))
(lAB)

Maximizationof

SLTRr with respect to mRt gives the condition
—

r — 1/2) =

3r

—

—

1)

+ 292r

(2A)

while the Blue government will set TB to
—

9)
T8= 2b(2
1+2b

The welfare of the two countries can then be derived as a function of the parameters 8, 5, b
and r. For example, when r = b = .5 and 8 = .9, we have for 9 equal to one:
UR

=

1.39

UB

= —2.6

Common Corrency - 20

and for A equal to 1.5:
U8

= —1.33

1B = —3.06

The general result is that the Red country does better than in any other regime, while the
Blue country does worse.
4We assume no government intervention in the foreign exchange market.
5While it is clear that a better equilibrium can be reached through coordination of
financing decisions, thereis no reason why we should expect this to occur automatically,or
even just more easily, in a world with a unique currency. The shift to such a regime requires
justifications that are outside the model presented. As usual, the simplest justification
is transactions costs. Think, for example, of a scaling down of utility when consumers
purchase on the foreign market, spending time and effort to understand the workings of
a foreign currency system. This point is further discussed in the Extensions section of

this paper. For an interesting approach to transactions costs in the context of optimum
currencyareas, see Mundell(in Johnson and Swoboda(1973), Chapter 7).
51f there are two distinct currencies, perfect substitutibility requires the highly unlikely existence of fixed exchange rate regime with zero probability of revision.
7Two points are worth mentioning. (1) While the dependence of optimal policy on
the government's horizon is well-known in the literature (see Alesina and Tabellini (1987)),
our model is somewhat special since it focuses on the strategic interaction between the
two countries (and not between two successive national governments) when a common
currency is used. This explains why our conclusion (a myopic government inflating less
than a forward looking one) is in contradiction to previous results. Of course, it would
be interesting to extend the analysis to a model taking both effects into consideration.
(2) Strictly speaking, the maximization problem is not well defined for S = 1 (since the
objective function is a non-converging infinite sum). We should then rewrite the problem
as the maximization of a time average, which we believe would give the same result. This
is a minor technical point.
51t is presumably possible to design a tax scheme such that the two countries are
taxed by the central bank on their additional printing of the common currency, and these
tax revenues are then redistributed. It is crucial that each country not receive back what
was withdrawnfrom it in taxes. In fact, in accordance with the Groves' mechanismsolution
to the free rider problem in public finance, it might be sensible to study an agreement in

Common Currency -

21

which the taxes collected from one government are distributed to the other. The tax rates
would then depend on the inflation rate. We would like to develop this point further.
obtained by assuming that the central bank acts as a
Stackelberg leader with respect to the national governments. The conclusion is sensitive
to the equilibriumconcept we use.
'°When 9 is different from 1, the solution seems to depend on but only slightly.
We have simulated the model for values of 5 ranging from .5 to 1, obtainingsubstantially
the same resuit.
9More precisely, our result

is

,

11See Casella

and Feinstein (1988).

Common Currency

- 22

References
Alesina, Alberto and Guido Tabellini. "A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Coyeminent Debt in a Democracy", NBER Working Paper #2308, July 1987.
Bernheim, D. and M. Whinston. "Common Agency", Econometrica, Vol. 54, 1986.
Casella, Alessandra and Jonathan Feinstein. "Notes on Language and Communication

in a Model of Economic Development", and "Extension
and Confusion", mimeos, 1988.

to the Economy of Symbols

Fischer, Stanley. "The SDR and the IMF: Toward a World Central Bank?", in Interational Money and Credit: The Policy Roles, ed. by George von Furstenberg,
Washington D.C., 1983.

Fratianni, M. and T. Peeters, ed. One Money for Europe. New York: Praeger, 1979.
Hamada, Koichi. "A Strategic Analysis of Monetary Interdependence", Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 84, 1976.
Helpman, Elhanan. "An Explorationin the Theory of Exchange Rate Regimes", Jour-

nal of Political Economy, Vol. 89,

1981.

Helpman, Elhanan and Assaf Razin. "Dynamics of a Floating Exchange Rate Regime",
Jounal of Political Economy, vol. 90, 1982.
Johnson, Harry G. and Alexander Swoboda, ed. The
rencies. London: George Allen and Tjnwin, 1973.
Kareken, John and Neil Wallace.

Economics of Common Cur-

"On the Indeterminacy of Equilibrium Exchange

Rates", Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 96, 1981.
Kehoe, Patrick. "Coordination of Fiscal Policies in a World Economy", Journal of
Monetary Economics, Vol. 19, 1987.
Masera, R. and Triflin, editors.

Europe's Money, 1984.
McKinnon, Ronald. "Optimum CurrencyAreas", American Economic Review. Vol.
53, 1963.
Mundell, Robert A. "A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas",
Review, Vol. 51, 1961.
Salin, Pascal, ed.

American Economic

Currency Competition and Monetary Union. The Hague:

Martinus Nihoff, 1984.

Common Currency . 23

Wood, Geoffrey E.

"European Monetary Integration? A Review Essay", Jounal

Monetary Economics,Vol. 18,

1986.

of

