                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      BLACK LIVES MATTER PROTESTS, SOCIAL DISTANCING, AND COVID-19

                                          Dhaval M. Dave
                                         Andrew I. Friedson
                                         Kyutaro Matsuzawa
                                           Joseph J. Sabia
                                          Samuel Safford

                                        Working Paper 27408
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27408


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2020




Sabia acknowledges research support from the Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies
(CHEPS) at San Diego State University, including grant support received from the Charles Koch
Foundation and the Troesh Family Foundation. We thank Kasey Buckles for helpful advice on a
previous version of the paper, as well as Drew McNichols, Alicia Marquez, Cameron Milani,
James Curry, Calvin Bryan, Erich Kevari, Connor Redpath, and Melinda Mueller for outstanding
research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Dhaval M. Dave, Andrew I. Friedson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, Joseph J. Sabia, and Samuel
Safford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Black Lives Matter Protests, Social Distancing, and COVID-19
Dhaval M. Dave, Andrew I. Friedson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, Joseph J. Sabia, and Samuel Safford
NBER Working Paper No. 27408
June 2020, Revised August 2020
JEL No. H75

                                          ABSTRACT

Sparked by the killing of George Floyd in police custody, the 2020 Black Lives Matter protests
have brought a new wave of attention to the issue of inequality within criminal justice. However,
many public health officials have warned that mass protests could lead to a reduction in social
distancing behavior, spurring a resurgence of COVID-19. This study uses newly collected data
on protests in 315 of the largest U.S. cities to estimate the impacts of mass protests on social
distancing, COVID-19 case growth, and COVID-19-related deaths. Event-study analyses provide
strong evidence that net stay-at-home behavior increased following protest onset, consistent with
the hypothesis that non-protesters’ behavior was substantially affected by urban protests. This
effect was not fully explained by the imposition of city curfews. Estimated effects were generally
larger for persistent protests and those accompanied by media reports of violence. Furthermore,
we find no evidence that urban protests reignited COVID-19 case or death growth after more than
five weeks following the onset of protests. We conclude that predictions of population-level
spikes in COVID-19 cases from Black Lives Matter protests were too narrowly conceived
because of failure to account for non-participants’ behavioral responses to large gatherings.


Dhaval M. Dave                                   Joseph J. Sabia
Bentley University                               San Diego State University
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195                       Center for Health Economics
Waltham, MA 02452-4705                           & Policy Studies
and IZA                                          5500 Campanile Drive
and also NBER                                    San Diego, CA 92182
ddave@bentley.edu                                and IZA & ESSPRI
                                                 jsabia@sdsu.edu
Andrew I. Friedson
Department of Economics                          Samuel Safford
University of Colorado Denver                    Center for Health Economics & Policy Studies
Lawrence Street Center 460T                      San Diego, CA
Campus Box 181                                   safford.samuel@gmail.com
P.O. Box 173364
Denver, CO 80217-3364
andrew.friedson@ucdenver.edu

Kyutaro Matsuzawa
Center for Health Economics and Policy Studies
San Diego State University
San Diego, CA
USA
qmatsuzawa@gmail.com
                                             1. Introduction

         Throughout the majority of 2020 the United States has battled a pandemic of the disease

COVID-19. The spread of the disease in the U.S. was rapid and deadly: COVID-19 was

confirmed to have infected over 1.7 million Americans and killed over 93.4 thousand Americans

as of May 25, 2020 (Johns Hopkins University 2020). May 25, 2020 also saw one additional

fatality of historical note: George Floyd, a 46-year-old black man, was killed by a member of the

Minneapolis Police Department when an officer used his knee to pin Floyd’s neck to the ground

for over eight minutes (Hill et al. 2020). The death, which resulted in the officer being charged

with murder, touched off a series of protests in cities around the United States, with protesters

demanding policing reform (Taylor 2020).

         These two national movements: the fight to contain COVID-19, and the Black Lives

Matter protests for reform in law enforcement and for greater social equality, have espoused

some tactics which appear to be in direct opposition to one another. Specifically, one of the

main tactics for controlling the spread of COVID-19 is social distancing: avoiding large public

gatherings, and maintaining at least 6 feet of distance between individuals (Australian

Government Department of Health. 2020; Public Health England. 2020; Public Health Agency of

Canada. 2020; White House 2020). At the same time, protests, designed to galvanize public

action for social justice, are by definition large public gatherings at which it is difficult to avoid

close contact with others. This mismatch of tactics has drawn many in the public health

community to speculate that the protest movement could lead to a surge in COVID-19 cases

(Bacon 2020; Goldberg 2020; Harmon and Rojas 2020). On the other hand, other public health

experts have made the argument that the goals of the protests may be worth the costs (Simon

2020).

                                                   1
       However, whether the Black Lives Matter protests actually caused a net increase in

population level spread of COVID-19 is an open question. While the protests themselves were

large gatherings that do not match well with social distancing guidelines, the protesting

population is not the only one that may have had a behavioral response. For example, other

individuals who did not wish to participate in the protests, perhaps due to fear of violence from

police clashes or general unrest, may have chosen to avoid public spaces while protests were

underway. This could have an offsetting effect, increasing social distancing behavior in other

parts of the population. The net effect, on both social distancing and on the spread of COVID-19

is thus an empirical question, and the focus of this study.

       Using anonymous cell phone tracking data from SafeGraph, Inc., as well as data on the

local prevalence of COVID-19 from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, we

demonstrate that cities which had protests saw a net increase in social distancing behavior for the

overall population relative to cities that did not. In addition, we find no evidence that net

COVID-19 case or mortality growth differentially rose following the onset of Black Lives Matter

protests, and even modest evidence of a small longer-run case growth decline. It is important to

underscore that our findings are net results for the overall population, and do not reflect specifics

of any particular subgroup (i.e. protest attendees or non-attendees). These results make an

important contribution not only to the current discussion around policies for controlling the

spread of disease, but also to the understanding of human behavior of the general population

during periods of civil unrest.



                                            2. Background

2.1 COVID-19 and Social Distancing



                                                  2
       The main vector for transmitting COVID-19 is believed to be respiratory droplets, which

are emitted during respiratory expulsion such as breathing, speaking, coughing or sneezing

(Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2020a, Fineberg 2020). The disease has been able

to circulate rapidly in part due to its ability to spread from asymptomatic carriers, allowing

individuals to infect others without knowing that they have done so or even that they themselves

are infected (Bai et al. 2020; Pan et al. 2020; Rothe et al. 2020).

       To combat the pandemic, governments have taken on two types of strategies. The first is

a set of public health recommendations for social behavior within the population. Specifically,

government health agencies have recommended frequent hand washing, mask-wearing in public

and social distancing – avoiding public spaces and when in public spaces maintaining distance

(usually at least 6 feet) between oneself and others (World Health Organization 2020; Centers for

Disease Control 2020b). The second set of policies have involved public encouragement and

enforcement of social distancing by shutting down public spaces, such as school closures, public

gathering bans, and blanket shelter-in-place orders. These policies have been the subject of a

growing literature that has shown meaningful increases in distancing behavior and meaningful

decreases in disease infection growth rates following the enactment of shelter-in-place orders,

suggesting that the strategy of social distancing (and its associated enforcement policies) have

been largely successful at slowing the spread of the disease (Courtemanche et al. 2020a,b; Dave

et al. 2020a,b,c; Friedson et al. 2020; Sears et al. 2020).



2.2 Features of the 2020 Black Lives Matter Protests

       On May 25, 2020 George Floyd was arrested for trying to use a counterfeit twenty-dollar

bill to purchase cigarettes. During the course of the arrest, one of the officers involved, Derek



                                                  3
Chauvin, who is white, restrained George Floyd by pinning him to the ground by his neck with

his knee. Despite George Floyd complaining that he was unable to breathe, Derek Chauvin

continued to restrain George Floyd in that position for 8 minutes and 46 seconds, during which

he became unresponsive and stopped breathing (Hill et al. 2020; Furber et al. 2020; State of

Minnesota 2020).

         News of the killing sparked immediate protest of policing behavior, with the first protest

taking place in Minneapolis on the next day, May 26, 2020.1 The death of George Floyd also

sparked widespread protests in large cities nationwide. Figure 1 shows both the gradual

diffusion of the protests, with 286 cities (documented to have a municipal population of at least

100,000) seeing protests by June 16, 2020. The vast majority of these cities saw protests lasting

more than 3 days (72 percent) and about one-third were attended by at least 1,000 people,

according to media reports.

         While many protests remained continuously peaceful, some included violence. There

were several high-profile instances of looting in cities such as Chicago, Minneapolis and Los

Angeles (Khazan 2020, Peterson 2020), as well a number of instances of police use of force

against protesters, including pepper spray, tear gas, and rubber bullets (Kim 2020). Some of the

police violence was in the course of enforcing citywide curfews which were enacted in some

cities in response to the large protests.



2.3 Protests and Transmission Behaviors



1
  The recent Black Lives Matter protests are not the first time that the killing of an individual has led to large scale
protests with regards to issues of unequal treatment by law enforcement on the basis of race. The Black Lives Matter
movement traces back to 2013 and events surrounding the death of Trayvon Martin (Black Lives Matter 2020), but
the larger issue of racial justice within law enforcement in the United States is substantially older.


                                                           4
       Large scale protests could impact social distancing and disease transmission through two

key populations, those who attend the protests and those who do not. Any impact on the overall

population rates of distancing behavior and contagion will be based on the relative effects of the

protests on the behavior of these populations as well as their sizes, and demographics.



2.3.1 Protest Attendees and Transmission Behaviors

       A protest is an activity that is difficult to socially distance. Attendees of the protests, be

they protesters, or police tend to congregate around points of interest (such as a seat of

government) in close proximity. While attendees can utilize some compensatory behaviors to

prevent spreading infection, such as wearing masks, maintaining distance from each other, and

staying home if they feel ill, it is difficult at such an event to completely avoid human contact.

Many activities that are common at protests, such as chanting or shouting can exacerbate the

spread of respiratory droplets (Wei and Li 2016). Additionally, many forms of crowd dispersal

used by law enforcement to break up protests such as pepper spray or tear gas illicit coughing,

which increases the likelihood that an infected individual will spread disease (Xi et al. 2009;

Rothenberg et al. 2016; Wei and Li 2016). In sum, we hypothesize that protests are activities

that would increase disease transmission, albeit perhaps in a dampened fashion if

countermeasures such as masks are used pervasively.



2.3.2 Avoiders and Transmission Behaviors

       The population who does not attend the large protests could have their social distancing

behavior altered by the presence of local protests. If the protests increase the perceived cost of

activities outside of the home, individuals would be more likely to avoid those activities and thus



                                                  5
remain distanced from others. This could take the form of additional time costs from traffic

congestion or from routing around streets closed off due to protests.

       There are other reasons why individuals could perceive leaving home to be more costly

when protests are present in the same city. If the protests are seen as dangerous (due to the

protesters or the police being potentially violent), then individuals may not leave home due to the

additional risk to their person or property. This would be consistent with previous literature

showing a link between crime and reduced outdoor physical activity, where individuals avoid

going outside due to additional perceived risk (Bennet et al. 2007; Stafford et al. 2007; Roman

and Chalfin 2008; Janke, Propper and Shields 2016; Yu and Lippert 2016; Stolzenberg,

D’Alessio and Flexon 2019). Also, if businesses are closed, either due to destruction from

looting or as a preventative measure to avoid looting, this could lower the options for out of the

home activities for non-attendees, increasing the likelihood that they would stay home. Finally,

non-attendees may perceive a higher risk of COVID-19 infection due to the protests and choose

to stay home.



                                              3. Data

3.1 Urban Protests

       Our data on protests are collected from May 25, 2020, the day George Floyd was killed,

through July 7, 2020 from 315 U.S. cities with municipal populations estimated at 100,000 or

more in 2019 (U.S. Census Bureau 2019). Searches for protests were carried out by the Center

for Health Economics & Policy Studies (CHEPS) at San Diego State University using internet

searches for local and national news articles, reports from local police departments, and

communications from mayors’ and governors’ offices. Of the 315 largest U.S. cities under



                                                 6
study, we document that 286 cities saw a protest while 29 did not. Figure 1 documents the

geographic dispersion of these protests over time, beginning on May 26, the first day following

George Floyd’s death. The first large U.S. cities to experience protests were Minneapolis,

Minnesota (May 26), the city where George Floyd was killed, followed by Memphis, Tennessee

(May 27), and Los Angeles, California (May 27). On May 28, 14 additional cities held protests,

followed by 49 additional cities on May 29, 88 cities on May 30, 49 on May 31, and 82 in the

month of June.

       Appendix Figure 1 shows the geographic distribution of the “control” cities without

protests (in black) as compared to the treatment cities (in red). Included among geographically

diverse large cities without a Black Lives Matter protest were Glendale, Arizona, Hialeah,

Florida, and Sugar Land, Texas.

       In Appendix Figure 2, we explore heterogeneity across protests by showing protests

which were accompanied by mainstream media reports of violence (which may include looting

or arrests) (blue) as compared to those that were consistently described as only peaceful

(yellow). Of the 286 cities with protests, 134 cities (46.9 percent) had a protest that was

accompanied by reports of violence.

       We also explore differences in protests with regards to persistence. Appendix Figure 3

compares large cities that had protests continue for three or more days (blue) to cities that held

protests on only one or two days (yellow). We find that 74.5 percent of treatment cities (213 of

286 cities) held protests for 3 or more days.

       In Appendix Figure 4, we show which cities included large protests, with media reports

of crowd sizes exceeding over 1,000 individuals. Such protests could increase the risk of




                                                 7
COVID-19 spread via the large reductions in social distancing among protest attendees. These

larger protests are depicted in blue and comprise 47.2 percent of all protest cities.

         Finally, in Appendix Figure 5, we map our 286 “protest cities” into their primary 203

counties (black) and 42 secondary counties (grey) using the crosswalk created by Simplemaps,

which compiles up-to-date geographic information from the U.S. Geological Survey and U.S.

Census Bureau.2 We do this for two reasons. First, our primary analyses of social distancing

and COVID-19 case growth will be at the county-level given data availability of both of these

outcomes. Second, using the county as our geographic unit of observation will allow us to

capture potentially important spillover effects from local protesters who (i) travel beyond city

limits to attend the events and (ii) perhaps travel back home where the coronavirus may be

spread. Supplemental analysis will widen this ring to include secondary counties associated with

primary counties, as well as include other border counties of the primary county where the

protest took place.



3.2 Social Distancing

         Our data on social distancing are drawn from SafeGraph, Inc., which provides an

anonymized population movement dataset of nearly 45 million smartphone devices aggregated to

the census block, county, and state levels.3 These data have been used by the Centers for

Disease Control and Prevention (Lasry et al. 2020) and by COVID-19 scholars examining social

distancing in the United States (Andersen et al. 2020; Dave et al. 2020a,b,c; Friedson et al. 2020;

Abouk and Heydari 2020; Gupta et al. 2020).



2
 The crosswalk is available at: https://simplemaps.com/data/us-cities
3
 SafeGraph data, and a detailed description of these data, are available at:
https://www.safegraph.com/dashboard/covid19-shelter-in-place

                                                           8
         Our social distancing analysis period spans the 30 days from May 15, 2020 through June

13, 2020, which envelopes the date of George Floyd’s death (May 25) and the outbreak of urban

protests (May 26). Our analysis focuses on 208 primary counties which map to the 315 cities

with a municipal population of 100,000. The average population of these counties is 779,565. In

supplemental analyses, we add 42 “secondary” counties, to which large cities extended, to the

treatment group. Moreover, we also conduct analyses augmenting the treatment group to include

739 border counties outside of the city limits to ensure that our results do not fail to capture

important spillovers of protests.

         From the SafeGraph data, we generate three measures of social distancing. The first

measure, Stay-at-Home Full-Time, captures the percent of the state population who remain at

home for the entire day. A person’s home is defined as a 153-meter by 153-meter area that

receives the most frequent GPS pings during the overnight hours of 6pm to 7am. We estimate

that in our sample, 35.6 percent of respondents remained at home full-time.

         We also measure two variables that capture social distancing behavior at the intensive

margin: Median Hours at Home and Median Percent Time Spent at Home. On average, county-

level respondents in our urban sample remained at home for a median of 12.5 hours per day and

for 89.6 percent of the time.4

         Panels (a) through (c) of Appendix Figure 6A shows trends in our three measures of

social distancing over the analysis period for our primary counties. We find that despite the

intra-week variance in social distancing, there is an overall downward trend for all three



4
  The measure Median Hours at Home is based on summed observed minutes at home throughout the day,
regardless of whether or not these time episodes are contiguous. Because time during which a smartphone is turned
off is not counted towards measured time spent at home, this measure is not sensitive to protesters potentially
turning off their phones during the protests as a result of concern for potential digital surveillance or tracking by law
enforcement. Irrespective of whether protesters are leaving their phones on or off during protesting activities, their
activity would be appropriately reflected as a decrease in the median number of hours spent at home during the day.

                                                            9
measures. We see that, comparing to our earlier sample period (e.g. the first five days of our

sample), less people are staying at home and spending time at home during our later sample

period (e.g. after June 1st).



3.3 COVID-19 Case and Death Growth

           Finally, we measure county-level COVID-19 cumulative case and death growth using

data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), made public by the Kaiser

Family Foundation.5 For our COVID-19 analysis period, May 15, 2020 through July 7, 2020, we

estimate an average of 710.4 COVID-19 cases per 100,000 population and 40.4 COVID-19

deaths per 100,000 population in our sample. Our COVID-19 dependent variable measures the

difference in the natural log in the cumulative number of COVID-19 cases (or death)s on a given

day and the natural log of the number of cases (or deaths) on the previous day (see also,

Courtemanche et al. 2020; Dave et al. 2020b). The mean of these measures over our sample

period is 0.021 for cases and 0.012 for deaths.

           In Panel (a) and Panel (b) of Appendix Figure 6B, we show the trend in COVID-19 cases

and COVID-19 deaths for the full sample of counties, respectively. We show that the slope is

almost linear for much of the sample period, but generally over the last week observed, there is

an upward inflection in trajectory for both cases and deaths.



                                                          4. Methods

           The main objective of this study is to estimate how mass protests across the U.S.

following the death of George Floyd have impacted social distancing and growth in COVID-19


5
    These data are available at: https://github.com/nytimes/covid-19-data


                                                           10
cases and deaths. Our research design capitalizes on variation in the differential outbreak of

these protests over time across “treated” cities in conjunction with “never-treated” large city

controls that did not experience any protests over the sample period.

        We begin by pooling our sample of 208 primary counties, which include the largest 315

U.S. cities with a municipal population of at least 100,000 across 30 days and estimate a

difference-in-differences model of the following form:


                                          𝑗
        SDcst = γ0 + ∑8𝑗=0 γ 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡ct + Xct β1 + Zst β2 + αc + τt + εsct                               (1)
                               𝑗



where SDcst is one of our four measures of social distancing in county c in state s on day t.

         𝑗
𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡ct represents a set of mutually exclusive indicators set equal to 1 if county c saw a large

city protest j days from day t, and captures any dynamics in social distancing behaviors

following the protest outbreak. In addition, Xct is a vector of county-level time-varying controls

including average temperature (in degrees Celsius) and an indicator for whether any measurable

precipitation fell.6 Zst is a vector of state-level time-varying controls including the natural log of

COVID-19 testing rates, an indicator for whether the state had a shelter-in-place order (SIPO) in

effect and indicators for whether the state permitted reopening of (i) restaurants or bars, (ii) retail

stores (beyond curbside pickup), (iii) pet or personal care services (such as barbershops, nail

salons and tattoo parlors), or (iv) entertainment activities (such as drive-in movie theatres, state

parks, and public pools).7 In addition, αc is a county fixed effect, and τt is a day fixed effect. All




6
 These data are available at: ftp://ftp.ncdc.noaa.gov/
7
 Data for COVID-19 testing are available from COVID tracking project (see: https://covidtracking.com). Data for
SIPO enactment are available in Mervosh et al. (2020) and Dave et al. (2020a). Data on reopening policies are
compiled by our own searches of official county websites, county court records, local news agencies, and
gubernatorial executive orders and proclamations.

                                                       11
regressions are weighted by the county population and standard errors are clustered at the

county-level.

       The parameters of interest, γ𝑗 , capture the net effects of the protests on mobility outside

the home operating through all — reinforcing and counteracting, direct and indirect —

behavioral pathways. In our main tables on social distancing, we present post-protest effects for

various time windows up to 8 or more days following its outbreak.

       Next, we examine effects of the protests on the growth in COVID-19 cases by using data

from May 15, 2020 through July 7, 2020 (54 days) and estimating the following specification:


                                                      𝑗
       COVID Growthcst, t-1 = γ0 + ∑35
                                    𝑗=0 γ 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡ct + Xct β1 + Zst β2 + αc + τt + εsct        (2)
                                            𝑗



where COVID Growthcst,t-1 is the difference in the natural log of cumulative COVID-19 cases (or

deaths) in county c on day t and day t-1, that is day-over-day COVID-19 case growth. Because

we have additional data on cases, we are able to estimate case effects up to 35 or more days

following the day of the protest, a period well beyond the median incubation period of COVID-

19 (5.1 days) (Li et al. 2020) when we would expect case divergence if there were an effect from

the protest gathering - as seen in studies of mitigation policies (Friedson et al. 2020; Dave et al.

2020a, b, c; Courtemanche et al. 2020a, b).

       Our difference-in-differences estimates of protest effects will only be unbiased in the

absence of (i) endogenous protests, that is, protests starting because of differential COVID-19

case growth, and (ii) unmeasured county-specific unobservables that could be correlated with

protests and with COVID-19 case growth.

       We take two approaches to assess the common trends assumption. First, we conduct an

event-study analysis, decomposing the estimated protest effect into coefficients up to 7 days

                                                 12
prior to the outbreak of the event and up to 10 (for social distancing) or 35 days (for cases)

following the onset of protests. This will provide a descriptive test for whether protests are

endogenous to the outcomes under study or correlated with differential trends in outcomes across

the treated and non-treated counties. Second, in a robustness check, we test the sensitivity of

estimates from equations (1) and (2) to additional controls for time-varying unmeasured factors.

We include county-specific linear time trends, which may capture (i) differences in the trajectory

of the COVID-19 epidemic across counties, and (ii) unobserved time-varying heterogeneity at

the county level such as enforcement of local mitigation policies or outreach to historically

marginalized populations. In alternate specifications, we also control for state-by-day fixed

effects to capture time-variant common shocks across counties within the same state.

       Next, we allow for spillover effects of protests by augmenting our analysis sample to

include 42 “secondary” counties to which cities may extend. In addition, in supplemental

analysis, we also augment our treatment group to include 739 border counties to the treatment

counties. We then re-estimate equations (1) and (2), turning the protest variable on for all

“treated” counties (primary, secondary, and non-secondary border counties) when a primary

county has its protest. This will allow us to capture those protesters who may travel from

neighboring jurisdictions to participate and potentially spread COVID-19 back in their home

counties. In these regressions, standard errors are clustered at the level of the 208 “primary

counties” associated with each group of border counties.

       Finally, we examine heterogeneity in the impact of urban protests across several key

dimensions of the protests, and estimate the following specification interacting the post-protest

time windows with the relevant characteristic:




                                                 13
                                             𝑗
         SDcst = γ0 + ∑8𝑗=0 γ 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡ct * Tc + Xct β1 + Zst β2 + αc + τt + εcst                               (3a)
                                𝑗

                                                            𝑗
         COVID Growthcst = γ0 + ∑35
                                 𝑗=0 γ 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑡ct * Tc + Xct β1 + Zst β2 + αc + τt + εcst                      (3b)
                                                 𝑗




where Tc measures particular characteristics of the protest that could differentially affect social

distancing and COVID-19 case (or death) growth. These include (i) Violentc, an indicator for

whether the protest was accompanied by media reports of violence (i.e. arrests, use of tear gas,

looting), (ii) Persistentc, an indicator for whether the protest lasted for at least three days, (iii)

Protest Sizec, an indicator for whether the protest was reported to consist of over 1,000

individuals on at least one day of the protest, and (iv) Curfewc, an indicator for whether the city’s

mayor issued a curfew order at some point during the protest period. 8 In addition, in a series of

auxiliary analysis, we explore whether there were heterogeneous effects by whether the onset of

protests occurred early in calendar time (on May 26, 27, or 28) or later, by whether the city

municipal population size was greater than 500,000 individuals, and by the racial composition of

the county (whether the county population exceeded the mean share of non-Hispanic whites,

based on the treated counties). Finally, we assess if the protests had differential effects on stay-

at-home behaviors and COVID-19 case growth depending on the county’s baseline trajectory of

COVID-19 cases.



                                                     5. Results




8
  46.9 percent of all treatment cities (and 58.7 percent of all treatment counties) had a protest that was accompanied
by media reports of violence; and 71.9 percent of all treatment cities (and 83.2 percent of all treatment counties) had
a protest that lasted for three or more days; 47.2 percent of all treatment cities (and 58.7 percent of all treatment
counties) had a protest with reported attendance exceeding 1,000 persons; and 52.9 treatment cities (and 47.6
percent of all treatment counties) had a protest that was accompanied by a city curfew.

                                                          14
         Our main findings are shown in Figure 2 and Tables 1 through 3. In Table 1 and in

Panels (a) through (c) of Figure 2, we present the net effects of protest onset on mobility.

Estimates of the heterogeneity analyses with respect to these social distancing measures are

presented in Table 2. Then, in Table 3 and Panel (d) of Figure 2, we present and discuss how the

mass protests affected COVID-19 case growth. Finally, in Table 4 and Appendix Figure 10 we

present and discuss the relationship between the protests and COVID-19 deaths. Additional

analyses addressing specific issues are presented in the Appendix.



4.1 Mass Protests and Social Distancing

         Panels (a) through (c) in Figure 2 visually present the conditional event study analyses for

our three measures of social distancing, drawn from SafeGraph’s anonymized geotagged cell-

phone data. Panel (a) plots the trend difference between the treated and non-treated counties,

pre- and post-protest outbreak, for the percent of respondents staying at home throughout the

day.9 Panels (b) and (c) repeat this exercise for intensity measures, respectively capturing the

median percent of time spent at home daily and the median daily hours spent at home.

         These analyses underscore three key points. First, it is validating that we find no

evidence that stay-at-home behaviors trend differently in treatment and control counties before

the outbreak of the protests. Trends between the treated and non-treated counties essentially

move in lock-step, reflected in the flat differential trends over the pre-protest periods. This

instills a degree of confidence that the timing of the protests is exogenous to trends in social

distancing.



9
 Estimates plotted in Figure 2 are conditional on state-level log testing rates, indicators for shelter-in-place policies
and reopening policies, county-level average temperature and an indicator for precipitation on the given day, and
day and county fixed effects.

                                                           15
        Second, where there are social distancing effects, they only appear to materialize after the

onset of the protests. Specifically, after the outbreak of an urban protest, we find, on average, an

increase in stay-at-home behaviors in the primary county encompassing the city. That overall

social distancing behavior increases after the mass protests is notable, as this finding contrasts

with the general secular decline in sheltering-at-home taking place across the sample period (see

Appendix Figure 6). Our findings suggest that any direct decrease in social distancing among

the subset of the population participating in the protests is more than offset by increasing social

distancing behavior among others who may choose to shelter-at-home and circumvent public

places while the protests are underway. This latter behavioral pathway is consistent with studies

that find perceived safety concerns, crime, and violence to be significant barriers to participation

in physical activity and spending time outdoors (Janke, Propper and Shields 2016; Roman and

Chalfin 2008; Foster and Giles-Corti 2008). Moreover, to the extent that the killing of George

Floyd, and the ensuing civil unrest and mass protests, also impacted residents’ mental health and

stress, this may further lead to decreased activity levels and an increase in stay-at-home

behaviors.10

        Third, the event study analyses shown in Panels (a) through (c) of Figure 2 point to some

dynamics in the response of stay-at-home behaviors. The rise in social distancing emerges after

about three days following the start of protests. Effects get stronger over the next few days and

peak within a week following the protests, before leveling off and showing some signs of

decline. Hence, the effects of the protests on social distancing appear to be somewhat transitory

and may fade over the longer-run, possibly as the scope of the protests and any associated

violence abate.


10
 Studies have causally linked crime and violence to poor mental health (Cornaglia, Feldman and Leigh, 2014;
Dustmann and Fasani 2015; Wang and Yang 2013; Rubin et al. 2005).

                                                      16
        The patterns evident in Figure 2 presage our main estimates of the average net effect of

the protests on each of the social distancing outcomes, based on equation (1) and reported in

Table 1. We present estimates both with and without controls as a gauge of the extent to which

the presence and timing of the protests are correlated with other observables. Our preferred

estimates are from the saturated models that include COVID-19 testing rates and other predictors

of social distancing, though it is reassuring that the results not very sensitive to these controls.

        Panel I presents results for primary counties that include the large cities under study. As

shown in column (2), we find an increase in the percent of county residents staying at home full-

time following protest onset, with the effect getting progressively stronger and statistically

significant after the third day. Within 4 to 7 days, there is about a 0.70 percentage point daily

increase (2.0 percent increase relative to the mean) in residents remaining at home all day. The

magnification of the effect over the first few days likely reflects dynamics in the behavioral

response with protests gaining momentum and numbers, occurring on consecutive or multiple

days, and being accompanied by more reports of violence in certain cities – dimensions that we

return to below in assessing heterogeneity in the response. Estimates from the intensity

measures of staying at home follow a similar pattern, indicating on average a 0.46 percentage

point increase in the median percent of time spent at home and a 0.18 hour increase in the

median time spent at home (0.5 to 1.4 percent relative to the mean), within 4-7 days of the start

of the protests.11 There is also evidence that social distancing effects level off or decline

following about a week after the protests, which could suggest either that the impact of the

protests are fading, or are cyclical depending on when future protests are organized.12


11
   Results are robust to controlling for county-specific linear time trends though less precisely estimated (see
Appendix Table 1A), and are also robust to the inclusion of state-by-day fixed effects (Appendix Table 1B).
12
   Data from Google Trends show that search queries on Google related to “protest”, “protest today”, “George Floyd
protest”, and “Black Lives Matter protest” peaked between May 31 and June 2, five to eight days since the start of

                                                       17
        One concern with our findings is that our estimated social distancing effects may not

fully capture any direct reduction in stay-at-home behaviors driven by the sub-population of

protesters if protesters are being drawn from outside the city. This is partly addressed by our

focus on the primary county – which encompasses the city – as the unit of analysis. However, in

Panel II of Table 1, we widen the spatial unit to include both primary and secondary counties for

cities that partly cross over into another county. Models reported in Appendix Table 2 further

expand the geographic cluster to include counties that border the treated primary county (county

that encloses the protest city). To the extent that protests in cities are drawing participants from

their larger parent counties or from other surrounding counties, our estimates will capture both

the direct social distancing effects on resident protesters in these counties as well as behavioral

effects on other non-participating residents. The estimates remain similar across both samples as

we broaden the geographical unit to capture non-local protesters.



4.2 Heterogeneity in the Effects of the Protests on Social Distancing

        Given consistent indications that the mass protests appear to have increased net stay-at-

home behaviors — potentially reflecting an overriding behavioral effect among non-participants

— we next assess whether this average response differs across relevant characteristics of the

protests. We present these results in Table 2, based on equation (3a) that interacts a specific

dimension of the protest with the post-protest timing windows.

        If the increase in social distancing among non-participating residents is induced by safety

and related concerns, then one would expect protests that are persistent (ongoing for 3 or more

days) or that have turned violent to generate a stronger response. In Panel I, we specifically


the early protests. Similarly, searches related to “protest violence” and “protest looting” peaked between May 31
and June 1.

                                                        18
assess treatment effects across protests which have turned violent as compared to those that have

not. We generally find increases in the percent of residents staying at home full-time and time

spent at home for both sets of protests, however, for protests that are accompanied by media

reports of violence we find larger estimates for the effect of the protest on distancing behaviors.

       In Panel II, we specifically assess treatment effects across protests which are longer

lasting as compared to those that last only one or two days. In cases when protests are longer

lasting, we find that within 4-7 days after the onset of the first protest, the percent of residents

staying at home all day increases by 0.73 percentage points, which then falls to 0.53 percentage

points after seven days; both estimates are statistically significant. In contrast, effects in counties

where the protests are not persistent are smaller (0.37 percentage points within 4-7 days and 0.38

percentage point after 7 days) and are statistically indistinguishable from zero.

       Panel III considers differences in the social distancing response based on the size of the

protest. Specifically, we compare treatment effects across cities where the protest size exceeded

1,000 protesters vs. those that drew smaller protests. Larger protests may be perceived as being

more disruptive and carrying a larger threat of violence. While there are significant increases in

social distancing in both cases, there are indications that the increase is larger when protests draw

a greater number of participants.

       Finally, in response to protests that had turned violent and disruptive or in anticipation of

such, some cities have issued nighttime curfews. In Panel IV, we assess whether these curfews

may be “mechanically” driving the increase in sheltering-at-home that we find. In addition to

their direct intended effects, curfews could also signal to residents the potential for the eruption

of violence, and may further elicit a behavioral response due to this information signal. We find

increases in staying-at-home behaviors across both cities with and without curfews, though effect



                                                  19
magnitudes are expectedly larger when the city has imposed a curfew order at some point during

the protest period.13

         In summary we find that overall the onset of mass protests has led to an increase in social

distancing, on the net, which is consistent with a counteracting response among non-protesting

residents who may be avoiding venturing out as the protests are underway, possibly due to

perceived safety concerns. The behavioral response may also reflect a diminution of economic

and business activity. For instance, if retail outlets and restaurants are closed as a precautionary

measure in anticipation of violence and disruption from the protests, then this would reduce the

demand for out-of-home mobility. If these behavioral pathways are at play, it is reasonable to

expect stronger responses when the protests are bigger in scope, persistent, and violent. The

estimates in Table 2 largely confirm these patterns.14

         Nevertheless, we also generally find an increase in social distancing behaviors across all

margins. This is not altogether surprising given the geographic diffusion of the protests,

including the national media attention. Hence, even if a protest in a given city is not violent,

large, or sustained, there are likely spillovers from media reports of violence and disruptions




13
   In supplementary analyses (see Appendix Table 3), we also assess whether there were heterogeneous effects
across other dimensions. Panel I of Appendix Table 3 considers differential effects based on whether the protests
occurred early in calendar time, within the first 3 days after the death of George Floyd. These protests were
arguably spontaneous, unanticipated, and exogenous to any considerations of COVID-19. We find significantly
larger increases in social distancing following these earlier protests. Many of the early protests also occurred among
the larger cities. In Panel II, we specifically decompose the treatment effect into separate effects across larger cities
(≥500,000 population) and smaller cities. While we find significant effects across the board, the effect magnitudes
are generally higher for protests occurring in larger cities. Given that the protests were united against police
brutality and racial bias in policing, and conjoined with the Black Lives Matter movement, we also assess whether
responses in social distancing differed across the racial composition of the county (Panel III). We do not find any
consistent or meaningful differences across our three social distancing outcomes across counties with a larger (≥
weighted mean of 56 percent among treated counties) share of non-Hispanic whites vs. those with a smaller share.
14
   Appendix Figure 7 presents event study graphs for each of the margins considered in Table 2. They largely
confirm flat differential trends prior to the onset of the protests, and increases in stay-at-home behaviors up to 7 days
post-protest which subsequently diminish in magnitude after this time.

                                                           20
from other cities; in this case, we would expect some behavioral response since there is a non-

zero probability that a given protest could turn violent in the future.15



4.3 Mass Protests and COVID-19 Case Growth

         Our findings thus far do not indicate that the protests on net led residents to spend more

time outside their homes. If anything, we find consistent evidence of an increase in social

distancing behaviors on average. Prima facie, given this increase in sheltering-at-home, we

would not expect any strong increases in COVID-19 case growth. However, a key concern has

been that local protesters, who are entering locations with high potential for transmission, may

then travel back home and spread the virus to others. In this case, it is possible that we may see

an increase in COVID-19 case growth, as a result of community spread from this subset of

population (protest participants) for whom there was by definition an increase in out-of-home

mobility and reduced social distancing.

         Panel (d) in Figure 2 presents the event study analysis for daily growth in confirmed

cases. Trends between the treated and non-treated counties are virtually identical prior to the

protests. This is reassuring and suggests that the timing of the protests is not correlated with

trends in COVID-19 case growth or unobservable determinants of case growth. We find no

significant divergence in the trends after the protests. While there is some suggestive decrease in

the daily growth rates in cases after 35 or more days subsequent to the start of the protests, the

estimates are statistically insignificant and also fairly small in magnitude.


15
  In Appendix Table 4, we stratify our analyses across county terciles based on the county’s baseline (2 weeks prior
to the death of George Floyd) growth in COVID-19 cases in order to assess whether the protests elicited a different
response in areas that were experiencing more rapid vs. more contained infection spread. These analyses indicate
that counties which were experiencing relatively higher growth in COVID cases and were on a relatively steep
upward trajectory of their outbreak cycle also witnessed the largest increase in net stay-at-home behaviors following
the onset of protests. This may be due to non-attendees possibly perceiving a higher risk of COVID-19 infection in
these areas due to the protests and large gatherings, and choosing to stay home.

                                                         21
        Estimates in Table 3, based on equations (2) and (3b), confirm these findings. In no case

do we find any significant or substantial increase in the growth in COVID-19 caseload (Panel I).

Our point estimates are close to zero and our confidence intervals are tight enough to rule out,

with 95 percent confidence, an increase in daily case growth exceeding 0.28 percent in a county

after five weeks following the onset of protests.

        These results are robust to widening the geographic unit of analysis to include primary

and secondary counties (Panel II) and border counties (Appendix Table 5); hence, accounting for

potential spillovers over a larger spatial unit as protesters travel back home does not alter our

results. Our estimates are also robust to controlling for county-specific linear trends (Appendix

Table 6A). The trends help to account for unobserved factors driving the exponential growth

trajectory of COVID-19 transmissions, and effects in these models are identified off deviations

from this trend growth. These controls may also be important in controlling for heterogeneity

across counties in the timing of coronavirus outbreak as well as for heterogeneity in growth of

COVID-19 testing. Moreover, in Appendix Table 6B (Panel I), we show that our results are not

impacted by the inclusion of state-by-day fixed effects, which control for all unmeasured time-

varying state level factors and rely only on counties within the same state for counterfactual

comparisons. Finally, as reported in Panel III, we do not find any evidence of differential effects

on case growth across specific dimensions of the protest (violent protests, persistent protests, size

of protests, or the existence of curfews).16 Heterogeneity across additional margins are assessed

in Appendix Tables 7 and 8, which also do not indicate any significant or consistent




16
  Appendix Figure 8 presents the event study graphs for COVID-19 case growth across these margins. If anything,
there is a very slight declining trend in case growth following protest onset where we also generally found a
relatively larger increase in social distancing; all effects however are small and statistically insignificant.

                                                      22
differences.17 One concern regarding the lack of any strong effects for COVID-19 case growth is

that the post-protest sample period might not be sufficiently long enough as of yet to detect a

resurgence or increase in the infection rates. While this is a possibility, we also note that our

sample includes at least 35 days of data following the early protests that took place in 242 cities

(during the first five days following George Floyd’s death), at least 30 days of data following

protests in 268 cities, and at least 28 days of data for 280 cities that experienced protests (during

the first week following George Floyd’s death). The median incubation period for COVID-19 is

5.1 days, with 75 percent of all infected individuals experiencing symptoms within 6.7 days and

97.5 percent within 11.5 days (Li et al. 2020). Prior work has uncovered strong effects of

shelter-in-place orders on confirmed cases within five to ten days following the adoption of the

policy (Friedson et al. 2020; Dave et al. 2020 a, b; c; Courtemanche et al. 2020a, b). Further,

other work in economics has detected secondary spread of COVID-19 from travel due to spring

break at a 2-week time horizon (Mangrum and Niekamp 2020). Hence, if there are any

meaningful changes in COVID-19 cases as a result of the mass protests, our post-protest window

is long enough to be able to capture them.

         We also estimate separate protest effects for each of the early protest cities (cities

experiencing protests on May 28 or earlier), in order to assess whether our finding of no

significant or substantial effects on COVID-19 cases is masking any meaningful changes for

certain cities. We employ a synthetic control approach to generate a counterfactual for each


17
  Specifically, in Appendix Table 7, we assess heterogeneous effects across: whether the protests occurred early in
calendar time (Panel I); larger vs. smaller cities (Panel II); and racial composition of the county (Panel III). There
are no indications of any significant or substantial increase in the growth of COVID-19 cases across any of these
margins, by three or more weeks following the start of the protests. Appendix Table 8 reports differential effects for
county terciles divided across the county’s baseline (2 weeks prior to the death of George Floyd) growth rate in
COVID-19 cases. While none of the estimates are statistically significant, it is interesting that the largest negative
point estimates are found for the upper tercile of counties that were experiencing the highest baseline growth in the
spread of the infection, the same group which also experienced the largest net increase in stay-at-home behaviors
subsequent to the onset of the protests (see Appendix Table 4).

                                                         23
primary county (Abadie et al. 2010), with the donor pool comprising counties where no large

city held any protest during the sample period or where the first protest occurred much later (less

than five days prior to the end of the sample, a period not long enough to generate substantial

effects on COVID-19 cases given the disease’s incubation period) (Li et al. 2020; Friedson et al.

2020; Dave et al. 2020a). Analyses for the 13 counties for which pre-treatment COVID-19 case

levels and trends were well-matched are visually presented in Appendix Figure 9.18 Cases are

expectedly trending upwards across all of these counties and their synthetic controls. However,

with the exception for Maricopa County, Arizona, we find essentially no evidence that protests

contributed to significant or substantial increases in COVID-19 during the period following

protest onset, consistent with our main difference-in-differences findings in Table 3.19

        Finally, we assess the sensitivity of these estimates to different sources of timing-based

identification. As our research design is capitalizing on variation in the timing of the protests

across cities, in conjunction with cities that did not experience any protests, the estimated

treatment effect is identified off the many sub-experiments comparing: 1) counties with early and

later-occurring protests with counties containing large cities that did not experience any protests;

2) counties witnessing early protests with counties where protests occurred later; and 3) counties

with later-occurring protests compared to counties with early onset of protests as controls




18
   We match on the COVID-19 confirmed case rate (per 100,000 population) for each of the pre-protest days. We
focus on protest counties where the quality of the pre-treatment match was good, as measured by the mean squared
prediction error over the pre-protest period. For four of the early protest counties (Hennepin, MN; San Bernardino,
CA; Los Angeles, CA; and Solano, CA), the quality of the pre-treatment match, between the county and its
synthetically generated counterfactual from the donor pool, was quite poor. Thus, estimated post-protest effects for
these counties are not regarded as credible.
19
   The effect size for Maricopa County implies an increase of 33.2 COVID-19 cases per 100,000 population within
13 days following the start of protests on May 28. The permutation-based p-value for this estimate is 0.067. The p-
values for the effects for other protest counties shown in Appendix Figure 9, that show COVID-19 case increases
relative to their synthetic control (Jefferson, Texas and Shelby, Tennessee), were never shown to have estimated
effects that were statistically distinguishable from zero at conventional levels, with p-values ranging from 0.53 to
0.67.

                                                        24
(Goodman-Bacon 2018). With dynamic treatment effects, as there appear to be for social

distancing outcomes and which also may be likely with COVID-19 cases, using counties with

early protests as a control for the treated later-protesting counties may underestimate the

treatment effect.20 In Appendix Table 9, we draw on subsets of the treated counties to identify

our effects, in turn excluding counties with late-occurring protests, counties with early-occurring

protests, and counties that saw no protests from the sample. These results confirm that there is

no discernible change in the growth of COVID-19 cases, among early- or later-protesting

counties, even after three or more weeks subsequent to the onset of protests, irrespective of

which counties form the counterfactual.21



4.3 Mass Protests and COVID-19 Death Growth

         Finally, we investigate the relationship between the protests and deaths due to COVID-

19. Given the lack of relationship between the protests and COVID-19 cases demonstrated in the

previous section, it is unlikely that a relationship between the protests and COVID-19 and deaths

exists. Thus, in light of the above findings, these analyses serve dually as an investigation of

mortality and as a check on the consistency of our previous results.

         The event study specification is shown in Appendix Figure 10, which much like the

COVID-19 case event study in panel (d) of Figure 2 shows little relationship between the timing



20
   This is because the trajectory in outcomes for counties with the early protests, at the time when other counties
witness their own protests at a later point in time, may still be affected by the “treatment” (that is, by the early
protests). In this context, it may be better to compare treated early-protesting counties with yet untreated later-
protesting counties or never-protesting counties, and compare treated later-protesting counties with never-protesting
counties (Goodman-Bacon 2018). At the same time, however, counties with large cities that did not contain any
protests may be different than counties that contained cities with protests. This suggests that it may also be
important draw on variation just among the protest counties, excluding the “never protesters” from contributing any
identifying variation (Dave et al. 2020b).
21
   This is consistent with the results presented in Appendix Table 7 (Panel I), which separated out the effects across
counties that saw the early wave of protests during the first three days following the death of George Floyd.

                                                         25
of the protests and deaths due to COVID-19. The trend in the results is largely flat, with a slight

(but noisy) decrease in mortality at the end of the sample period. These results are consistent

with the estimated coefficients reported in Table 4, which shows small and statistically

insignificant estimates for primary counties (Panel I), as well as for primary and secondary

counties (Panel II).22 Similar to the above findings on cases, results reported in Panel III largely

do not show any evidence of differential or consistent effects on case growth across specific

dimensions of the protest (violent protests, persistent protests, size of protests, or the existence of

curfews).



                                                  6. Conclusions

         This study is the first to empirically examine the linkage between the 2020 Black Lives

Matter protests and the spread of COVID-19, which has been a point of concern among public

health officials and the media (Bacon 2020; Goldberg 2020; Harmon and Rojas 2020). While it

is almost certain that the protests caused a decrease in social distancing behavior among protest

attendees, we demonstrate that effect of the protests on the social distancing behavior of the

entire population residing in counties with large urban protests was positive. Likewise, while it

is possible that the protests caused an increase in the spread of COVID-19 among those who

attended the protests, we demonstrate that the protests had little effect on the spread of COVID-

19 for the entire population of the counties with protests during the more than five weeks




22
   Estimates are also robust to controlling for county-specific linear trends (Panel II in Appendix Table 6A) and
state-by-day fixed effects (Panel II in Table 6B).

                                                         26
following protest onset. In most cases, the estimated longer-run effect (post-30 days) was

negative, though not statistically distinguishable from zero.23

         While the exact mechanisms for these findings cannot be conclusively known with the

data available, the results are consistent with avoidance behavior on the part of the non-attending

population. This is consistent with the literature on crime, violence, and perceived safety

amongst the general population, who in the presence of crime or violence choose to remain home

more often (Bennet et al. 2007; Stafford et al. 2007; Chalfin 2008; Janke, Propper and Shields

2016; Yu and Lippert 2016; Stolzenberg, D’Alessio and Flexon 2019). While Black Lives

Matter protests are protected speech and not criminal activities, they may still be viewed as

dangerous by non-attendees due to the occasional presence of violence, including police

response to these protests, and elicit avoidance behavior.

         There are other possible explanations for our findings as well, such as avoiding travel

outside the home due to additional traffic congestion or street closures, or due to lack of

available activities from businesses closures near protest sites. Additionally, non-attendees may

perceive a higher risk of COVID-19 infection due to the protests and choose to stay home.

         Finally, it is possible that the result of suggestive lower spread of COVID-19 relative to

non-protesting cities is due in part to characteristics of the protesters. For example, protest

attendees may have mitigated the spread of COVID-19 via infection countermeasures such as

wearing masks. The attendees may further be a selected subpopulation of younger individuals

who if infected have less severe symptoms (Liao et al. 2020) and thus may never get tested and

not show up in the official COVID-19 numbers.



23
  Our results do not necessarily extrapolate to imply that large outdoor gatherings per se are safe. In the case of the
protests that we study, compensatory behavioral responses among the non-participating subpopulation appear to be
driving the net effects that we find in the overall population.

                                                          27
       Regardless of the underlying mechanisms, our findings show that the protests and the

fight against COVID-19 were on net aligned. It is important to underscore that our findings do

not imply that that this was the case for all parts of the population. The net effect of increased

sheltering and decreased case growth could mask adverse outcomes within a subset of the

population (specifically protest attendees). This could hypothetically cause a redistribution of

public health benefits (and costs) across demographic groups, and could only be measured with

more granular data that to our knowledge does not exist at present.

       However, when considering the results’ implications for the entire population: public

speech and public health did not trade off against each other in this case. Our findings also

highlight the importance of understanding the behavior of all relevant populations when

conducting analysis in the realm of social science in general, and public health in particular: the

most visible portion of the population is not always the primary driver of the outcome of interest.




                                                 28
                                        7. References

Abadie, A., Diamond, A. and Hainmueller, J. (2010). “Synthetic Control Methods for
      Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Effect of California’s Tobacco Control
      Program.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 105 (490): 493–505.

Abouk, R, and Heydari, B. (2020). “The Immediate Effect of COVID-19 Policies on Social
      Distancing Behavior in the United States.” Retrieved from SSRN:
      https://ssrn.com/abstract=3571421

Andersen, M., Maclean, J.C., Pesko, M.F., and Simon, K.I. (2020). “Effect of a Federal Paid
      Sick Leave Mandate on Working and Staying at Home: Evidence from Cellular Device
      Data.” NBER Working Paper No. 27138.

Australian Government Department of Health. 2020. “Social Distancing for Coronavirus
       (COVID-19).” Available at: https://www.health.gov.au/news/health-alerts/novel-
       coronavirus-2019-ncov-health-alert/how-to-protect-yourself-and-others-from-
       coronavirus-covid-19/social-distancing-for-coronavirus-covid-19

Bai, Yan, Lingsheng Yao, Tao Wei, Fei Tian, Dong-Yan Jin, Lijuan Chen, and Meiyun Wang.
       2020. "Presumed asymptomatic carrier transmission of COVID-19." JAMA, 323(14):
       1406-1407.

Bacon, John. (2020, May 31). “Coronavirus updates: George Floyd protests could fuel COVID
       cases, Trump postpones G7 summit” USA Today.

Bennett, G.G., McNeill, L.H., Wolin, K.Y., Duncan, D.T., Puleo, E. and Emmons, K.M., 2007.
       Safe to walk? Neighborhood safety and physical activity among public housing residents.
       PLoS medicine, 4(10).

Black Lives Matter. 2020. “About Black Lives Matter” Available at:
       https://blacklivesmatter.com/about/

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2020a. “Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19):
       How It Spreads.” Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-
       getting-sick/how-covid-
       spreads.html?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Fcoronavirus%2F20
       19-ncov%2Fprepare%2Ftransmission.html

Centers for Disease Control. 2020b. “COVID-19 How to Protect Yourself and Others.”
       Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-
       sick/prevention.html

Cornaglia, F., Feldman, N.E. and Leigh, A., 2014. “Crime and Mental Well-being.” Journal of
      Human Resources, 49(1), pp.110-140.



                                              29
Courtemanche, Charles, Joseph Garuccio, Anh Le, Joshua C. Pinkston, and Aaron Yelowitz.
      2020a. “Strong Social Distancing Measures In The United States Reduced The COVID-
      19 Growth Rate.” Health Affairs, in press.

Courtemanche, Charles J., Joseph Garuccio, Anh Le, Joshua C. Pinkston, and Aaron Yelowitz.
      2020b. "Did Social-Distancing Measures in Kentucky Help to Flatten the COVID-19
      Curve?" Institute for the Study of Free Enterprise Working Paper 2020-4.

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K., McNichols, D. and Sabia, J.J., 2020a. “Did the
       Wisconsin Supreme Court Restart the COVID-19 Epidemic? Evidence from a Natural
       Experiment.” NBER Working Paper No. 27322.

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K. and Sabia, J.J., 2020b. “When Do Shelter-In-Place
       Orders Fight COVID-19 Best? Policy Heterogeneity Across States And Adoption Time.”
       NBER Working Paper No. 27091.

Dave, D.M., Friedson, A.I., Matsuzawa, K. Sabia, J.J., and Safford, S. 2020c. “Were Urban
       Cowboys Enough to Control COVID-19? Local Shelter-In-Place Orders and Coronavirus
       Case Growth.” NBER Working Paper No. 27229.

Dustmann, C. and Fasani, F., 2016. “The Effect of Local Area Crime on Mental Health.” The
      Economic Journal, 126(593), pp.978-1017.

Fineberg, Harvey. 2020. “Rapid Expert Consultation on the Possibility of Bioaerosol Spread of
       SARS-CoV-2 for the COVID-19 Pandemic” The National Academies of Science,
       Engineering, Medicine, April 1. Available at:
       https://www.nap.edu/read/25769/chapter/1#3

Foster, S. and Giles-Corti, B., 2008. “The Built Environment, Neighborhood Crime and
        Constrained Physical Activity: An Exploration of Inconsistent Findings.” Preventive
        Medicine, 47(3), pp.241-251.

Furber, Matt, Audra D. S. Burch and Frances Robles. (2020, May 29). “What Happened in the
       Chaotic Moments Before George Floyd Died.” The New York Times.

Goldberg, Emma (2020, June 7). “George Floyd Protests Add New Front Line for Coronavirus
      Doctors” The New York Times

Goodman-Bacon, Andrew. 2018. “Difference-in-Differences with Variation in Treatment
     Timing.” NBER Working Paper No. 25108.

Gupta, S., Nguyen, T.D., Rojas, F.L., Raman, S., Lee, B., Bento, A., Simon, K.I. and Wing, C.
       (2020). “Tracking Public and Private Responses to the COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence
       from State and Local Government Actions” NBER Working Paper No. 27027.




                                              30
Harmon, Amy, and Rick Rojas. (2020, June 7) “A Delicate Balance: Weighing Protest Against
     the Risks of the Coronavirus” The New York Times

Hill, Evan, Ainara Tiefenthäler, Christiaan Triebert, Drew Jordan, Haley Willis and Robin Stein.
        (2020, May 31). “8 Minutes and 46 Seconds: How George Floyd Was Killed in Police
        Custody.” The New York Times.

Friedson, Andrew I., Drew McNichols, Joseph J. Sabia, and Dhaval Dave. 2020. “Did
       California’s Shelter-in-Place Order Work? Early Coronavirus-Related Public Health
       Effects.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 26992.

Janke, K., Propper, C. and Shields, M.A., 2016. Assaults, murders and walkers: The impact of
       violent crime on physical activity. Journal of Health Economics, 47, pp.34-49.

Johns Hopkins University. 2020. “COVID-19 Case Tracker.” Available online:
       https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html

Khazan, Olga. (2020, June 2). “Why People Loot” The Atlantic.

Kim, Catherine. (2020, May 31). “Images of police using violence against peaceful protesters are
      going viral” Vox.

Lasry, A., Kidder, D., Hast, M., Poovey, J., Sunshine, G., Zviedrite, N., Ahmed, F. and Ethier,
       K.A., (2020). “Timing of Community Mitigation And Changes in Reported COVID-19
       And Community Mobility―Four US metropolitan Areas.” Morbidity and Mortality
       Weekly Report, 69(15): 451-457.

Li, Peng, Ji-Bo Fu, Ke-Feng Li, Yan Chen, Hong-Ling Wang, Lei-Jie Liu, Jie-Nan Liu, Yong-Li
       Zhang, She-Lan Liu, An Tang, Zhen-Dong Tong, and Jian-Bo Yan. 2020. “Transmission
       of COVID-19 In The Terminal Stage of Incubation Period: A Familial Cluster.”
       International Journal of Infectious Diseases, March 17. Available at:
       https://www.ijidonline.com/article/S1201-9712(20)30146-6/fulltext

Liao, J., Fan, S., Chen, J., Wu, J., Xu, S., Guo, Y., Li, C., Zhang, X., Wu, C., Mou, H. and Song,
        C., 2020. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of COVID-19 in adolescents and
        young adults. The Innovation, 1(1), p.100001.

Mangrum, D. and Niekamp, P., 2020. College Student Contribution to Local COVID-19 Spread:
      Evidence from University Spring Break Timing. Available at SSRN 3606811.

Pan, Xingfei, Dexiong Chen, Yong Xia, Xinwei Wu, Tangsheng Li, Xueting Ou, Liyang Zhou,
       and Jing Liu. 2020. “Asymptomatic cases in a family cluster with SARS-CoV-2
       infection.” The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 20(4): 410-411.

Peterson, Hayley. (2020, May 29). “A Minneapolis Target store was destroyed by looting.
       Photos show the flooded remains.” Business Insider.

                                                31
Public Health England. 2020. “Guidance on Social Distancing for Everyone in the U.K.”
       Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-guidance-on-social-
       distancing-and-for-vulnerable-people/guidance-on-social-distancing-for-everyone-in-the-
       uk-and-protecting-older-people-and-vulnerable-adults

Public Health Agency of Canada. 2020. “Community-Based Measures to Mitigate the Spread of
       Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) in Canada.” Available at:
       https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/diseases/2019-novel-coronavirus-
       infection/health-professionals/public-health-measures-mitigate-covid-19.html

Roman, C.G. and Chalfin, A., 2008. “Fear of Walking Outdoors: A Multilevel Ecologic Analysis
     of Crime and Disorder.” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 34(4), pp.306-312.

Rothe C, Schunk M, Sothmann P, et al. 2020. “Transmission of 2019-nCoV Infection from an
       Asymptomatic Contact in Germany.” New England Journal of Medicine, 382:970-971

Rothenberg, C., Achanta, S., Svendsen, E.R. and Jordt, S.E., 2016. “Tear gas: an epidemiological
      and mechanistic reassessment.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1378(1),
      p.96.

Rubin, G.J., Brewin, C.R., Greenberg, N., Simpson, J. and Wessely, S., 2005. “Psychological
       and behavioural reactions to the bombings in London on 7 July 2005: cross sectional
       survey of a representative sample of Londoners.” BMJ, 331(7517), p.606.

Sears, James and Villas-Boas, J. Miguel and Villas-Boas, Vasco and Villas-Boas, Sofia, Are We
        #StayingHome to Flatten the Curve? (May 25, 2020). Department of Agricultural and
        Resource Economics. CUDARE Working Papers. . Available at SSRN:
        https://ssrn.com/abstract=3569791.

Stafford, M., Cummins, S., Ellaway, A., Sacker, A., Wiggins, R.D. and Macintyre, S., 2007.
       Pathways to obesity: identifying local, modifiable determinants of physical activity and
       diet. Social Science & Medicine, 65(9), pp.1882-1897.

Simon, Mallory. (2020, June 5). “Over 1,000 health professionals sign a letter saying, Don't shut
       down protests using coronavirus concerns as an excuse.” CNN.

Stolzenberg, L., D’Alessio, S.J. and Flexon, J.L., 2019. The Impact of Violent Crime on Obesity.
       Social Sciences, 8(12), p.329.

State of Minnesota. 2020. “Warrant: State of Minnesota v Derek Michael Chauvin” Available at:
        https://www.hennepinattorney.org/-/media/Attorney/Derek-Chauvin-Criminal-
        Complaint.pdf

Taylor, Derrick Bryson. (2020, June 9) “George Floyd Protests: A Timeline” The New York
       Times.


                                               32
Wang, Y. and Yang, M., 2013. “Crisis-induced depression, physical activity and dietary intake
      among young adults: Evidence from the 9/11 terrorist attacks.” Economics & Human
      Biology, 11(2), pp.206-220.

Wei, J. and Li, Y., 2016. “Airborne spread of infectious agents in the indoor environment.”
        American Journal of Infection Control, 44(9), pp.S102-S108.

White House. 2020. “The President’s Coronavirus Guidelines for America.” Available at:
      https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/03.16.20_coronavirus-
      guidance_8.5x11_315PM.pdf

World Health Organization. 2020. “Q&A: Similarities and Differences – COVID-19 and
      Influenza.” Available at: https://www.who.int/news-room/q-a-detail/q-a-similarities-and-
      %20differences-covid-19-and-influenza

Xie, X., Li, Y., Sun, H. and Liu, L., 2009. Exhaled droplets due to talking and coughing. Journal
       of the Royal Society Interface, 6(suppl_6), pp.S703-S714.

Yu, E. and Lippert, A.M., 2016. Neighborhood crime rate, weight‐related behaviors, and obesity:
       a systematic review of the literature. Sociology Compass, 10(3), pp.187-207.




                                               33
     Figure 1. Protests in Cities with Municipal Population of Least 100,000 Persons
                 May 26                                            May 31




                 May 28                                             June 1




                  May 29                                           June 7




                  May 30                                            July 7




Note: Red dots represent cities that held a protest

                                                      34
   Figure 2. Event Studies Analysis of the Effects of Urban Protests on Social Distancing and COVID-19 Case Growth
      Panel (a): Percent Staying at Home Full-Time                                                            Panel (b): Median Percent of Time at Home




                Panel (c): Median Hours at Home                                                             Panel (d): COVID-19 Case Growth Rate




Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether
food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level controls include:
average temperature and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell.

                                                                                    35
       Table 1. Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of Urban Protests on Social Distancing

                                                    Stay-at-Home               Median Percent Time                Median Hours
                                                      Full-Time                  Spent at Home                    Spent at Home

                                                   (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)           (5)             (6)

                                                                            Panel I: Primary Counties
0-1 Days After Protest                           -0.040          0.072         0.118        0.177              -0.021           0.003
                                                (0.142)         (0.123)       (0.156)      (0.151)            (0.040)          (0.037)
2-3 Days After Protest                           -0.087          0.109         -0.064       0.061              -0.013           0.023
                                                (0.169)         (0.159)       (0.209)      (0.208)            (0.041)          (0.041)
4-7 Days After Protest                            0.490         0.703**        0.322       0.460*              0.132           0.175*
                                                (0.336)         (0.324)       (0.272)      (0.261)            (0.091)          (0.092)
8+ Days After Protest                             0.265         0.575**        0.347        0.551              0.096           0.158*
                                                (0.344)         (0.272)       (0.466)      (0.423)            (0.091)          (0.086)
N                                                6210             6210           6210             6210          6210            6210

                                                                   Panel II: Primary & Secondary Counties
0-1 Days After Protest                           -0.074           0.035        0.105      0.161      -0.024                     -0.000
                                                (0.137)         (0.119)       (0.151)    (0.146)    (0.038)                    (0.036)
2-3 Days After Protest                           -0.117           0.075        -0.073     0.048      -0.017                      0.018
                                                (0.164)         (0.154)       (0.202)    (0.202)    (0.039)                    (0.039)
4-7 Days After Protest                            0.437         0.637**        0.320     0.447*      0.121                     0.161*
                                                (0.325)         (0.314)       (0.259)    (0.249)    (0.086)                    (0.088)
8+ Days After Protest                             0.192          0.476*        0.313      0.493      0.084                     0.138*
                                                (0.330)         (0.265)       (0.451)    (0.412)    (0.085)                    (0.081)
N                                                7470             7470           7470             7470          7470            7470

Mean of DV                                      35.572           35.572         89.586            89.586       12.533          12.533
Observable Controls?                              No              Yes             No               Yes           No             Yes
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls include:
log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or pet care services
reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level controls include: average temperature and an indicator for
whether any precipitation fell. Standard errors, clustered at the county-level, are reported inside the parentheses.




                                                                    36
                         Table 2. Heterogeneity in the Effects of Urban Protests on Social Distancing

                                                                    Median Percent Time                  Median Hours
                               Stay-at-Home Full-Time
                                                                      Spent at Home                      Spent at Home
                                         (1)                                (2)                               (3)

                                Tc=1            Tc=0                Tc=1           Tc=0               Tc=1          Tc=0

                                                      Panel I: Cities with Violent Protests (Tc=1) vs.
                                                          Cities with Peaceful Protests (Tc=0)
0-1 Days After Protest           0.144          -0.111             0.250            0.150              0.008        -0.020
                               (0.138)         (0.163)            (0.179)          (0.171)           (0.044)       (0.042)
2-3 Days After Protest           0.127          0.051              0.181            0.008              0.018        0.017
                               (0.194)         (0.194)            (0.230)          (0.206)           (0.046)       (0.061)
4-7 Days After Protest         0.723**          0.432            0.527**            0.168             0.176*        0.132
                               (0.348)         (0.266)            (0.260)          (0.243)           (0.101)       (0.086)
8+ Days After Protest           0.504*          0.324              0.601            0.212              0.149        0.093
                               (0.296)         (0.333)            (0.461)          (0.400)           (0.092)       (0.108)

                                                     Panel II: Cities with Persistent Protests (Tc=1) vs.
                                                          Cities with Temporary Protests (Tc=0)
0-1 Days After Protest           0.111          -0.148              0.168           0.429               0.006       -0.008
                               (0.128)         (0.273)             (0.160)         (0.280)            (0.040)      (0.060)
2-3 Days After Protest           0.125          0.056               0.108           0.050               0.022       0.047
                               (0.169)         (0.300)             (0.212)         (0.288)            (0.042)      (0.090)
4-7 Days After Protest         0.729**          0.374              0.530**          0.320              0.181*       0.147
                               (0.341)         (0.353)             (0.261)         (0.359)            (0.100)      (0.105)
8+ Days After Protest           0.529*          0.384               0.588           0.307              0.158*       0.139
                               (0.280)         (0.394)             (0.427)         (0.489)            (0.092)      (0.137)




                                                               37
                                                                                      Median Percent Time                        Median Hours
                                         Stay-at-Home Full-Time
                                                                                        Spent at Home                            Spent at Home
                                                      (1)                                     (2)                                     (3)

                                           Tc=1                Tc=0                   Tc=1             Tc=0                  Tc=1               Tc=0

                                                                  Panel III: Protest Cities with Size >1,000 (Tc=1) vs.
                                                                         Protest Cities with Size <1,000 (Tc=0)
     0-1 Days After Protest               0.132               -0.026              0.278             0.104           -0.001                      0.014
                                         (0.159)             (0.164)             (0.183)          (0.179)          (0.044)                     (0.039)
     2-3 Days After Protest               0.194               -0.088              0.280            -0.242            0.031                      0.011
                                         (0.214)             (0.161)             (0.246)          (0.163)          (0.049)                     (0.050)
     4-7 Days After Protest              0.739**              0.474*            0.643**             0.058           0.189*                     0.140*
                                         (0.353)             (0.253)             (0.267)          (0.217)          (0.101)                     (0.078)
     8+ Days After Protest                0.444              0.584**              0.579             0.157            0.136                     0.174*
                                         (0.269)             (0.292)             (0.399)          (0.389)          (0.083)                     (0.102)

                                                  Panel IV: Cities with a Curfew (Tc=1) vs. Cities without a Curfew (Tc=0)
     0-1 Days After Protest               0.106          -0.024             0.233           0.142              0.008          -0.012
                                         (0.146)        (0.164)            (0.174)        (0.197)             (0.043)        (0.040)
     2-3 Days After Protest               0.137          -0.043             0.224          -0.213              0.030          -0.011
                                         (0.202)        (0.187)            (0.237)        (0.188)             (0.048)        (0.046)
     4-7 Days After Protest              0.707**        0.447*             0.597**          0.039             0.180*          0.110
                                         (0.345)        (0.248)            (0.259)        (0.212)             (0.096)        (0.078)
     8+ Days After Protest                0.334        0.785***             0.432           0.436              0.098         0.213**
                                         (0.267)        (0.294)            (0.407)        (0.385)             (0.084)        (0.098)
     N                                            6210                              6210                               6210
     Mean of DV                                  35.572                            89.586                             12.533
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

 Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls include: log testing rate,
 indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment
 or activity reopened. County-level controls include: average temperature and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell. Standard errors, clustered at the
 county-level, are reported inside the parentheses.

                                                                                 38
         Table 3. Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of Urban Protests on
                                    COVID-19 Case Growth

                                            (1)                                      (2)

                                                       Panel I: Primary Counties
0-5 Days After Protest                    0.0008                                    0.0011
                                         (0.0015)                                  (0.0013)
6-14 Days After Protest                   0.0011                                    0.0017
                                         (0.0024)                                  (0.0021)
15-19 Days After Protest                  0.0012                                    0.0017
                                         (0.0033)                                  (0.0028)
20-24 Days After Protest                  0.0010                                    0.0014
                                         (0.0039)                                  (0.0032)
25-29 Days After Protest                  0.0012                                    0.0015
                                         (0.0045)                                  (0.0038)
30-34 Days After Protest                  -0.0021                                   -0.0020
                                         (0.0054)                                  (0.0045)
35+ Days After Protest                    -0.0079                                   -0.0078
                                         (0.0063)                                  (0.0054)
N                                          11178                                     11178
Observable Controls?                        No                                        Yes

                                              Panel II: Primary & Secondary Counties
0-5 Days After Protest                    0.0007                               0.0011
                                         (0.0014)                             (0.0013)
6-14 Days After Protest                   0.0006                               0.0013
                                         (0.0023)                             (0.0020)
15-19 Days After Protest                  0.0004                               0.0011
                                         (0.0032)                             (0.0027)
20-24 Days After Protest                  -0.0003                              0.0001
                                         (0.0038)                             (0.0032)
25-29 Days After Protest                  -0.0000                              0.0002
                                         (0.0045)                             (0.0038)
30-34 Days After Protest                  -0.0036                              -0.0035
                                         (0.0053)                             (0.0045)
35+ Days After Protest                    -0.0094                              -0.0085
                                         (0.0062)                             (0.0054)
N                                          13446                                13446
Observable Controls?                        No                                   Yes




                                                  39
                                  Panel III: Heterogenous Effects by Protest Characteristics
                                        Tc=1                                  Tc=0

                           (a): Cities with Violent Protests (Tc=1) vs Cities Peaceful Protests (Tc=0)
0-5 Days After Protest                   -0.0001                                0.0017
                                        (0.0013)                               (0.0017)
6-14 Days After Protest                  0.0000                                 0.0027
                                        (0.0022)                               (0.0026)
15-19 Days After Protest                 -0.0004                                0.0061
                                        (0.0030)                               (0.0038)
20-24 Days After Protest                 0.0003                                 0.0056
                                        (0.0034)                               (0.0039)
25-29 Days After Protest                 0.0012                                 0.0068
                                        (0.0039)                               (0.0050)
30-34 Days After Protest                 -0.0009                                0.0009
                                        (0.0045)                               (0.0050)
35+ Days After Protest                   -0.0076                                0.0012
                                        (0.0052)                               (0.0058)

                              (b): Cities with Persistent Protests (Tc=1) vs Cities with Temporary
                                                          Protests (Tc=0)
0-5 Days After Protest                   0.0007                                  0.0002
                                        (0.0013)                                (0.0026)
6-14 Days After Protest                  0.0007                                  0.0052
                                        (0.0021)                                (0.0039)
15-19 Days After Protest                 0.0008                                  0.0101
                                        (0.0028)                                (0.0067)
20-24 Days After Protest                 0.0005                                  0.0135
                                        (0.0032)                                (0.0085)
25-29 Days After Protest                 0.0016                                  0.0081
                                        (0.0038)                                (0.0089)
30-34 Days After Protest                 -0.0015                                 0.0058
                                        (0.0045)                                (0.0091)
35+ Days After Protest                   -0.0071                                 0.0064
                                        (0.0054)                                (0.0087)




                                              40
                                                         Tc=1                                          Tc=0

                                          (c): Protest Cities with Size ≥1,000 (Tc=1) vs. Protest Cities with Size
                                                                       <1,000 (Tc=0)
 0-5 Days After Protest                               0.0013                                0.00002
                                                     (0.0012)                               (0.0017)
 6-14 Days After Protest                              0.0015                                 0.0012
                                                     (0.0020)                               (0.0027)
 15-19 Days After Protest                             0.0014                                 0.0030
                                                     (0.0028)                               (0.0039)
 20-24 Days After Protest                             0.0014                                 0.0018
                                                     (0.0034)                               (0.0041)
 25-29 Days After Protest                             0.0017                                 0.0015
                                                     (0.0039)                               (0.0049)
 30-34 Days After Protest                             -0.0014                                -0.0044
                                                     (0.0046)                               (0.0052)
 35+ Days After Protest                               -0.0084                                -0.0069
                                                     (0.0054)                               (0.0058)

                                            (d): Cities with a Curfew (Tc=1) vs. Cities without a Curfew (Tc=0)
 0-5 Days After Protest                                0.0005                                 0.0010
                                                      (0.0013)                               (0.0015)
 6-14 Days After Protest                               0.0003                                 0.0025
                                                      (0.0022)                               (0.0024)
 15-19 Days After Protest                              0.0002                                 0.0039
                                                      (0.0029)                               (0.0035)
 20-24 Days After Protest                              -0.0002                                0.0045
                                                      (0.0036)                               (0.0037)
 25-29 Days After Protest                              0.0011                                 0.0041
                                                      (0.0040)                               (0.0044)
 30-34 Days After Protest                              -0.0016                                -0.0006
                                                      (0.0046)                               (0.0047)
 35+ Days After Protest                                -0.0082                                -0.0043
                                                      (0.0053)                               (0.0055)

 N                                                                               11178
 Mean of DV                                                                      0.0212
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls
include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or
pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level controls include: average temperature
and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell. Panel III includes the full set of controls. Standard errors, clustered at the
county-level, are reported inside the parentheses.




                                                               41
         Table 4. Difference-in-Differences Estimates of the Effect of Urban Protests on
                                    COVID-19 Death Growth

                                            (1)                                      (2)

                                                       Panel I: Primary Counties
0-14 Days After Protest                   0.0011                                    0.0011
                                         (0.0016)                                  (0.0015)
15-19 Days After Protest                  0.0020                                    0.0019
                                         (0.0024)                                  (0.0023)
20-24 Days After Protest                  0.0017                                    0.0015
                                         (0.0028)                                  (0.0025)
25-29 Days After Protest                  -0.0011                                   -0.0013
                                         (0.0034)                                  (0.0031)
30-34 Days After Protest                  -0.0001                                   -0.0004
                                         (0.0042)                                  (0.0039)
35+ Days After Protest                    -0.0033                                   -0.0036
                                         (0.0048)                                  (0.0045)
N                                          11106                                     11106
Observable Controls?                        No                                        Yes

                                              Panel II: Primary & Secondary Counties
0-14 Days After Protest                   0.0012                               0.0012
                                         (0.0015)                             (0.0015)
15-19 Days After Protest                  0.0020                               0.0019
                                         (0.0023)                             (0.0022)
20-24 Days After Protest                  0.0020                               0.0018
                                         (0.0027)                             (0.0025)
25-29 Days After Protest                  -0.0008                              -0.0011
                                         (0.0032)                             (0.0030)
30-34 Days After Protest                  -0.0004                              -0.0007
                                         (0.0040)                             (0.0037)
35+ Days After Protest                    -0.0038                              -0.0041
                                         (0.0046)                             (0.0043)
N                                          13061                                13061
Observable Controls?                        No                                   Yes




                                                  42
                                  Panel III: Heterogenous Effects by Protest Characteristics
                                        Tc=1                                  Tc=0

                           (a): Cities with Violent Protests (Tc=1) vs Cities Peaceful Protests (Tc=0)
0-14 Days After Protest                  0.0001                                 0.0019
                                        (0.0016)                               (0.0018)
15-19 Days After Protest                 0.0003                                 0.0050
                                        (0.0023)                               (0.0039)
20-24 Days After Protest                 0.0010                                 0.0034
                                        (0.0026)                               (0.0032)
25-29 Days After Protest                 -0.0021                                0.0019
                                        (0.0031)                               (0.0044)
30-34 Days After Protest                 -0.0008                                0.0042
                                        (0.0039)                               (0.0059)
35+ Days After Protest                   -0.0034                                0.0057
                                        (0.0046)                               (0.0077)

                              (b): Cities with Persistent Protests (Tc=1) vs Cities with Temporary
                                                          Protests (Tc=0)
0-14 Days After Protest                  0.0006                                  0.0026
                                        (0.0015)                                (0.0034)
15-19 Days After Protest                 0.0008                                  0.0153
                                        (0.0023)                                (0.0101)
20-24 Days After Protest                 0.0015                                  0.0053
                                        (0.0026)                                (0.0046)
25-29 Days After Protest                 -0.0013                                 0.0054
                                        (0.0031)                                (0.0057)
30-34 Days After Protest                 -0.0003                                0.0131*
                                        (0.0039)                                (0.0071)
35+ Days After Protest                   -0.0029                                 0.0260
                                        (0.0045)                                (0.0259)




                                              43
                                                         Tc=1                                          Tc=0

                                          (c): Protest Cities with Size ≥1,000 (Tc=1) vs. Protest Cities with Size
                                                                       <1,000 (Tc=0)
 0-14 Days After Protest                              0.0000                                 0.0021
                                                     (0.0015)                               (0.0018)
 15-19 Days After Protest                             -0.0003                                0.0065
                                                     (0.0022)                               (0.0041)
 20-24 Days After Protest                             0.0003                                 0.0050
                                                     (0.0025)                               (0.0036)
 25-29 Days After Protest                             -0.0021                                0.0019
                                                     (0.0030)                               (0.0039)
 30-34 Days After Protest                             -0.0020                                0.0077
                                                     (0.0037)                               (0.0057)
 35+ Days After Protest                               -0.0038                                0.0071
                                                     (0.0044)                               (0.0066)

                                            (d): Cities with a Curfew (Tc=1) vs. Cities without a Curfew (Tc=0)
 0-14 Days After Protest                              (0.0015)                                0.0021
                                                       -0.0004                               (0.0017)
 15-19 Days After Protest                             (0.0022)                                0.0051
                                                       0.0001                                (0.0033)
 20-24 Days After Protest                             (0.0025)                                0.0044
                                                       -0.0027                               (0.0033)
 25-29 Days After Protest                             (0.0030)                                0.0028
                                                       -0.0012                               (0.0039)
 30-34 Days After Protest                             (0.0039)                                0.0043
                                                       -0.0043                               (0.0047)
 35+ Days After Protest                               (0.0044)                                0.0040
                                                      (0.0015)                               (0.0056)

 N                                                                               11106
 Mean of DV                                                                      0.0124
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls
include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or
pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level controls include: average temperature
and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell. Panel III includes the full set of controls. Standard errors, clustered at the
county-level, are reported inside the parentheses.




                                                               44
             Appendix Figure 1: Distribution of Large U.S. Cities with and without Protests




Note: Red dots represent cities with a protests. Black dots represent cities with >100,000 population and without a protest.


                                                          45
        Appendix Figure 2. Distribution of Large Cities with Protests, by Whether Accompanied by Media Reports of Violence




Note: Blue dots represent cities with protests that were accompanied by mainstream media reports of violence. Yellow dots represent cities with protests
that were consistently described as peaceful.


                                                                            46
                             Appendix Figure 3. Distribution of Large Cities with Protests, by Protest Persistence




Note: Blue dots represent cities with protests that persisted for three or more days. Yellow dots represent cities with protests that only persisted for one or
two days.



                                                                               47
         Appendix Figure 4. Distribution of Large Cities with Protests, by Whether Protest Attracted at Least 1,000 Protesters




Note: Blue dots represent cities with protests with crowds of over 1,000 people. Yellow dots represent cities with protests with crowds of less than 1,000
people.
                                                                            48
                               Appendix Figure 5. Distribution of Counties with at Least One Large Urban Protest




Note: Black shaded counties represent primary counties with a protest. Gray shaded counties represent secondary counties with a protest.

                                                                                  49
Appendix Figure 6A. Trends in Social Distancing and COVID-19 Cases
                  Panel (a): Stay-at-Home Full-Time




             Panel (b): Median Percent Time Spent at Home




                    Panel (c): Median Hours at Home




                                  50
Appendix Figure 6B. Trends in COVID-19 Cases and COVID-19 Deaths

               Panel (a): COVID-19 Cases per 100,000




               Panel (b): COVID-19 Deaths per 100,000




                                 51
Appendix Figure 7. Event-Study Analysis of Effect of Urban Protests on % Stay at Home Full-Time, by Protest Characteristics
                         Panel (a): Violent                                                                                  Panel (b): Persistent




                        Panel (c): Large Protest                                                                               Panel (d): Curfew




Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food
industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level controls include: average
temperature and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell.


                                                                                          52
Appendix Figure 8. Event-Study Analysis of Urban Protests on COVID-19 Case Growth Rate, by Characteristics of Protest
                           Panel (a): Violent                                                                                 Panel (b): Persistent




                         Panel (c): Large Protest                                                                              Panel (d): Curfew




   Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO,
   whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level
   controls include: average temperature and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell.


                                                                                      53
        Appendix Figure 9. Synthetic Control Estimates of Effects of Urban Protests on COVID-19 Cases Per
    100,000 Population for Selected Counties with Early Protest and Strong Pre-trend Match (May 28 or Earlier)
                          Alameda, CA                                                        Jefferson, AL




                        Bernalillo, NM                                                      Jefferson, KY




                          Denver, CO                                                          Jefferson, TX




                           Franklin, OH                                                       Larimer, CO




Note: Estimate is generated using synthetic control method matching on each pre-protest day of COVID-19 cases. The donor pool consists of
counties where no large (100,000 population) city held a protest or where such a protest took place June 4 or later.

                                                                  54
                                                   Appendix Figure 9. Continued

                           Maricopa, AZ                                                       Shelby, TN




                          Multnomah, OR                                                        Suffolk, MA




                            New York, NY




Note: Estimate is generated using synthetic control method matching on each pre-protest day of COVID-19 cases. The donor pool consists of
counties where no large (100,000 population) city held a protest or where such a protest took place June 4 or later.




                                                                 55
Appendix Figure 10. Event-Study Analysis of Urban Protests on COVID-19 Case Death Rate




 Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls
 include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or
 pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level controls include: average temperature
 and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell.




                                                                 56
       Appendix Table 1A. Sensitivity of Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Urban Protests on
                Social Distancing to Controls for County-Specific Linear Time Trends


                                                     Stay-at-Home Full-Time                       Median Hours at Home

                                                                   (1)                                     (2)
   0-1 Days After Protest                                         0.008                                  -0.016
                                                                (0.162)                                 (0.039)
   2-3 Days After Protest                                        -0.003                                  -0.013
                                                                (0.173)                                 (0.060)
   4-7 Days After Protest                                         0.524                                   0.114
                                                                (0.469)                                 (0.143)
   8+ Days After Protest                                          0.216                                   0.043
                                                                (0.501)                                 (0.170)

   N                                                             6210                                    6210
   Controls                                                      Yes                                     Yes
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects as well as county
specific linear time trends. State-level controls include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened,
whether retail store reopened, whether personal or pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened.
County-level controls include: average temperature and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell. Standard errors, clustered
at the county-level, are reported inside the parentheses.




                                                                 57
          Appendix Table 1B. Sensitivity of Difference-in-Differences Estimates to Inclusion of State-
                                             by-Day Fixed Effects


                                                     Stay-at-Home Full-Time                        Median Hours at Home

                                                                   (1)                                      (2)
          0-1 Days After Protest                                 0.067                                    -0.005
                                                                (0.101)                                  (0.026)
          2-3 Days After Protest                                 -0.221                                   -0.047
                                                                (0.156)                                  (0.035)
          4-7 Days After Protest                                 0.401                                   0.128**
                                                                (0.244)                                  (0.062)
          8+ Days After Protest                                 0.438*                                   0.144**
                                                                (0.228)                                  (0.069)

          N                                                      6210                                     6210
          Controls                                               Yes                                      Yes
 * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls include:
log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or pet care services
reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level controls include: average temperature and an indicator for
whether any precipitation fell. Standard errors, clustered at the primary treatment county-level, are reported inside the parentheses.




                                                                    58
           Appendix Table 2. Sensitivity of Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Urban Protests on
                              Social Distancing to Inclusion of Border Counties

                                                                         Median Percent Time
                                    Stay-at-Home Full-Time                 Spent at Home                 Median Hours at Home

                                                  (1)                               (2)                              (3)
   0-1 Days After Protest                        0.017                             0.306                            0.029
                                               (0.143)                           (0.223)                           (0.054)
   2-3 Days After Protest                       -0.076                            -0.031                            0.024
                                               (0.164)                           (0.178)                           (0.044)
   4-7 Days After Protest                      0.477*                            0.445*                            0.143*
                                               (0.286)                           (0.250)                           (0.074)
   8+ Days After Protest                         0.231                             0.409                           0.131*
                                               (0.275)                           (0.392)                           (0.070)

   N                                           29430                              29430                             29430
   Controls                                     Yes                                Yes                               Yes
 * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls include:
log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or pet care services
reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level controls include: average temperature and an indicator for
whether any precipitation fell. Standard errors, clustered at the primary treatment county-level, are reported inside the parentheses.




                                                                    59
                   Appendix Table 3. Heterogeneity in the Effects of Urban Protests on Social Distancing
                                                              Median Percent Time
                           Stay-at-Home Full-Time                 Spent at Home                  Median Hours at Home
                                     (1)                               (2)                               (3)

                             Tc=1            Tc=0                 Tc=1           Tc=0                Tc=1             Tc=0

                           Panel I: Cities with Protest on May 28 or Before (Tc=1) vs. Cities with Protest After May 28 (Tc=0)
0-1 Days After Protest      0.427**           0.023            0.677**           0.113                0.044            0.005
                            (0.200)          (0.158)            (0.267)         (0.158)              (0.059)          (0.036)
2-3 Days After Protest       0.187            0.158              0.695           -0.134               0.112            -0.001
                            (0.418)          (0.175)            (0.538)         (0.130)              (0.114)          (0.040)
4-7 Days After Protest     1.510***          0.328**          1.109***           0.050              0.304***           0.085
                            (0.398)          (0.156)            (0.280)         (0.169)              (0.106)          (0.055)
8+ Days After Protest        0.542            0.244           0.772***           0.049               0.108*            0.090
                            (0.405)          (0.219)            (0.270)         (0.255)              (0.064)          (0.074)

                                Panel II: Cities with Population ≥ 500K (Tc=1) vs. Cities with Population < 500K (Tc=0)
0-1 Days After Protest       0.028            0.070              0.229         0.323*               -0.001           0.020
                            (0.215)          (0.146)            (0.250)        (0.166)             (0.043)          (0.047)
2-3 Days After Protest       0.034            0.085              0.338          0.047               -0.024           0.070
                            (0.277)          (0.183)            (0.372)        (0.158)             (0.063)          (0.054)
4-7 Days After Protest      0.774*          0.494**            0.892***         0.160              0.237**          0.147*
                            (0.419)          (0.228)            (0.297)        (0.191)             (0.115)          (0.075)
8+ Days After Protest        0.205           0.523*              0.515          0.246               0.125            0.152
                            (0.289)          (0.278)            (0.403)        (0.365)             (0.081)          (0.098)




                                                             60
                                                                                      Median Percent Time
                                       Stay-at-Home Full-Time                           Spent at Home                            Median Hours at Home
                                                 (1)                                          (2)                                        (3)

                                         Tc=1                Tc=0                     Tc=1              Tc=0                     Tc=1                 Tc=0

                                    Panel III: Counties with ≥ Mean Share of Non-Hispanic Whites (Tc=1) vs. Counties with < Mean Share
                                                                       of Non-Hispanic Whites (Tc=0)
 0-1 Days After Protest                0.252            -0.055            0.273          0.149               -0.007          0.001
                                      (0.186)          (0.148)           (0.180)        (0.187)             (0.046)         (0.041)
 2-3 Days After Protest                0.198            0.057             -0.103         0.222               0.073           -0.021
                                      (0.194)          (0.200)           (0.167)        (0.267)             (0.050)         (0.049)
 4-7 Days After Protest               0.534**          0.788**            -0.027       0.753***             0.185**          0.161
                                      (0.255)          (0.360)           (0.219)        (0.262)             (0.075)         (0.103)
 8+ Days After Protest               0.939***           0.320             0.504          0.462             0.259***          0.098
                                      (0.335)          (0.267)           (0.404)        (0.405)             (0.098)         (0.085)

 N                                                 6210                                        6210                                         6210
 Mean of DV                                       35.572                                      89.586                                       12.533
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls include: log testing rate, indicator
for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity
reopened. County-level controls include: average temperature and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell. Standard errors, clustered at the county-level,
are reported inside the parentheses.




                                                                                 61
         Appendix Table 4. Estimated Effect of Urban Protests on Social Distancing,
       by Pre-George Floyd Death (May 10-24) County-Level COVID-19 Growth Rate

                                         (1)                             (2)                    (3)
                                         rd                               rd                       rd
                               Lower 3 Pre-Floyd                Middle 3 Pre-            Upper 3 Pre-Floyd
                                 Case Growth                  Floyd Case Growth            Case Growth

                                                Panel I: Percent Staying at Home Full-Time
  0 to 1 Days After                             0.213                   -0.161            0.163
                                              (0.284)                  (0.262)           (0.188)
  2 to 3 Days After                            -0.101                    0.056            0.308
                                              (0.358)                  (0.216)           (0.249)
  4 to 7 Days After                             0.305                    0.139           1.478**
                                              (0.284)                  (0.242)           (0.612)
  8+ Days After                                 0.363                   -0.135           1.451**
                                              (0.376)                  (0.356)           (0.711)

                                                 Panel II: Median Percent of Time at Home
  0 to 1 Days After                             0.433                   0.214             0.022
                                              (0.305)                 (0.195)           (0.253)
  2 to 3 Days After                            -0.461                  -0.042             0.439
                                              (0.295)                 (0.168)           (0.399)
  4 to 7 Days After                             0.208                   0.278             0.811
                                              (0.312)                 (0.250)           (0.530)
  8+ Days After                                 0.267                  -0.144             1.351
                                              (0.486)                 (0.264)           (0.936)

                                                     Panel III: Median Hours at Home
  0 to 1 Days After                             0.043                   0.009                     0.012
                                              (0.085)                 (0.049)                   (0.056)
  2 to 3 Days After                           -0.133*                  -0.001                   0.159**
                                              (0.078)                 (0.056)                   (0.075)
  4 to 7 Days After                             0.006                   0.090                   0.394**
                                              (0.061)                 (0.067)                   (0.199)
  8+ Days After                                -0.045                   0.062                    0.406*
                                              (0.090)                 (0.075)                   (0.226)

  N                                            6210                       6210                    6210
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-
level controls include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store
reopened, whether personal or pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-
level controls include: average temperature and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell. Standard errors,
clustered at the county-level, are reported inside the parentheses. Pre-treatment growth is defined as the change in
COVID-19 case rate between May 10 and May 24.


                                                         62
Appendix Table 5. Sensitivity of Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Urban Protests on
                         Cases to Inclusion of Border Counties

                                                                                 (1)
          0-5 Days After Protest                                               0.0013
                                                                             (0.0012)
          6-14 Days After Protest                                              0.0024
                                                                             (0.0019)
          15-19 Days After Protest                                             0.0026
                                                                             (0.0025)
          20-24 Days After Protest                                             0.0017
                                                                             (0.0029)
          25-29 Days After Protest                                             0.0016
                                                                             (0.0033)
          30-34 Days After Protest                                            -0.0016
                                                                             (0.0038)
          35+ Days After Protest                                              -0.0061
                                                                             (0.0042)

          N                                                                   54465
         * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

         Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and
         day fixed effects. State-level controls include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO,
         whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or pet
         care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level
         controls include: average temperature and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell.
         Standard errors, clustered at the primary treatment county-level, are reported inside the
         parentheses.




                                                     63
Appendix Table 6A. Sensitivity of Difference-in-Differences Estimates of Urban Protests on
              Cases to Controls for County-Specific Linear Time Trends

                                                                            (1)
                                                            Panel I: COVID-19 Case Growth Rate
    0-5 Days After Protest                                                0.0011
                                                                         (0.0013)
    6-14 Days After Protest                                               0.0017
                                                                         (0.0021)
    15-19 Days After Protest                                              0.0019
                                                                         (0.0028)
    20-24 Days After Protest                                              0.0014
                                                                         (0.0032)
    25-29 Days After Protest                                              0.0015
                                                                         (0.0038)
    30-34 Days After Protest                                              -0.0020
                                                                         (0.0045)
    35+ Days After Protest                                                -0.0078
                                                                         (0.0054)

    N                                                                           11178

                                                            Panel II: COVID-19 Death Growth Rate
    0-14 Days After Protest                                                0.0011
                                                                          (0.0015)
    15-19 Days After Protest                                               0.0019
                                                                          (0.0023)
    20-24 Days After Protest                                               0.0015
                                                                          (0.0025)
    25-29 Days After Protest                                               -0.0013
                                                                          (0.0031)
    30-34 Days After Protest                                               -0.0004
                                                                          (0.0039)
    35+ Days After Protest                                                 -0.0036
                                                                          (0.0045)

    N                                                                           11106
         * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

          Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and
          day fixed effects, as well as county-specific linear time trend. State-level controls include:
          log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store
          reopened, whether personal or pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or
          activity reopened. County-level controls include: average temperature and an indicator for
          whether any precipitation fell. Standard errors, clustered at the county-level, are reported
          inside the parentheses.




                                                       64
  Table 6B. Sensitivity of Difference-in-Differences Estimates to Inclusion of State-by-Day
                                         Fixed Effects



                                                            Panel I: COVID-19 Case Growth Rate
          0-5 Days After Protest                                           0.0021
                                                                         (0.0013)
          6-14 Days After Protest                                          0.0023
                                                                         (0.0023)
          15-19 Days After Protest                                         0.0036
                                                                         (0.0034)
          20-24 Days After Protest                                         0.0039
                                                                         (0.0040)
          25-29 Days After Protest                                         0.0030
                                                                         (0.0050)
          30-34 Days After Protest                                         0.0023
                                                                         (0.0058)
          35+ Days After Protest                                          -0.0020
                                                                         (0.0064)

          N                                                                     11178

                                                           Panel II: COVID-19 Death Growth Rate
          0-14 Days After Protest                                        -0.00003
                                                                         (0.0014)
          15-19 Days After Protest                                        0.00002
                                                                         (0.0022)
          20-24 Days After Protest                                        -0.0005
                                                                         (0.0024)
          25-29 Days After Protest                                        -0.0032
                                                                         (0.0030)
          30-34 Days After Protest                                        -0.0017
                                                                         (0.0037)
          35+ Days After Protest                                          -0.0031
                                                                         (0.0043)

          N                                                                     11106
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level
controls include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened,
whether personal or pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level controls
include: average temperature and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell. Standard errors, clustered at the
primary treatment county-level, are reported inside the parentheses.




                                                          65
     Appendix Table 7. Heterogeneity in the Effects of Urban Protests on Case Growth Rate
                                                (1)                               (2)
                                                 Tc=1                            Tc=0

                                 Panel I: Cities with Protest on May 28 or Before (Tc=1) vs. Cities with
                                                       Protest After May 28 (Tc=0)
0-5 Days After Protest                          0.0013                              0.0002
                                              (0.0022)                             (0.0013)
6-14 Days After Protest                        -0.0003                              0.0005
                                              (0.0040)                             (0.0021)
15-19 Days After Protest                       -0.0009                              0.0003
                                              (0.0049)                             (0.0030)
20-24 Days After Protest                       -0.0028                              0.0004
                                              (0.0071)                             (0.0035)
25-29 Days After Protest                       -0.0043                              0.0025
                                              (0.0050)                             (0.0043)
30-34 Days After Protest                       -0.0058                              0.0006
                                              (0.0057)                             (0.0046)
35+ Days After Protest                         -0.0100                              -0.0032
                                              (0.0061)                             (0.0050)

                                     Panel II: Cities with Population ≥ 500K (Tc=1) vs. Cities with
                                                       Population < 500K (Tc=0)
0-5 Days After Protest                          0.0019                             0.0006
                                              (0.0013)                            (0.0013)
6-14 Days After Protest                         0.0016                             0.0010
                                              (0.0024)                            (0.0022)
15-19 Days After Protest                        0.0007                             0.0022
                                              (0.0032)                            (0.0031)
20-24 Days After Protest                        0.0023                             0.0003
                                              (0.0044)                            (0.0034)
25-29 Days After Protest                       -0.0001                             0.0022
                                              (0.0043)                            (0.0043)
30-34 Days After Protest                       -0.0019                             -0.0016
                                              (0.0050)                            (0.0049)
35+ Days After Protest                         -0.0089                             -0.0048
                                              (0.0057)                            (0.0056)




                                                66
                                                                  (1)                                         (2)
                                                                   Tc=1                                      Tc=0

                                              Panel III: Counties with ≥ Mean Share of Non-Hispanic Whites (Tc=1)
                                                vs. Counties with < Mean Share of Non-Hispanic Whites (Tc=0)
0-5 Days After Protest                                       0.0016                            0.0012
                                                           (0.0015)                           (0.0016)
6-14 Days After Protest                                      0.0030                            0.0015
                                                           (0.0025)                           (0.0024)
15-19 Days After Protest                                     0.0031                            0.0021
                                                           (0.0035)                           (0.0031)
20-24 Days After Protest                                     0.0034                            0.0018
                                                           (0.0049)                           (0.0033)
25-29 Days After Protest                                     0.0009                            0.0037
                                                           (0.0049)                           (0.0041)
30-34 Days After Protest                                    -0.0025                            -0.0004
                                                           (0.0056)                           (0.0048)
35+ Days After Protest                                      -0.0078                            -0.0069
                                                           (0.0059)                           (0.0057)

N                                                                                     11178
Mean of DV                                                                            0.0212
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls
include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or pet
care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level controls include: average temperature and an
indicator for whether any precipitation fell. Standard errors, clustered at the county-level, are reported inside the parentheses.




                                                                  67
      Appendix Table 8. Estimated Effect of Urban Protests on COVID-19 Case Growth Rate,
         by Pre-George Floyd Death (May 10-24) County-Level COVID-19 Growth Rate

                                         (1)                               (2)                              (3)
                                    Lower 3rd                       Middle 3rd                    Upper 3rd Pre-Floyd
                             Pre-Floyd Case Growth            Pre-Floyd Case Growth                 Case Growth

0 to 5 Days After                      -0.0004                          0.0011                            -0.0007
                                      (0.0019)                         (0.0015)                          (0.0025)
6 to 14 Days After                     -0.0015                          0.0015                            -0.0011
                                      (0.0031)                         (0.0024)                          (0.0038)
15 to 19 Days After                    -0.0021                          0.0023                             0.0006
                                      (0.0045)                         (0.0032)                          (0.0050)
20 to 24 Days After                    -0.0054                          0.0030                             0.0032
                                      (0.0053)                         (0.0028)                          (0.0059)
25 to 29 Days After                    -0.0055                          0.0062                             0.0019
                                      (0.0060)                         (0.0039)                          (0.0072)
30 to 34 Days After                    -0.0055                          0.0044                            -0.0021
                                      (0.0063)                         (0.0041)                          (0.0085)
35+ Days After                         -0.0073                          0.0027                            -0.0120
                                      (0.0065)                         (0.0049)                          (0.0082)

N                                      11718                             11718                            11718
    * Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level
    Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-
    level controls include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store
    reopened, whether personal or pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-
    level controls include: average temperature and an indicator for whether any precipitation fell. Standard errors,
    clustered at the county-level, are reported inside the parentheses. Pre-treatment growth is defined as the change in
    COVID-19 case rate between May 10 and May 24.




                                                             68
        Appendix Table 9. Comparisons of Estimates for Early, Later, and Never-Protest Counties

                                             (1)                     (2)                      (3)                      (4)
                                          Pooled              Early v. Never             Late v. Never           Early v. Late
 0-5 Days After Protest                    0.0011                 -0.0024                   0.0002                   0.0016
                                         (0.0013)                (0.0040)                  (0.0014)                (0.0021)
 6-14 Days After Protest                   0.0017                 -0.0051                   0.0005                   0.0003
                                         (0.0021)                (0.0045)                  (0.0023)                (0.0040)
 15-19 Days After Protest                  0.0019                 -0.0064                   -0.0001                 -0.0007
                                         (0.0028)                (0.0064)                  (0.0033)                (0.0049)
 20-24 Days After Protest                  0.0014                 -0.0130                   -0.0002                 -0.0027
                                         (0.0032)                (0.0078)                  (0.0038)                (0.0073)
 25-29 Days After Protest                  0.0015                 -0.0084                   0.0011                  -0.0051
                                         (0.0038)                (0.0074)                  (0.0046)                (0.0048)
 30-34 Days After Protest                 -0.0020                 -0.0095                   0.0004                  -0.0067
                                         (0.0045)                (0.0090)                  (0.0052)                (0.0051)
 35+ Days After Protest                   -0.0078                 -0.0146                   -0.0025                 -0.0077
                                         (0.0054)                (0.0093)                  (0.0059)                (0.0047)

 N                                        11178                     1188                     10206                    10962
* Significant at the 10% level, ** Significant at the 5% level, *** Significant at the 1% level

Notes: Estimate is generated using weighted least squares. All models include county and day fixed effects. State-level controls
include: log testing rate, indicator for a SIPO, whether food industry reopened, whether retail store reopened, whether personal or
pet care services reopened, and whether entertainment or activity reopened. County-level controls include: average temperature and
an indicator for whether any precipitation fell. Standard errors, clustered at the county-level, are reported inside the parenthesis.
Counties with first protest on May 28 or before are coded as Early protest county. Counties with first protest on May 29 or after are
coded as Late protest county.




                                                                  69
