NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TREASURY INCONVENIENCE YIELDS DURING THE COVID-19 CRISIS
Zhiguo He
Stefan Nagel
Zhaogang Song
Working Paper 27416
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27416

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020

We appreciate helpful discussions with Wenxin Du and Michael Fleming. We thank Yiran Fan
and Tianshu Lyu for great research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2020 by Zhiguo He, Stefan Nagel, and Zhaogang Song. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Treasury Inconvenience Yields during the COVID-19 Crisis
Zhiguo He, Stefan Nagel, and Zhaogang Song
NBER Working Paper No. 27416
June 2020
JEL No. E4,E5,G01,G21,G23
ABSTRACT
In sharp contrast to most previous crisis episodes, the Treasury market experienced severe stress
and illiquidity during the COVID-19 crisis, raising concerns that the safe-haven status of U.S.
Treasuries may be eroding. We document large shifts in Treasury ownership during this period
and the accumulation of Treasury and reverse repo positions on dealer balance sheets. To
understand the pricing consequences, we build a model in which balance sheet constraints of
dealers and demand/supply shocks from habitat agents determine the term structure of Treasury
yields. A novel element of our model is the inclusion of levered investors' repo financing as part
of dealers' intermediation activities. Both direct holdings of Treasuries and reverse repo positions
of dealers are subject to a regulatory balance sheet constraint. According to the model, Treasury
inconvenience yields, measured as the spread between Treasuries and overnight-index swap
(OIS) rates, as well as spreads between dealers' reverse repo and repo rates, should be increasing
in dealers' balance sheet costs. Consistent with model predictions, we find that both spreads are
large and positive during the COVID-19 crisis. We further show that the same model, adapted to
the institutional setting in 2007-2009, also helps explain the opposite signs of repo spreads and
Treasury convenience yields during the financial crisis.
Zhiguo He
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
zhiguo.he@chicagobooth.edu
Stefan Nagel
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
stefan.nagel@chicagobooth.edu

Zhaogang Song
The Johns Hopkins Carey
Business School
100 International Drive
Baltimore, MD 21202
zsong8@jhu.edu

1

Introduction

U.S. Treasury bonds are generally viewed as some of the most liquid and safe assets in the world.
Their safety and liquidity is reflected in a price premium (Longstaff (2004); Krishnamurthy and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2012)). During periods of financial market turmoil when prices of risky and
illiquid assets fall dramatically due to a flight-to-safety and flight-to-liquidity, the price premium
of Treasuries typically rises (Nagel (2016); Adrian, Crump, and Vogt (2019)). More generally,
Treasury bonds have had negative beta in recent decades, rising in price when stock prices fall (He,
Krishnamurthy, and Milbradt (2019); Baele, Bekaert, Inghelbrecht, and Wei (2019); Campbell,
Pflueger, and Viceira (2019)); Cieslak and Vissing-Jorgensen (2020)).
Events in March 2020 during the COVID-19 crisis did not follow this established crisis playbook.
Like in many previous periods of financial market turmoil, stock prices fell dramatically, the VIX
of implied stock index return volatility spiked, credit spreads widened, the dollar appreciated, and
prime money market funds experienced outflows. Yet, in sharp contrast to previous crisis episodes,
prices of long-term Treasury securities fell sharply. From March 9 to 23 when the stock market
experienced four halts, the 10-year Treasury yield increased up to 60 basis points, resulting in a
striking and unusual positive correlation between stock and bond returns (see Figure 1). Widening
bid-ask spreads and collapsing order book depth indicated market illiquidity in the Treasury bond
market (Fleming and Ruela (2020)). In direct response, the Federal Reserve (Fed) offered essentially
unconstrained short-term financing to primary dealers for their Treasury positions, but the take-up
was very low.1
Why was it different this time? Given the Treasury bond market’s outsized role in the financial
system, this stunning deviation from historical correlations in recent decades calls for an explanation. Are the events in March 2020 the canary in the coal mine indicating a fundamental change
in the properties of Treasury bonds away from being a negative-beta flight-to-safety target asset?
Or can the surprising price movements of Treasury bonds be attributed to market dysfunctionality
induced by frictions? Our goal in this paper is to shed light on this question, both empirically and
theoretically.
1

See https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/opolicy/operating_policy_200312a for the Fed’s announcement on the repo funding. For some discussions on the low take-up, see https://www.marketwatch.com/story/
fierce-bond-market-swings-dry-up-liquidity-in-wide-swathe-of-15-trillion-us-bond-market-2020-03-12
and https://www.wsj.com/articles/fed-to-purchase-treasury-securities-to-address-market-disruptions-11584109975.

1

3/9/2020 3/23/2020

1/30/2020

3/9/2020

60

1.50

1/30/2020

80

2.00

Figure 1: Treasury Yields and VIX during the COVID-19 Crisis

0.00

20

0.50

40

1.00

3/23/2020

01jan2020

01feb2020
CMT: 3m

01mar2020

01apr2020 01jan2020

01feb2020

01mar2020

01apr2020

VIX

CMT: 10y

Notes: This figure plots daily series of the constant-maturity Treasury (CMT) yields in percent, of 3-month
and 10-year maturities (left panel), and of the VIX (right panel), from January 1, 2020 to March 27, 2020.

We start by characterizing major features of asset price movements and investor flows during
the crucial weeks in March 2020. A simple explanation of the rise in long-term Treasury yields
would be that the enormous fiscal burden of the COVID-19 pandemic triggered a shift in inflation
expectations and inflation uncertainty. However, asset price data suggest that this is unlikely. Prices
of inflation-protected bonds (TIPS) fell along with the prices of nominal Treasuries. Inflation-swaps
show no increase in risk-neutral inflation expectations. Prices of inflation caps and floors do not
provide evidence of an increase in inflation uncertainty either.
An alternative explanation would be that the cyclicality of real interest rates has changed. As
Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2017) emphasize, the negative beta of Treasuries in the decades
leading up to 2020 partly reflects a positive correlation between stock prices and real interest rates.
That March 2020 represents a regime-shift towards a negative correlation cannot be ruled out at
this point. But it would be difficult to come up with an economic mechanism that explains this
shift. In the post-WWII history examined by Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (2017), the only
major episode with pro-cyclical bond prices (or, counter-cyclical real interest rates) was the Volcker
disinflation of the early 1980s where the rise of real interest rates in a recession was induced by
contractionary monetary policy intended to crush inflation. This is clearly not what happened in
March 2020.
We therefore turn to an examination of investor flows to understand whether supply and demand

2

balances may have interacted with intermediation frictions to give rise to the unusual price movements in the Treasury market. Foreign investors, including foreign central banks and investors in
tax havens, sold about $300 billion (bn) worth of Treasuries, mutual funds sold around $15bn, and
the U.S. Treasury issued about $150bn net. Much of this supply was temporarily accommodated
by broker-dealers, partly through somewhat higher direct holdings, but also indirectly through a
massive expansion of $400bn in repo financing that primary dealers provided to levered investors.
Eventually, starting at the end of March, the Federal Reserve came in and purchased $700bn worth
of Treasury notes and bonds, and the expansion in dealer balance sheets reverted back. The selling
pressure and its eventual accommodation by the Federal Reserve were concentrated in long-term
Treasuries. There was little net selling by foreigners in T-bills and the Federal Reserve did not
expand their T-bill holdings.
While these are big shifts in the ownership of Treasuries, it is far from obvious that they
could induce substantial increases in Treasury yields in a market that is usually thought to be
extremely liquid. Why didn’t financial intermediaries and agile institutional investors financed by
intermediaries accommodate this supply more elastically? We argue that balance sheet constraints
of dealers played a key role.
We build on the preferred habitat model of Vayanos and Vila (2020) and Greenwood and
Vayanos (2014) to understand how a negative demand shock for long-term Treasuries can affect
the term structure of Treasury yields. In the preferred habitat model, dealers intermediate the
exogenous demands of habitat investors. Since repo financing was an important part of dealers’
intermediation activities in March 2020, we extend this model to allow levered investors (hedge
funds) to take positions in Treasuries financed by borrowing from dealers in the repo market.
Moreover, dealers are subject to a balance sheet constraint, consistent with the supplementary
leverage ratio (SLR) that dealers are subject to following the reforms adopted after the 2007-09
financial crisis. Importantly, both direct holdings of Treasuries and reverse repo positions that
finance levered investments by hedge funds take up balance sheet space.
Dealers therefore demand compensation for the shadow cost of balance sheet expansion via
direct holdings (with compensation in the form of higher yield) or repo (with compensation in
the form of higher repo rates). As a consequence, when habitat agents’ desire for direct holdings
of Treasuries drops, the degree to which a rise in yields makes levered investments in Treasuries
3

attractive to hedge funds is limited by the simultaneous rise in repo rates charged by dealers. The
repo friction hurts the demand for Treasury bonds in two ways, first through a more costly current
repo funding, and second via the anticipation of a reduced collateral value of Treasuries in future
financing. Therefore, dealers’ direct holdings and yields need to rise even more in order to clear the
market. In equilibrium then, the yield curve steepens and repo rates rise above frictionless risk-free
rates.
Empirically, we find support for these predictions. To measure repo rates at which dealers lend
to levered investors, we use the General Collateral Finance (GCF) repo rates (see Fleming and
Garbade (2003)). Much of the activity in the GCF repo market involves large dealers lending to
smaller ones. In this sense, these rates reflect the conditions at which large dealers are willing
to lend against general Treasury collateral (Baklanova, Copeland, and McCaughrin (2015)). We
compare the GCF rate to Triparty repo rates. Most of the financing flow in the Triparty market
involves cash lenders like money market funds lending to large dealers (Baklanova, Copeland, and
McCaughrin (2015)). Consistent with the balance sheet cost explanation, we find that GCF repo
rates substantially exceeded Triparty repo rates at the time when Treasury yields spiked.
In the model, the rise in long-term yields has two components. The first component is a
heightened risk premium because dealers demand compensation for the interest-rate risk exposure
that the expansion of their direct Treasury holdings entails. The second component reflects the
inconvenience yield induced by the balance sheet cost due to the SLR constraint. To isolate this
second component, we use the dealers’ pricing kernel to price a derivative asset that offers exactly
the same cash-flows as physical Treasury bonds, but without the balance sheet cost. We think of
this derivative asset as an overnight index swap (OIS).2 Practically, the weight imposed by the SLR
constraint on interest rate derivative contracts is about two orders of magnitude smaller than the
weight on Treasury securities, so zero balance sheet cost is a good approximation.
In line with the model’s predictions, we find that during the two weeks of turmoil, Treasury
yields rose substantially above maturity-matched OIS rates, reflecting the inconvenience yield.
Other measures of the Treasury convenience yield have been eroding since the Great Recession (Du,
Im, and Schreger (2018)). Based on the findings in Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012),
the rise in the supply of U.S. Treasuries since the Great Recession could also have contributed to
2

The OIS rate can be interpreted as the risk-neutral expectation of the expected Federal Funds Target Rate.

4

a disappearing convenience yield. Viewed from this perspective, the rise of Treasury yields relative
to OIS rates in March 2020 is a further extension of this phenomenon.
The inconvenience yield of Treasuries during March 2020 is particularly striking in contrast with
the financial crisis in 2007–09 (or, the Great Recession). Flight-to-safety and liquidity during the
early stages of the financial crisis until mid-2008 pushed Treasury yields below OIS rates. Dealers
came into the financial crisis with a short position in Treasuries. Rather than having to absorb
a supply of Treasuries like in March 2020, dealers were scrambling to obtain more Treasuries. As
a consequence, dealers were willing to lend cash to obtain Treasury collateral in the GCF repo
market at much lower rates—about 70 bps—than they were charged by cash lenders in the triparty
repo market. Unlike in COVID-19 crisis in March 2020, the Federal Reserve took action in 2008 to
increase the supply of Treasuries in the market, for example allowing dealers to obtain Treasuries
against non-Treasury collateral in the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF). This seems to have
alleviated the shortage of Treasuries, leading to a closing of the Treasury-OIS and triparty-GCF
rate spreads.
These empirical patterns in 2007-09 financial crisis (or, the Great Recession) are consistent
with our model, too, but under different conditions. If the dealer sector is short in Treasuries, and
habitat investors demand more direct holdings of Treasuries, consistent with the widespread flightto-safety during the financial crisis, then the Treasury-OIS and triparty-GCF rate spreads should
switch signs compared with March 2020, consistent with our empirical observations. Our model
therefore provides a unified account of the very different Treasury and repo market dislocations in
the 2007-09 financial crisis and COVID-19 crisis.
In summary, the observed movements in Treasury yields and spreads in March 2020 can be
rationalized as a consequence of selling pressure that originated from large holders of Treasuries interacted with intermediation frictions, including regulatory constraints such as the SLR. Evidently,
the current institutional environment in the Treasury market is such that it cannot absorb large
selling pressure without substantial price dislocations or intervention by the Federal Reserve as the
market maker of last resort. Indeed, the Fed announced that it would directly purchase Treasuries
“to support the smooth functioning of markets” on March 15 and 23, which alleviated market stress
(as seen in Figure 1). Consistent with our model particularly, the Fed also announced that it would

5

temporarily exempt Treasuries from the SLR on Arpil 1.3
Our theory and evidence can explain why selling pressure had such a strong price impact, but
it does not answer the question of what motivated some large holders of U.S. Treasuries to sell in
March 2020.4 Nor does it answer the question of why dealers, levered investors financed by dealers,
and ultimately the Federal Reserve, had to absorb this additional supply, while other long-term
investors stayed away.
The fact that the Federal Reserve was able to alleviate the dislocations by substantially tilting
the maturity structure of U.S. government liabilities away from the long-term securities it purchased
towards very short-term liabilities it created (reserves) invites comparisons with emerging-markets
crises where shortening of maturities by sovereign issuers is a typical response to investors’ concerns about issuers’ ability to repay (Broner, Lorenzoni, and Schmukler (2013)). But since neither
inflation nor default risk concerns are apparent in derivatives prices in March 2020, there is little
to suggest that concerns about the U.S. fiscal situation are the underlying cause, although the
“safe” asset status of U.S. Treasuries should be disciplined by fundamental fiscal capacities (e.g.,
He, Krishnamurthy, and Milbradt (2019)).
Related literature. Two related works, Duffie (2020) and Schrimpf, Shin, and Sushko (2020),
also provide some evidence on how the Treasury market has been stressed by COVID-19 recently.
They mainly focus on raising policy proposals that can potentially make the Treasury market
robust to shocks. A number of empirical studies document the change of corporate bond price and
liquidity during the COVID-19 period, including D’Amico, Kurakula, and Lee (2020), Haddad,
Moreira, and Muir (2020), Kargar, Lester, Lindsay, Liu, Weill, and Zuniga (2020), Qiu and Nozawa
(2020), and O’Hara and Zhou (2020).
An expanding literature studies safe assets’ supply, demand, and convenience premia, including
early studies by Bansal and Coleman (1996), Duffee (1996), and Longstaff (2004), and recent
studies by Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012), Bansal, Coleman, and Lundblad (2011),
3

See https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20200315a.htm for the announcement of direct Treasury purchases and https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/
bcreg20200401a.htm for the announcment of the temporary change to the SLR rule.
4
The shock that initially triggered a large selling pressure of Treasury bonds during the COVID-19 crisis was
reportedly caused by a scramble for cash. For example, cash is pursued by corporations for payroll and operation, by
foreign central banks for potential fiscal stimuli, and so on. As the prices of Treasury bonds tanked, levered investors
like hedge funds who had been taking arbitrage positions (e.g., between the Treasury cash and futures markets)
conducted “fire-sales” and amplified the initial shock (Schrimpf, Shin, and Sushko (2020)).

6

Xie (2012), Sunderam (2014), Nagel (2016), Greenwood, Hanson, and Stein (2015), Du, Im, and
Schreger (2018), Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2018), Kacperczyk, Pérignon, and Vuillemey (2019),
Jiang, Krishnamurthy, and Lustig (2019), and He and Song (2019), among others.5
We build our model based on Vayanos and Vila (2020) and Greenwood and Vayanos (2014),
who study the equilibrium Treasury pricing where a risk-averse intermediary sector absorbs exogenous demand/supply shocks from the habitat agents. We introduce Poisson events which capture
temporary (and potentially large) supply shocks in their model, and more importantly the levered
hedge fund sector that borrows from the dealers via the repo market. The endogenous repo spread
(i.e., the difference between the GCF repo lending rates and the Triparty repo borrowing rates) and
its connection to the broad demand/supply in the Treasury market are the major contributions of
this paper. We further provide strong empirical support for these theoretical predictions.
Our paper is also related to studies of the collateral market of safe assets, including Duffie
(1996), Duffie, Garleanu, and Pedersen (2002), Gorton and Metrick (2012), Krishnamurthy, Nagel,
and Orlov (2014), Bartolini, Hilton, Sundaresan, and Tonetti (2011), Hu, Pan, and Wang (2019),
Song and Zhu (2019), and Lenel, Piazzesi, and Schneider (2019).
Our paper contributes to the literature of intermediary-based asset pricing à la He and Krishnamurthy (2013a), especially those that highlight constraints on dealers such as Klingler and
Sundaresan (2019), Jermann (2019), Fleckenstein and Longstaff (2020), Boyarchenko, Eisenbach,
Gupta, Shachar, and Tassel (2018), and He, Khorrami, and Song (2019). See He and Krishnamurthy
(2018) for a recent survey (and Gromb and Vayanos (2010) for a survey on limits-of-arbitrage).

2

Motivating Evidence and Institutional Background

To set the stage for our main analysis, we first provide further evidence on the Treasury market
disruption during the COVID-19 crisis, in addition to Figure 1. The evidence motivates us to examine the interaction of supply and demand balances with intermediation frictions as the potential
economic mechanism. Accordingly, we also introduce institutional background that is useful for
the development of our institutional trading model of the Treasury market.
5

The theoretical literature has modeled several economic channels, such as on information sensitivity, complexity,
and coordination (Gorton and Pennacchi (1990), Caballero and Simsek (2013), He, Krishnamurthy, and Milbradt
(2019), and Farhi and Maggiori (2017)). See Gorton (2017) and Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2017) for two
broad surveys on safe assets.

7

2.1

Motivating Evidence

A simple explanation of the soaring 10-year Treasury yield would be that the expected fiscal burden
of the COVID-19 pandemic can trigger a shift in inflation expectations and inflation uncertainty.
The left panel of Figure 2 plots weekly time series of two market-based measures of inflation
expectation, the 10-year breakeven inflation rate that equals the difference between the 10-year
CMT nominal and TIPS yields and the 10-year inflation swap rate.6 Both of them fell throughout
the COVID-19 period, especially in March 2020. The right panel plots weekly series of measures
of the inflation uncertainty and the (risk-neutral) probability of a large increase in inflation (of
more than 3%), extracted from 5-year inflation caps and floors by the Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis. We observe that the inflation uncertainty dropped significantly until mid-March, and
increased afterwards. The probability of a large increase in inflation has dropped and stayed low
throughout April, pointing to concerns about deflation rather than inflation.

3/9/2020

1/30/2020

3/9/2020
3/23/2020

01jan2020

.04
0

.5

.0065

.02

1

.007

percent

1.5

.0075

3/23/2020

.06

1/30/2020

.008

2

Figure 2: Inflation Expectation and Uncertainty During the COVID-19 Crisis

01feb2020

01mar2020

01apr2020

01jan2020

Breakeven Inflation 10y
Inflation Swap 10y

01feb2020

01mar2020

01apr2020

Inflation Uncertainty 5y (Left)
Probability of Large Inflation Increase 5y (Right)

Notes: The left panel plots weekly time series of the 10-year breakeven inflation rate (that equals the
difference between the 10-year CMT nominal and TIPS yields) and the 10-year inflation swap rate, both in
percentage. The right panel plots weekly series of the (risk-neutral) standard deviation and probability of
a more than 3% increase in inflation that are estimated using 5-year inflation caps and floors. The sample
period is from January 1, 2020 to April 13, 2020.

We then examine investor flows in the Treasury market to understand the changes in supply
and demand balances, and their potential association with price movements. From the top left
6

As in Figure 1, we consider three event dates, 1/30/2020 when the World Health Organization declared the
outbreak of coronavirus a global health emergency, 3/9/2020 when the S&P 500 index declined by 7%, triggering
the first market-wide circuit breaker trading halt, and 3/23/2020 when the Fed announced “its full range of tools”
to support the U.S. economy including unlimited purchases of Treasury securities.

8

panel of Figure 3, we observe a net positive issuance of $150bn in March by the U.S. Treasury.
However, foreign investors, including foreign central banks and investors in tax havens, sold about
$300bn worth of long-term Treasuries (middle left panel), while mutual funds sold around $15bn
(bottom left panel). Much of this supply was temporarily accommodated by broker-dealers, partly
through somewhat higher direct holdings (top right panel), but much of it indirectly through a
massive expansion of $300bn in repo financing that primary dealers provided to levered investors
(middle right) before 3/9.7
Yet, during the week from March 9 to 15 when the 10-year Treasury yield increased most
sharply (see Figure 1), primary dealers’ direct Treasury holdings remained almost flat, while their
reverse repo lending increased by another $120bn. The Fed offered $1.5 trillion repo funding to
primary dealers on March 12 (i.e., they would be able to access the funding at low repo rate),
but the taking was abysmally low. Hence, dealers seem to face certain balance sheet constraints.
Eventually, starting from March 15, the Federal Reserve came in and purchased $700 billion worth
of Treasury notes and bonds, and the expansion in dealer balance sheets reverted back. On balance,
primary dealers’ net cash Treasury positions and reverse repo amounts decreased in March. The
selling pressure and its eventual accommodation by the Federal Reserve were concentrated in longterm Treasuries. There was little net selling by foreigners in T-bills and the Federal Reserve did
not expand their holdings of T-bills.
In sum, examinations of asset price movements and investor flows during the crucial weeks in
March 2020 suggest that shifts of fundamental risks are unlikely to have caused the unusual price
movements in the Treasury market. Instead, the large shifts in the supply of Treasuries, primary
dealers’ balance sheet movements, and the nature of the Federal Reserve’s interventions point to an
economic interpretation based on institutional trading with frictions. To understand the relevant
frictions, we briefly introduce some institutional background.

2.2

Institutional Background

In this section, we first outline institutional features of the Treasury and repo markets, especially
the important role of dealers as intermediaries in both markets. We then discuss the key regulations
7

Moreover, primary dealers are net borrowers in the repo market. Hence, they take positive market-making
portfolios of Treasuries and fund them with repos. See Appendix B.2 for further details.

9

Figure 3: Investor Flows and Positions of Treasuries during the COVID-19 Crisis
Primary Dealers' Net Treasury Holdings
1/30/2020

3/9/2020

3/23/2020

01jan2020
Jan

Feb

Mar

01feb2020

Apr

Net Issuance of Treasury Notes and Bonds

FRNs

TIPS

Tbills

Coupons

01apr2020

2000
1900

1/30/2020

3/9/2020

3/23/2020

-150

1600

-100

1700

1800

billion
-50

50

Primary Dealers' Total Repo

0

Foreign Investors

01mar2020

Jan

Feb

Mar

Asia
Caribbean

01jan2020

Europe
Other

01feb2020

01mar2020

01apr2020

Gross Reverse Repo

The Federal Reserve's Treasury Holdings
1/30/2020

3/9/2020
3/23/2020

01jan2020

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

250
200
100

-15

2000

150

-10

2500

billion
-5

3000

0

300

5

3500

Long-Term Government Mutual Funds

350

0

0

50

100

billion

100

200

150

300

The U.S. Treasury

01feb2020
Coupon (Left)
TIPS (Right)

Net Flows

01mar2020

01apr2020
Tbill (Right)

Notes: The left panels plot monthly series of the net issuance amount of Treasury notes and bonds (top left
panel), the changes in holdings of long-term Treasuries of foreign investors (middle left panel), and the net
flows of long-term government mutual funds (bottom left panel). The right panels plot weekly series of the
primary dealers’ net positions of Treasuries (top right panel), the primary dealers’ gross reverse repo amount
(middle right panel), and the amount of the Fed’s holdings of Treasuries (bottom right panel). The units
are all in billions of U.S. dollars.

10

that were introduced in the U.S. since the 2007-09 financial crisis and their potential impacts on
the Treasury markets and dealers.8

2.2.1

The Treasury and Repo Markets

The U.S. Treasury market is one of the largest fixed-income markets with an outstanding balance
held by the public of about $17 trillion as of March 2020. The major component is coupon-bearing
Treasuries, about $12.5 trillion, while T-bills comprise the second largest fraction, about $2.6
trillion.9 The secondary cash market of Treasuries maintains an average daily total trading volume
of about $575bn over the period of August 2017 to July 2018, of which coupon Treasuries and
T-bills account for the largest bulk, about 82% and 15%, respectively. About 70% of the trading
volume is concentrated in on-the-run securities, which are most recently auctioned of a given tenor,
while the rest is in off-the-run securities, which consist of all the previously issued securities.10
Off-the-run securities account for the major fraction—over 95%—of outstanding Treasuries
(Clark, Cameron, and Mann (2016)) and were hit hardest by the COVID-19 market disruption,
though on-the-run securities were also notably affected (Fleming and Ruela (2020)). In contrast
to on-the-run securities that are mainly traded on electronic exchange-like platforms, investors
of off-the-run Treasuries mostly trade over-the-counter with broker-dealers as readily available
counterparties.
Broker-dealers, especially the primary dealers that are trading counterparties of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York in its implementation of monetary policy, are important participants in
both the primary and secondary markets of Treasuries. In particular, primary dealers are expected
to participate in all issuance auctions of Treasuries, and have traditionally been the predominant
purchasers at these auctions.11 Dealers are also key intermediaries of the Treasury cash market,
8

We keep the details to a minimum, and refer to Fleming (1997), Fleming and Garbade (2004), Garbade, Keane,
Logan, Stokes, and Wolgemuth (2010), and Baklanova, Copeland, and McCaughrin (2015) for additional details on
Treasury and repo markets, Fleming and Rosenberg (2007) on dealers, and Duffie (2018) and Boyarchenko, Eisenbach,
Gupta, Shachar, and Tassel (2018) on post-crisis regulations.
9
The rest are Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), floating rate notes (FRNs), and Separate Trading
of Registered Interest and Principal Securities (STRIPS). The outstanding balance is obtained from the SIFMA
(https://www.sifma.org/resources/research/us-fixed-income-issuance-and-outstanding/).
10
The summary of trading volume can be found at https://libertystreeteconomics.newyorkfed.org/2018/09/
unlocking-the-treasury-market-through-trace.html.
11
The primary dealers’ share of purchases at issuance auctions has been declining over time, though; see Fleming
and Myers (2013) for further discussions. He, Kelly, and Manela (2017) document the role of primary dealers in
understanding the cross-sectional returns of asset prices outside the equity class.

11

accounting for about 75% of all transactions. In fact, all client transactions, which account for half
of the total $575 billion daily trading volume, go through dealers.12
When intermediating Treasury trades of clients, dealers need to use their balance sheet to
hold inventories. For example, when investors with Treasuries receive a liquidity shock, they sell
holdings to dealers who take them on their balance sheet as inventories before finding ultimate
buyers. Carrying inventory entails risk for which dealers demand compensation, as in classical
modes of market-making (Ho and Stoll (1981) and Amihud and Mendelson (1980)). However,
given the safety of Treasury securities, the inventory risk is unlikely to be severe. The cost that
particularly interests us arises from balance sheet constraints associated with post-crisis regulations,
which we will review below.
In addition to selling them outright in the Treasury cash market, investors often post Treasuries
as collateral to borrow cash on a short-term basis, particularly in the repo market. The U.S. repo
market is comprised of two segments, triparty repo and bilateral repo. A triparty repo involves a
third party known as a clearing bank who provides clearing and settlement services such as keeping
the repo on its books and ensuring the execution according to repo terms.13 Differently, in bilateral
repo, the clearing and settlement are managed by each counterparty’s custodian bank. Furthermore,
within the triparty repo market, a special General Collateral Financing Repo Service (GCF Repo)
allows securities dealers registered with the Fixed Income Clearing Corporation (FICC) as netting
members to trade repos among themselves. That is, the GCF repo is mainly an inter-dealer
market, while in the non-GCF triparty repo market (referred to as triparty repo hereafter), broad
cash lenders including money market mutual funds (MMFs), banks, and securities lenders lend cash
to dealers.
As in the cash Treasury market, broker-dealers are also key intermediaries in the repo market,
transmitting funds from lenders to borrowers who cannot directly deal with each other for certain
reasons.14 In particular, large high-credit-profiles dealers borrow cash in the triparty market from
12
The so-called principal trading firms that specialize in electronic and automated intermediation only participate
in the inter-dealer segment.
13
In the U.S., tri-party repo services have been offered by Bank of New York Mellon and JP Morgan Chase. The latter announced a plan to exist this business in 2019 (https://www.wsj.com/articles/
j-p-morgan-to-exit-part-of-its-government-securities-business-1469135462).
14
Dealers also obtain funding for their market-making inventories in the triparty repo market by posting Treasuries
as collateral assets. This is effectively similar to the strategy of levered investors like hedge funds who finance their
proprietary portfolios through repo funding. The hedge fund sector in our model includes this strategy of dealers
(see Section 3 for details).

12

cash lenders and lend to small low-credit-profiles dealers in the GCF market. Large dealers also
borrow cash in the triparty market and lend to levered investors especially hedge funds in bilateral
repo markets.15 Hence, both the GCF and bilateral repo markets are used by levered investors to
finance their cash Treasury positions, where the funds are transmitted by large dealers from the
triparty market.
In addition to the intermediation activity on a cash basis, dealers also conduct intermediation in
the (mainly bilateral) repo market on a security basis, which is often used to source securities and
facilitate short-selling. For example, dealers can lend cash to providers of Treasury securities, and
use the received collateral assets (or provide them to hedge funds) to cover short sales or establish
hedging positions in the cash Treasury market.16 Typical providers of Treasury securities include
pension funds, mutual funds, and insurance companies who hold large portfolios of Treasuries and
seek to earn extra yield by lending them out. Although securities-driven repo often targets specific
Treasuries, denoted as special repo as in Duffie (1996), it is also used widely to source general
securities when Treasuries are in shortage as a whole. In either case, short-selling incurs costs of
searching for securities and failing to deliver, which can lead to large market disruptions (Duffie,
Garleanu, and Pedersen (2002), Fleming and Garbade (2004), and Garbade, Keane, Logan, Stokes,
and Wolgemuth (2010)). The implementation of the Fed’s TSLF program from March 2008 to June
2009 that lent Treasuries to dealers against non-Treasury collateral suggests that such costs can be
too high for market participants.

2.2.2

Post-Crisis Regulations

As discussed above, dealers’ intermediation activities in the Treasury market are unlikely to pose
severe risks to their balance sheets because of Treasuries’ great safety and liquidity. However, since
the 2007-09 financial crisis, various regulatory reforms of financial institutions and markets have
been proposed, some of which impose constraints on dealers’ balance sheet capacity (Duffie (2018)).
Among them, the most relevant for the Treasury market is the so-called supplemental leverage ratio
15

In recent years, repo transactions cleared through the FICC Delivery-versus-Payment (DVP) repo service have
increased, which facilitate cash flow from the triparty repo market to hedge funds. See https://www.jpmorgan.com/
global/research/sponsored-repo for details.
16
In this regard, securities lending contracts are economically equivalent to repo for borrowing and lending securities
(Baklanova, Copeland, and McCaughrin (2015)). Dealers who facilitate a hedge fund customer’s short positions, often
known as prime brokers, can rehypothecate collateral assets from other customers’ long positions in the repo market,
or borrow from securities lenders such as pension funds.

13

(SLR).
To strengthen the resilience of the global banking system, the Basel III regulatory framework
introduced the SLR as a backstop to risk-based capital regulation. It is defined as the Tier I
capital divided by total leverage exposure irrespective of its riskiness, which is distinct from the
conventional risk-weighted-asset (RWA) capital requirement. The total leverage exposure includes
both on-balance-sheet assets and off-balance-sheet exposures to derivatives. The Basel Committee
proposed a 3% minimum leverage ratio, while U.S. regulators require global systemically important
institutions (G-SIBs) to maintain an SLR of at least 5% on a consolidated basis and at least 6%
for their depository subsidiaries. The rule of SLR was finalized in 2014 and was phased in from
2015 with G-SIBs and other large banking institutions required to make public disclosures related
to the SLR, and was largely implemented in 2018.
The leverage exposure in the SLR includes the total notional of all cash and repo transactions,
regardless of which securities are used as collateral, hurting the bank dealers’ intermediation activities in both cash and repo markets of Treasury securities greatly. As argued by Duffie (2018))
based on a variant of debt overhang proposed in Andersen, Duffie, and Song (2019), “the SLR increases ‘rental cost’ for the space on a bank’s balance sheet.” The announcement of the temporary
exemption of Treasuries from the SLR on Arpil 1, 2020 by the Fed in response to the Treasury
market disruption suggests that this is indeed the case.
Compared with the constraint on Treasury cash and repo positions, the constraint imposed by
the SLR on standard interest-rate derivatives is minor. Specifically, the off-balance-sheet exposures
to derivatives included in the SLR total leverage exposure are calculated based on the Current
Exposure Method and consisting of the Current Exposure and Potential Future Exposure (Polk
(2014)). For standard interest-rate derivatives like vanilla Libor swaps and OIS that have become
centrally cleared, the CE is effectively zero because the variation margin is posted on a daily
basis. The PFE is defined using a combination of net and gross risk exposures, equal to P F E =
0.4 × Agross + 0.6 × N GR × Agross , where Agross is the adjusted gross notional equal to gross
notional multiplied by a maximum of 1.5%, and N GR is the net-to-gross ratio equal to the net
current mark-to-market value and gross current mark-to-market value. That is, the constraint
imposed by SLR on interest-rate derivatives is about two orders of magnitude smaller than that on
the Treasury positions.
14

In addition, we briefly discuss two other regulations—the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and
Volcker rule–that have been progressively put into effect since 2014. The LCR is to ensure that
potential cash outflows over a 30-day period are sufficiently covered by liquid assets.17 Specifically,
it assumes that dealers may lose all of their collateralized funding with terms of less than 30 days
and hence stipulates that they need to hold sufficient cash and high-quality liquid assets to cover
this loss of funding. The Volcker rule prohibits proprietary trading of banks (or financial institutions
with access to FDIC insurance or the Federal Reserve’s discount window) that are financed by lowcost deposits of the affiliated bank branch. The Volcker Rule exempts hedging, market-making,
and various financial instruments such as foreign exchange and government securities. Yet, the
difficulty in drawing a clear-cut distinction between market-making and proprietary trading has
the potential unintended consequences of reducing bank dealers’ market-making activities. Both
the LCR and Volcker rule may lead to higher funding costs to dealers.

3

The Model

We now show within a model how supply shocks can interact with intermediation frictions to
give rise to the observed Treasury market disruptions. Moreover, the model provides additional
empirical predictions about spreads between different repo rates, swap rates, and Treasury yields
that we examine subsequently.
The economy in this section is an extension to Greenwood and Vayanos (2014). In their model,
preferred habitat agents trade with arbitrageurs. We separate the arbitrageurs in Greenwood and
Vayanos (2014) into hedge funds and dealers, and introduce a repo market in which the former
group borrows from the latter. Throughout, we use lowercase letters to denote an individual agent’s
choices while uppercase letters denote aggregate quantities.

3.1

Aggregate Shocks and Assets

There are two sources of aggregate risk in this model, following Greenwood and Vayanos (2014).
The first is the stochastic evolution of short interest rate rt , which follows an Ornstein–Uhlenbeck
17

A companion liquidity regulation is the net stable funding ratio (NSFR) designed to limit maturity transformation.
It requires sufficient stable funding, equity or long-term debt, to cover assets over a one-year horizon.

15

process

drt = κ (r − rt ) dt + σdZt ,

where {Zt : 0 ≤ t < ∞} is a standard Brownian motion defined on a complete probability space, κ
is the mean-reverting parameter, and σ is the volatility of short-rate.
The second aggregate shock is Treasury demand/supply shock β̃t , which follows a Markov chain
β̃t ∈ {0, β}. The jump intensity from β̃t = 0 (β̃t = β) to β̃t = β (β̃t = 0) is denoted by ξ0 (ξβ ). We
interpret β̃t = 0 (β̃t = β) as the normal (stress) state; and our model can capture both demand
and supply shocks depending on the sign of β.
We consider zero-coupon Treasury bonds which mature at the tenor τ ∈ [0, T ]. Denote by Pt (τ )
their endogenous price to be solved in equilibrium.

3.2

Habitat Agents

Following Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) we consider an exogenous demand/supply shock from
habitat agents, so that their holdings of bonds with tenor τ is

Ht (τ ) = −θ (τ ) β̃t ,

(1)

where θ (τ ) captures the exposure to the shock. Without loss of generality, let θ (τ ) ≥ 0. The case
of β > 0 corresponds to an exogenous supply shock to the economy, while the case of β < 0 it
represents a demand shock. These habitat agents represent insurance companies, pension funds,
and/or foreign central banks in practice.
Let Θ ≡

RT
0

θ (τ ) dτ . We first analyze the model without specifying the function θ (·). Depending

on applications, we later specialize the function θ (·) either to

θ (τ ) =




1,

for τ > τ̂ ,



0,

otherwise,

(2)

so that the (negative) demand shock hits the long-end of the curve, or let θ (τ ) = 1 for all τ ∈ [0, T ]
so that the demand shock applies to the entire curve.
16

3.3

Hedge Funds and Repo

A unit measure of hedge funds in this economy can borrow from dealers in the repo market to
e When a hedge
exploit the investment opportunity created by aggregate demand/supply shocks β.

fund borrows one dollar from a dealer by pledging one dollar of Treasury bonds as collateral, she
needs to pay an endogenous repo financing rate of Rt dt.
Following Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) we assume that each hedge fund solves the following
instantaneous mean-variance objective at time t

h

i

max Et dGht −

qth (τ )≥0

h
i
1
V art dGht .
2ρh

(3)

where dGht is the hedge fund’s trading gain, and ρh > 0 is the hedge fund’s risk-bearing capacity
(or risk tolerance, the inverse of their absolute risk-aversion). Given the repo financing cost Rt
which will be determined in equilibrium, the dynamics of her wealth is given by


dGht =

Z T

qth (τ )

0

| {z }

hedge-fund holdings, repo demand





 dPt (τ )



−
R
dt
t  dτ.
 P (τ )
| t
{z
}

(4)

trading profit

For each τ ∈ [0, T ], the hedge fund sector’s repo demand, denoted by qth (τ ), in general depends
on the repo financing cost Rt ; the higher the Rt , the greater the demand. This price-dependence
of repo demand is one of our key contributions relative to Greenwood and Vayanos (2014).

3.4

The Dealer Sector

A unit measure of risk-averse dealers absorb the residual Treasury supply/demand shocks and
provide overnight repo funding to the hedge fund sector.
3.4.1

Dealer’s problem

Following Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) we assume that each dealer solves the following instantaneous mean-variance objective at time t:

max

xt (τ ),qtd (τ )≥0

h

i

Et dwtd −
17

h
i
1
V art dwtd ,
2ρd

(5)

where ρd > 0 is the dealer’s risk-bearing capacity, and the dynamics of his wealth, dwtd − wtd rt dt, is
given by




Z T
 dP τ



xt (τ )  τt − rt dt − Λt dt  dτ +
| {z } 
 Pt
| {z }
0
0
{z
} B/S cost
direct holdings |

Z T





qtd (τ ) 


| {z }
repo

∆

t
|{z}

repo wedge

−

Λ

t
|{z}


 dtdτ

(6)

B/S cost

excess return

s.t.

xt (τ ) + qtd (τ ) ≥ 0.
|

{z

(7)

}

no naked-short-selling

Here, xt (τ ) is the direct holdings of bond τ (in terms of dollars, which could be negative), and
qtd ≥ 0 is the dealer’s reverse repo position (i.e., repo funding provided to hedge funds).
In Eq. (6), we have defined
∆t ≡ Rt − rt ,

(8)

which captures the wedge between the collateralized borrowing rate Rt in the repo market and
the instantaneous risk-free lending rate rt . We do not specify in more detail the funding markets
in which dealers borrow at rate rt . Empirically, we approximate rt with the repo rate from the
triparty market because funding flows in this market are mainly from cash lenders like money
market funds to large dealers. We proxy for Rt with the GCF repo rate because the funding flows
in the GCF are mainly from large dealers to smaller dealers. The wedge between GCF and Triparty
repo rates therefore captures the wedge between the rates at which large dealers lend and borrow
in collateralized funding markets and it corresponds to ∆t in our model. This GCF-Triparty repo
wedge is a riskless profit earned by the dealer sector in equilibrium. In the next section, we explain
the additional balance sheet cost Λt in the dealer’s budget equation (6) that allows this wedge to
exist.
In the baseline model we rule out “naked” short-selling for our dealers, as required by (7). We
envision that repo is the only channel through which dealers borrow the bonds and then short-sell
them to habitat agents. As a result, xt (τ ), whenever it is negative, has to be bounded by the
dealer’s reverse repo position qtd ≥ 0; this gives rise to the constraint xt (τ ) + qtd (τ ) ≥ 0 in (7). In
practice, dealers can also resort to borrowing bonds in the costlier securities lending market, or even
engage in “naked” short sales by failing to deliver the short-sold bond (delivery failures were quite
common around the time of 2007-09 financial crisis). We relax the no-naked-short-selling condition
18

(7) later in Section 4.3 when we apply our model to the episode of 2007-09 financial crisis.

3.4.2

Balance sheet cost

Compared with Greenwood and Vayanos (2014), we study the repo market in which dealers provide
repo services qtd (τ ) in (6), in addition to their portfolio choice xt (τ ). What is more, dealers face
an additional balance sheet cost—denoted by Λt —in their portfolio choices in our model. Each
individual dealer takes the marginal cost Λt as given, so the total effect is linear in their own
positions xt (τ ) and qtd (τ ). The balance sheet cost Λt depends on the aggregate holdings only; one
can think of a frictionless inter-dealer market which equalizes these costs across dealers.
Recall that for each tenor τ , the aggregate bond holdings in the dealer sector is Xt (τ ), and the
aggregate reverse repo Qdt (τ ). What is the balance sheet size for tenor τ ? There are two cases to
consider.
1. If Xt (τ ) ≥ 0, then the accounting is straightforward. The balance sheet occupied by tenor-τ
bonds, denoted by Bt (τ ), is simply
Bt (τ ) = Xt (τ ) + Qdt (τ ) .
Denote Qdt ≡

RT
0

Qdt (τ ) dτ . Integrating over τ ∈ [0, T ], we can calculate the balance sheet

size of the entire dealer sector as

Bt ≡

Z T
0

Xt (τ ) dτ + Qdt .

(9)

Note, all equilibrium aggregate variables, Xt (τ ), Qdt and Bt , will depend on the aggregate
bond demand shock βet .
2. When Xt (τ ) < 0 (i.e., when the dealer is short selling some tenor-τ bonds), then
Bt (τ ) = Qdt (τ ) .

To see this, recall that we have ruled out naked short selling in Section (3.4). To sell short
a bond, the dealer therefore must first borrow the bond via the repo market. The dealer’s

19

short sale may be smaller than than his entire reverse repo position; in this case, the dealer’s
liability side books both the short sale and his tri-party repo market borrowing.18
Combining these two cases, we can write the aggregate size of the dealer’s balance sheet as

Bt ≡

Z T
0

max (Xt (τ ) , 0) dτ + Qdt .

As we will see, the particular supply shock during the COVID-19 crisis implies that Case 1 prevails
in equilibrium.
We assume that the marginal balance sheet cost Λt ≡ Λ (Bt ) is linear in the balance sheet size
Bt :
Λt = λBt , with λ > 0.
In words, the dealer is bearing a marginal cost from taking on an extra dollar of Treasuries (whether
directly held by the dealer or indirectly by financing hedge funds’ positions) onto the balance sheet,
and this cost is increasing in the aggregate balance sheet size Bt .
As explained in the introduction, the balance sheet cost captures the Supplementary Leverage
Ratio (SLR) constraint combined with some cost of raising equity (with an upward sloping equity
supply curve, say as in He and Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013b)).

3.5

Equilibrium

Without loss of generality, we follow Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) by normalizing the aggregate
bond supply for each tenor τ ∈ [0, T ] to be zero. We focus on symmetric equilibrium in which
individual agents (hedge funds and dealers) are employing the same strategy as their own groups,
respectively. In aggregate, for tenor τ , the dealer sector has Xt (τ ) = xt (τ ) amount of direct (cash)
Treasury holdings and provides Qdt (τ ) = qtd (τ ) ≥ 0 amount of reverse repo.
We define the equilibrium in the standard way:
As an example, suppose that a dealer engages in q d (τ ) = 3 repo lending, and at the same time holds a short
position x = −1 by having (short) sold in the Treasury market. This implies that the dealer first takes 3 dollars worth
of bonds that he receives through reverse repo; he then passes 2 dollars’ worth of bonds as collateral in the Tri-party
repo market (where the collateral would have rested without being available to anyone else for purchase), and sells the
remaining 1 dollar of bonds to the Treasury market. On the dealer’s balance sheet, the dealer’s obligation to return
the borrowed and short-sold Treasuries to the habitat agents is recorded as a liability of 1 as “Financial instruments
sold but not yet purchased.” Adding the 2 dollars of liability in the form of Tri-party repo, the balance sheet size of
this dealer is 3, which is his total repo position.
18

20

Definition 1. Given the demand by habitat agents Ht = −θ (τ ) β̃t in (1), a (symmetric) equilibrium
is a collection of quantities

n

qth (τ ) , Qht (τ )

o

by hedge funds,

n

o

xt (τ ) , Xt (τ ) , qtd (τ ) , Qdt (τ )

by

dealers, and prices {Pt (τ ) , Λt , Φt (τ )}, so that
1. Each hedge fund solves the problem in (3);
2. Each dealer solves the problem in (5);
3. Allocations are symmetric and consistent: qth (τ ) = Qht (τ ), xt (τ ) = Xt (τ ), and qtd (τ ) =
Qdt (τ );
4. Both Treasury and repo markets clear for τ ∈ [0, T ], i.e.,

0 = Ht (τ ) + Qht (τ ) + Xt (τ ) ,

(10)

0 = Qht (τ ) − Qdt (τ ) .

Since Qht (τ ) = Qdt (τ ) in equilibrium, we will use Q to denote them whenever without risk of
confusion. Figure 4 illustrates the model setting with X > 0. There is an aggregate bond (risk)
supply S to be borne by habitat agents (via direct holdings X and Q) and dealers (direct holdings
X). But as shown, dealers are serving as the counterparty for repo transactions Q, which occupy
their balance sheet—hence a balance sheet size of B = Q + X. We will come back to Figure 4 in
Section 4.1.5 to offer a full illustration of how this simple fact drives the interesting interactions
between the repo market and Treasury market in our model.

4

Model Solution and Implications

We first consider a special case of our model and illustrate its economic mechanism in detail. We
then show that this case is sufficiently rich to deliver interesting empirical patterns during the
Treasury market breakdown when the pandemic hit the U.S. in mid-March 2020.

4.1

Model Solution and Mechanism

As the main focus our paper is on the 2020 COVID-19 crisis, in this section we consider β > 0
which entails a positive supply shock of Treasuries to be absorbed by dealers and hedge funds.
21

As in Greenwood and Vayanos (2014), the demand from habitat agents is price inelastic, and
hence exogenously determined by the aggregate demand shock as Ht (τ ) = −θ (τ ) β̃t < 0 given in
(1). Invoking the market clearing condition (10) we immediately know that in equilibrium

Qt (τ ) + Xt (τ ) = θ (τ ) β̃t ≥ 0 for all τ ∈ [0, T ] .

(11)

This implies that the naked-short-selling constraint (7) never binds in equilibrium. We study the
alternative case in Section (4.3).

4.1.1

Equilibrium balance sheet size and repo wedge

We will show soon in equilibrium that

Xt (τ ) ≥ 0 for all τ ∈ [0, T ] .

(12)

As explained in Section (3.4.2), under (12) the dealer’s balance sheet size for bond τ is Bt (τ ) =
Qt (τ )+Xt (τ ). This is particularly convenient because then the market clearing 0 = Ht (τ )+Qt (τ )+
Xt (τ ) in (10) implies that the equilibrium balance sheet size is independent of the equilibrium repo
size Qt (τ ):
Bt (τ ) = −Ht (τ ) ≥ 0.
To see this, imagine the hedge fund sector buys one dollar’s worth of bonds from the dealer, but
using leverage through repo. While this reduces the risk the dealer has to bear, it does not relax
the dealer’s balance sheet.
We now use (1) to calculate the equilibrium aggregate balance sheet (recall Θ =

RT
0

θ (τ ) dτ )

Z T

Bt =

Bt (τ ) dτ = β̃t Θ.

(13)

0

Equation (11) and Qt (τ ) ≥ 0 imply that the dealer is taking an interior repo position in equilibrium.
Because the dealer’s objective is linear in the repo funding supply Qt (τ ), with a marginal benefit

22

of ∆t − Λt , in equilibrium it must be that

∆t = Λt = λBt > 0.

This result has important implications for our problem. Per unit of Treasury bond, the dealer’s
holding cost is the balance sheet cost Λt while the hedge fund’s holding cost is the repo financing
wedge ∆t . In equilibrium they must be the same.
4.1.2

Optimal risk sharing within the intermediary sector

The same holding cost for both dealers and hedge funds imply that they are facing the same
problem. To see this, because the dealer’s problem is linear in the reverse repo q d , the profit from
repo provision must be zero.19 Plugging in ∆t = Λt one can show that the wealth dynamics of a
dealer and that of a hedge fund are identical.
In our model, dealers and hedge funds only differ in their risk-bearing capacity ad and ah .
However, the standard asset pricing result implies that, in equilibrium, the optimal risk sharing
has dealers (hedge funds) directly hold

Xt (τ ) = −

ρd
Ht (τ ) ,
ρd + ρh

(14)

and the hedge fund sector to hold (Qht (τ ) = Qt (τ ))
Qt (τ ) = −

4.1.3

ρh
Ht (τ ) .
ρd + ρh

(15)

Euler equation and equilibrium asset pricing

We now study equilibrium bond pricing based on the standard Euler equation. The derivation in
this section is an extension of Greenwood and Vayanos (2014) but with Poisson jumps. What is
more, in our model the equilibrium pricing kernel—which is determined by {Xt {τ } : τ ∈ [0, T ]}—
is endogenous and pinned down by the dealer’s equilibrium holdings (14) under the optimal risk
sharing just shown.
19

Recall that the no-naked-short-selling constraint (7) never binds in equilibrium due to (12).

23

Denote Pβ̃τ t ≡ Pβ̃t t (τ ) and guess that the equilibrium prices take the form of
t

h



Pβ̃τt t = exp − A (τ ) rt + Cβ̃t (τ )

i

, with β̃t ∈ {0, β}

(16)

where A (τ ), C0 (τ ), and Cβ (τ ) are endogenous functions of τ . We only outline the key steps for
the dealer’s Euler equation; for detailed derivations and numerical method, see Appendix A.
For illustration, suppose that β̃t = β—i.e., the demand shock has occurred to the economy.
Applying Ito’s Lemma we have
τ
n
o
dPβt
= µτβt dt + eC0 (τ )−Cβ (τ ) − 1 (dNt − ξβ dt) − A (τ ) σdZt ,
τ
Pβt

where dNt denotes the Poisson shock with intensity ξβ , and the drift of the bond return is given by


1
µτβt ≡ A0 (τ ) rt + A (τ ) κ (rt − r) + Cβ0 (τ ) + A2 (τ ) σ 2 + ξβ eCβ (τ )−C0 (τ ) − 1 .
2

(17)

Recall that the dealer is maximizing his mean-variance objective over (as the equilibrium profits
from repo service is zero)

dwtd

−

wtd rt dt

Z T

=
0

τ
dPβt
xβt (τ )
τ − rt dt − Λβt dt dτ,
Pβt

!

so that
h

i

h

i

Et dwtd − wtd rt dt =
Vart dwtd

−

wtd rt dt

Z T
0





xβt (τ ) µτβt − rt − Λβt dt dτ dt,

Z T



xβt (τ ) e

=

Cβ (τ )−C0 (τ )

0



− 1 dτ

!2

!2

Z T

ξβ dt +

xβt (τ ) A (τ ) dτ

σ 2 dt.

0

As a result, we can derive the representative dealer’s Euler equation from his first-order condition

24

with respect to xβt (τ ) :
µτβt − rt − Λβt
expected effective excess return

σ2
ρd

Z T

+
Xβt (u) A (u) du
0
risk premium for Brownian interest rate risk σdZt

=



A (τ )

 ξ Z Tn
β

eC0 (τ )−Cβ (τ ) − 1 ·

ρd





o

Xβt (u) eCβ (τ )−C0 (τ ) − 1 du ,

(18)

0
risk premium for Poisson demand risk β̃

where we have invoked the dealer’s equilibrium holdings xβt (τ ) = Xβt (τ ), which are given by (14).
Note, one can also write the Euler equation from the entire intermediary sector’s perspective: it
absorbs the whole supply shock −Ht (τ ) but with an effective risk bearing capacity of ρI ≡ ρd + ρh .
Now plugging in (17), one can derive A (τ ) =

1−e−κτ
κ

and an ordinary differential equation

(ODE) for Cβ (·). Repeating the same exercise for β̃t = 0 (i.e., before the economy is hit by the
demand shock), we obtain another ODE for C0 (·). Appendix A gives the details as well as the
numerical algorithm to solve for {C0 (·) , Cβ (·)}.
Equation (18) is the standard Euler equation for the representative risk-averse dealer. The
left-hand side gives the bond τ ’s expected effective excess return, net the balance sheet cost. In
equilibrium it equals the risk premium that compensates the dealer for bearing the additional
Brownian interest rate risk σdZt and Poisson demand risk β̃, as shown on the right-hand side of
(18).
Equation (18) also makes it clear that the entire dealer’s equilibrium portfolio {Xt {τ } : τ ∈ [0, T ]}
pins down the pricing kernel in this model that prices each bond with tenor τ . Similar to Greenwood and Vayanos (2014), demand shocks affect the dealer’s equilibrium holdings and hence the
pricing kernel. Dealers who absorb an increase in the supply of long-term bonds bear more interest rate risk in their portfolio, and hence in equilibrium require all bonds—both long-term and
short-term—to offer higher expected returns in excess of the short rate.

4.1.4

Shadow price for OIS curves

One of the key empirical objectives in our paper is to track changes in the (in-)convenience yield
of Treasuries during the COVID-19 crisis episode. For this reason, we seek a maturity-matched
benchmark for comparison that isolates the (in-)convenience yield. In our model, we can define as
benchmark a derivative asset with the exact same cash flows as physical Treasury bonds, but free
25

from balance sheet or inventory concerns and hence free from inconvenience yields. Empirically, we
proxy for the yield of this derivative asset with overnight index swap (OIS) rates. In practice, the
weight imposed by the SLR constraint on interest rate derivative contracts is about two orders of
magnitude smaller than the underlying bonds,20 and dealers can in principle write any derivative
contracts in case there is a demand, free from the physical “inventory” constraints.
Similar to Garleanu and Pedersen (2011), suppose that dealers in our model are quoting prices
the price of an OIS
for OIS contracts, which are zero-net supply in equilibrium. Denote by Pβ̃OIS,τ
t
t

contract with tenor τ , which takes the following functional form (one can show that A (τ ) =

1−e−κτ
κ

as in Section 4.1.3)
h



= exp − A (τ ) rt + Cβ̃OIS
(τ )
Pβ̃OIS,τ
t
t
t

i

, with β̃t ∈ {0, β} .

(19)

/dt satisfies the standard Euler equation but without the balance sheet
Then the drift of dPβ̃OIS,τ
t
t

and inventory adjustment:
µOIS,τ
−rt = A (τ )
βt

σ2
ρd

Z T

 ξ Z Tn
β



Xβt (u) A (u) du+ eC0 (τ )−Cβ (τ ) − 1 ·

0

ρd





0

(20)
n

o

One can solve for C0OIS (·) , CβOIS (·) following the same technique as in Section (4.1.3) (for details,
see Appendix A.3).
The Treasury-OIS spread at τ roughly captures the Treasury’s extra holding cost Λt during
the remaining time-to-maturity τ , discounted by the equilibrium pricing kernel which takes into
account aggregate demand shock. Hence through the lens of our model, Treasury-OIS spreads
observed in the empirical data capture the Treasury (in)convenience yields.

4.1.5

Summary and model mechanism

The following proposition summarizes what we have shown.
Proposition 1. Consider the scenario of a potential supply shock, i.e., β > 0, from the habitat
agents. Recall the habitat agents random demand Ht (τ ) = −θ (τ ) β̃t . The equilibrium is character20
The Potential Future Exposure of derivative contracts equals the effective notional principal amount, times the
add-on factor. The add-on factor for interest rate derivatives is 0 for bonds with remaining maturity of one-year or
less; 0.5% over 1 to 5 years; and 1.5% over 5 years.

26

o

Xβt (u) eCβ (τ )−C0 (τ ) − 1 du .

ized by:
1. The dealer’s balance sheet size and the equilibrium repo rate spread is given by

Bt = β̃t Θ, and ∆t = Λt = λBt = λβ̃t Θ;

2. The holdings of Treasury bonds by hedge funds via repo financing are
ρh
θ (τ ) β̃t ;
ρd + ρh

Qt (τ ) =

3. The direct holdings of Treasury bonds with tenor τ by the dealer sector are
ρd
θ (τ ) β̃t ;
ρd + ρh

Xt (τ ) =

) in Eq. (16) (Eq. (19)) satisfy the Euler equa4. The equilibrium bond (OIS) prices Pβ̃τ t ( Pβ̃OIS,τ
t
t

t

tion Eq. (18) (Eq. (20)), with solution A (τ ) =
n

1−e−κτ
κ

and the ODE system of {C0 (·) , Cβ (·)}

o

( C0OIS (·) , CβOIS (·) ) in Eq. (35) (Eq. (36)) given in Appendix A.3.
Figure 4 illustrates the workings of our model; the mechanism applies to tenor-τ bonds as well
as the entire maturity spectrum. Say a supply shock hits habitat agents (β̃t jumps from 0 to β > 0).
As illustrated by Figure 4, the dealers’ balance sheet B = −H expands due to market clearing.
The greater the (negative) demand shock size β, the larger the dealers’ balance sheet size, and
hence the higher the balance sheet cost Λ (B) = λB. This effect is stronger for a larger balance
sheet cost parameter λ, which presumably reflects the scarcity of intermediary capital (He and
Krishnamurthy (2012, 2013b)) and/or debt overhang (Andersen, Duffie, and Song (2019)).
Hedge funds step in to absorb the supply shock from habitat agents via collateralized repo
borrowing from dealers. Since reverse repo takes up space on the dealers’ balance sheet, in equilibrium the dealers pass the balance sheet cost Λ through to hedge funds via the repo wedge ∆ on a
one-to-one basis, adversely affecting the repo demand Q from the hedge fund sector. In equilibrium
both dealers and hedge funds achieve the optimal risk sharing.
The dealers’ direct holding X pins down their pricing kernel and hence equilibrium bond prices
via their Euler equation (18). As noted in Figure 4, the balance sheet cost Λ, as the holding cost or
27

Figure 4: Model Schematic Diagram

Dealers’ Balance Sheet 𝐵𝐵 = 𝑄𝑄 + 𝑋𝑋 = −𝐻𝐻
𝐵𝐵 (↑) drives up B/S cost Λ = 𝜆𝜆𝜆𝜆 (↑)

Hedge fund demand via
Repo, decreasing in Δ = Λ (↑)

𝑄𝑄 (↑)

Dealers’ direct holding
Λ(↑) and pricing kernel

𝑋𝑋(↑)

Optimal Risk Sharing

Hedge funds’ Risk Exposure 𝑄𝑄 Dealers’ Risk Exposure 𝑋𝑋
𝛽𝛽� shock to Habitat agents’ holdings −𝐻𝐻 (↑)

Notes: A schematic representation of the model when the economy suffers from a supply shock β̃ > 0 from
habitat agents. Increasing one-to-one to absorb the supply shock, the dealers’ balance sheet (with a size
B = −H) accommodates not only dealers’ direct holdings (X) but also repo financing (Q) from hedge funds.

inconvenience yield per unit of Treasury bonds, also enters in the Euler equation (18). In contrast,
the OIS curve, which does not entail the balance sheet cost, is driven by the dealers’ pricing kernel
only.

4.2

Treasury Market Breakdown in the COVIC-19 Crisis in 2020

We show that a simple special case of our model, which features a supply shock to long-term
Treasuries, can explain the market turmoil experienced in March 2020. Consider θ (τ ) = 1{τ >τ̂ }
and β > 0, so that long-term Treasuries are being sold by habitat agents. We then have Θ =
RT
0

θ (τ ) dτ = T − τ̂ in all the equilibrium objects in Proposition 1. In our illustrative numerical

example, we set τ̂ = 5.

4.2.1

Model implications: Treasury inconvenience yield

Figure 5 Panel A (left) plots the equilibrium yield curves at the normal state β̃ = 0 and the stressed
state β̃ = β > 0. We observe that the yield at the long-end rises when the hedge fund sector and

28

dealers are absorbing the aggregate supply shock from the habitat agents. As in Greenwood and
Vayanos (2014), the equilibrium yield at the short-end also rises because all Treasury bonds are
priced by the same marginal investors (hedge funds and dealers). Importantly, we observe that the
yield curve steepens in the stressed state, consistent with yield curve movements in March 2020
(see Figure 1).
To express the new implication of our paper, Figure 5 Panel B (right) plots the equilibrium
repo GCF-Triparty wedge ∆ (left axis) and 10-year Treasury-OIS spread (right axis) in the stress
state β̃ = β, both as a function of the supply shock size β. The equilibrium repo wedge ∆ equals
the balance sheet cost Λt = λΘβ̃t , which is linear in the supply shock size β in the stress state.
This represents the extra holding cost of Treasury bonds on the dealer’s balance sheet (i.e., the
inconvenience yield of Treasuries). This inconvenience yield is state-dependent, and drives about a
5-bps wedge between the instantaneous Treasury yield and risk-free short rate rt in Panel A in the
stress state.
In Panel B we see that our model generates a positive implied 10-year Treasury-OIS spread,
thanks to the balance sheet cost. The model implied 10-year Treasury-OIS spread is increasing in
the shock size β, just like the repo wedge ∆. These theoretical predictions will be confirmed in the
data, as shown in the next section.

4.2.2

Empirical evidence of Treasury inconvenience yield

Figure 6 plots daily series of the 10-year and 3-month Treasury-OIS spreads (in the left panel)
during the COVID-19 crisis. Consistent with the model prediction (Figure 5 Panel B), the 10-year
Treasury-OIS spread is indeed positive. Moreover, it decreased before 3/9/2020, consistent with
a standard flight-to-safety to long-term Treasuries, but shot up since then amid a selling pressure
by investors who scrambled for cash. On 3/15 right before the Fed announced direct purchases of
Treasuries, the 10-year Treasury-OIS spread jumped up by about 30bps, consistent with an increase
of Λt in our model. In contrast, the 3-month Treasury-OIS spread decreased on 3/15, consistent
with the supply shock being concentrated at the long end. The 10-year Treasury-OIS spread began
to decrease afterwards likely because the Fed’s direct purchases weakened the supply shock.
The right panel of Figure 6 plots daily series of the GCF-Triparty repo spread during the
COVID-19 crisis. Also consistent with the model prediction (Figure 5 Panel B), the repo spread
29

Figure 5: Supply Shock: Yield Curves, Repo Spreads, and Treasury-OIS Spreads
Panel A

0.04

Panel B

20
18

0.035

16
0.03
14

basis points

yield

0.025
0.02
0.015

12
10
8
6

0.01
4
0.005

2

0

0
0

2

4

6

8

10

0

0.005

0.01

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

0.035

0.04

Notes: Panel A (left) plots model-implied Treasury yield curves in both states (normal β̃ = 0 and stressed
β̃ = β); Panel B (right) plots model-implied GCF-Triparty Repo spreads and Treasury–OIS spreads. The
model captures a supply shock for Treasury bonds from habitat agents so that β > 0, just like in 2020
COVID-19 crisis. Parameters: r̄ = 0.055, κ = 0.201, ρh = ρd = 1/57, σ = 0.017, ξ0 = 0.1, ξβ = 0.4, λ = 0.01,
and rt = 0.

is mostly positive. It spiked up as high as 60 basis points during the two-week period from 3/9 to
3/23, driven by the increase of the balance sheet cost Λt associated with the supply shock. Holders
of long-term Treasury securities found it hard to post them as collateral in the repo market to raise
cash.
Together with the results in Section 2.1, we find that during the COVID-19 crisis, both the
long-term Treasury yield and repo spread increased considerably. Consistent with our model, these
increases are associated with the sale of long-term Treasuries. Primary dealers only take a limited
amount of them, and also provide limited repo funding for levered investors to take them until the
Fed steps in with direct purchases.

4.3

Excess Treasury Demand and 2007–09 Financial Crisis

While our focus in this paper is on the COVID-19 crisis in 2020, we now show that one can also
understand, through the lens of the same model, the movements of yields and yield spreads during
the 2007-09 financial crisis. This serves as a useful additional validation of the model.
We have so far focused on the case with a supply shock from habitat agents, i.e., β > 0. But in
the 2007-09 financial crisis, the shock was a different one. In the early stages of the financial crisis,
30

Figure 6: Treasury-OIS and GCF-Triparty Repo Spreads during the COVID-19 Crisis
.6

3/9/2020 3/23/2020

1/30/2020

3/9/2020 3/23/2020

0

-.2

0

.2

.2

.4

.4

.6

1/30/2020

01jan2020

01feb2020
Treasury-OIS: 3m

01mar2020

01apr2020 01jan2020

01feb2020

Treasury-OIS: 10y

01mar2020

01apr2020

GCF - Triparty Spread

Notes: This figure plots daily series of the 10-year and 3-month Treasury-OIS spreads (left panel) and of the
GCF-Triparty repo spread (right panel), from January 1, 2020 to April 13, 2020.

there was a positive demand shock for Treasuries. To accommodate such a demand shock, the
intermediary sector has to short-sell some bonds to meet that excess demand from habitat agents.
In this section we first introduce costly naked short-selling into our base model, and then apply this
model to understand the empirical patterns in the 2007-09 financial crisis. Since this is an episode
prior to the SLR regulation, the analysis in this section ignores the balance sheet cost (it is trivial
to add back the balance sheet cost).
As there is no clear term structure pattern in 2007-09 financial crisis, for exposition purposes
we eliminate the tenor-dependence of demand shocks by setting θ (τ ) = 1 in this section; hence
Θ = T . We therefore drop τ whenever appropriate, especially for aggregate quantities and prices.

4.3.1

Excess Treasury Demand and Naked Short-Selling

When Treasury demand surges, β̃t = β < 0 implies that Ht > 0. In this case, the no-naked-shortselling constraint in (7) must fail, simply because

Qt + Xt = −Ht < 0.

(21)

We introduce naked short-selling to accommodate this empirically relevant case. We assume
that naked short-selling is costly, which captures reputation loss or regulatory penalty when the

31

dealer fails to deliver. We could equivalently introduce a securities lending market in which dealers
engage in a search for Treasury bonds to borrow from some habitat agents, and then sell to other
habitat agents who demand these bonds, as long as these security lending activities entail some
cost (for instance, it is difficult to locate the securities).
For each tenor τ , denote by ndt (τ ) ≥ 0 the amount of naked short-selling that the dealer is
engaged in, with an additional marginal cost Γt ≥ 0 (to be specified shortly). The dealer’s wealth
dynamics dwt − rwt dt now equal
Z T
0

s.t.

dPtτ
xt (τ )
− rt dt dτ −
Ptτ




Z T
0

ndt (τ ) Γt dτ dt +

Z T
0

qtd (τ ) ∆t dτ

xt (τ ) + ndt (τ ) + qtd (τ ) ≥ 0,

(22)
(23)

qtd (τ ) ≥ 0, ndt (τ ) ≥ 0.

The dealer is facing the exact same problem as before in (6), except one difference: now he can
short-sell nt (τ ) dollars of bonds to relax his short-selling constraint (23) at a cost of ndt (τ ) Γt .21
For simplicity, we assume that hedge funds are endowed with the same technology in naked
short-selling as dealers. More specifically, if the hedge fund short-sells nht (τ ) amount of bonds,
then its wealth dynamics dwth − wth rt dt read

Z T
0




Z T
 
 dPt (τ ) 


 dτ −
nht (τ ) Γt dτ dt
−
R
1
+
r
1
dt
h
h
t
t
qt (τ )≥0
qt (τ )<0

| {z } 
0
|Pt (τ )

{z
}

qth (τ )

holdings

trading profit

s.t.

qth (τ ) + nht (τ ) ≥ 0.

Here, if the hedge fund is holding a short position qth (τ ) < 0, then it earns a short risk-less rate rt
on the sales proceeds.
Suppose that in equilibrium the hedge fund sector is offering Nth (τ ) amount of naked shortselling. To close the model, we assume that the naked short-selling cost Γt is increasing in the
For instance, xt (τ ) = −1.5, qtd (τ ) = 1, and ndt (τ ) = 0.5 imply that the dealer short-sells 1 unit of Treasury via
repo, and short-sells another 0.5 through either naked positions or security lending.
21

32

equilibrium aggregate naked short selling Nt ≡ Nth + Ntd . For simplicity we assume that
Γt ≡ Γ (Nt ) = γNt for some γ > 0.

4.3.2

Equilibrium repo wedge and bond pricing

Naked short-selling allows us to connect its cost Γt to the repo wedge ∆t in equilibrium. Some
positive naked short-selling Nt > 0 must occur in equilibrium given a positive excess Treasury
demand −Ht < 0 (recall Eq. (21)). Then, a strictly positive cost of naked short-selling Γt = λNt > 0
implies that (23) holds with equality, with

Nt = −Qt − Xt = −β̃t > 0.

In fact, because both hedge funds and dealers are endowed with the same naked-short-selling
constraint, in equilibrium they will absorb the habitat agents’ demand shock in proportion to their
risk-bearing capacity as in Section (4.1.2):
ρh
β̃t < 0
ρh + ρd
ρd
Qt = −Nth =
β̃t < 0.
ρh + ρd

Xt = −Ntd =

In this case, in equilibrium both hedge funds and dealers are in a short position, and hence the
equilibrium repo volume is zero (note, in our model repo can only be used to finance long positions).
However, the shadow price of repo financing is linked to the cost of naked short-selling. To see
this, each dealer in equilibrium is solving the following problem

max

qtS ≥0,ndt =Ntd ≥0

−ndt · Γt + qtd · ∆t ,

with a linear constraint (23). Because dealers are free to obtain one unit of security via repo (and
then sell it short), in equilibrium they will offer an attractive repo wedge to just offset the naked

33

short-selling cost:22
∆t = −Γt = −γNt = γT β̃t < 0.

(24)

The negative repo wedge can be viewed as a natural consequence of a Treasury bond shortage
given a demand shock. In our model, the Triparty repo rate is fixed by the short-term risk-free
rate rt . But dealers are desperate to borrow and short-sell Treasury bonds to satisfy the habitat
agents’ surging demand. Intuitively, dealers are bidding down the GCF repo rate aggressively and
willing to eat the loss of GCF-Triparty repo wedge (∆t ), as long as in equilibrium this loss can be
covered from the saved cost of cutting an extra dollar of naked short-selling (Γt ). This mechanism
is similar to Treasury being “special” in Duffie (1996).
Given this, one can solve for equilibrium bond pricing as in Section 4.1.5, recognizing that now
the holding cost of an additional Treasury bond is negative with ∆t = γT β̃t < 0—i.e., a convenience
yield.
Figure 7: Demand Shock: Yield Curves, Repo Spreads, and Treasury-OIS Spreads
Panel A

0.042

Panel B

0

0.04

-5

0.038

basis points

-10

yield

0.036

0.034

-15

-20
0.032
-25

0.03

0.028
0

2

4

6

8

-30
-0.03

10

-0.025

-0.02

-0.015

-0.01

-0.005

0

Notes: Panel A (left) panel plots model-implied Treasury yield curves in both states (normal β̃ = 0 and
stressed β̃ = β); Panel B (right) plots model-implied GCF-Triparty Repo spreads and Treasury-OIS spreads.
The model captures a demand shock for Treasury bonds from habitat agents so that β < 0, just like in the
2007–09 financial crisis. Parameters: r̄ = 0.055, κ = 0.201, ρh = ρd = 1/57, σ = 0.017, ξ0 = 0.1, ξβ = 0.4, γ =
0.01, and rt = 0.03.
22
We have assumed away tenor-dependent demand shocks in this section, by setting θ (τ ) = 1 for all τ ∈ [0, T ]. For
general θ (τ ), in equilibrium Nt (τ ) = Ht (τ ) as well as the cost of naked short-selling γNt (τ ) will be τ -dependent.
This would be inconsistent with our General Collateral (GC) repo market setting, in which the repo wedge ∆t is
uniform across all tenor τ . The special repo market studied in Duffie (1996) precisely captures this tenor-τ dependent
demand, and would be an interesting direction for future research.

34

4.3.3

Treasury convenience yield in 2007–09 financial crisis: Theory and evidence

As before Figure 7 Panel A (left) plots the equilibrium yield curves at the normal state β̃ = 0 and
the stressed state β̃ = β < 0 (demand shock). Overall the yield curve is downward sloping. This is
because the dealers (hedge funds) are in a short position in equilibrium; long-term bonds provide
a hedge benefit for the marginal investor, hence demand a lower premium.
In contrast to the supply shock we studied in Section 4.2, the demand shock β̃ = β < 0 pushes
down the entire yield curve. Figure 7 Panel B then plots the equilibrium GCF-Triparty repo wedge
∆ (left axis) and 10-year Treasury-OIS spread (right axis) after the demand shock, both as a
function of the shock size β < 0. The equilibrium repo wedge ∆, which is now negative, equals the
naked short-selling cost Γt = λT β̃t < 0. This implies that Treasuries enjoy a convenience yield—a
holding benefit—which is widely documented in the safe asset literature. This explains a negative
implied 10-year Treasury-OIS spread, that is increasing in the shock size β, as plotted in the same
figure.
Turning to empirical analysis, Figure 8 plots weekly series of the holdings of Treasuries by
foreign investors, Fed, and primary dealers, as well as the repo amounts of primary dealers, from
January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2008. The three event dates considered are 7/31/2007 when
Bear Stearns filled for bankruptcy, 9/15/2008 when Lehman Brothers filled for bankruptcy, and
11/25/2008 when the Fed announced the direct purchases of agency MBS. We observe a flightto-safety to long-term Treasuries in the 2007–09 crisis, in sharp contrast to their selling pressure
during the COVID-19 crisis (see Figure 3). In particular, the top left panel shows a large increase
in foreign investors’ holdings of long-term Treasuries by about $350bn since July 31, 2007, while
the top right panel shows a decrease in the Fed’s holdings. In stark contrast to March 2020, the Fed
reduced its holdings of Treasuries to help accommodate the safety demand. Primary dealers were
net short in Treasuries, especially coupon Treasuries, and were on the net lending side in the repo
market. That is, they maintained short positions in their market-making portfolios of Treasuries
and often borrowed Treasuries in the repo market. Their net short cash positions and net repo
lending amounts trended lower towards the end of 2008, suggesting an easing of the shortage of
Treasuries.
The excess demand of Treasuries as evidenced in Figure 8 would imply an effectively positive

35

Figure 8: Investor Flows and Positions of Treasuries during the 2007-09 Financial Crisis

7/31/2007

500

The Federal Reserve's Treasury Holdings
9/15/2008

9/15/2008

400
300
200

40

100

20
0

0

-20

01jan2007
2007m7

2008m1

2008m7

01jul2007

2009m1

Coupons
TIPS

Net Purchases of U.S. Treasury Bonds and Notes

01jan2009

Tbills

7/31/2007

9/15/2008

11/25/2008

01jan2007

2500
1500

0

-200

-150

100

-100

2000

200

-50

0

300

50

01jul2008

Primary Dealers' Total Repo

9/15/2008
11/25/2008

400

Primary Dealers' Net Treasury Holdings
7/31/2007

01jan2008

3000

2007m1

7/31/2007

11/25/2008

11/25/2008

60

80

Foreign Investors

01jul2007

01jan2008
Coupons
TIPS

01jul2008

01jan2009 01jan2007

Tbills

01jul2007

01jan2008

Net RRP: Total (left)
RP: Total (right)

01jul2008

01jan2009

RRP: Total (right)

Notes: The top left panel plots monthly series of the changes in holdings of long-term Treasuries by foreign
investors. The top right panel plots weekly series of the amount of the Fed’s Treasury holdings. The bottom
left panel plots weekly series of the primary dealers’ net positions of Treasuries. The bottom right panel
plots weekly series of the primary dealers’ gross repo amount, gross reverse repo amount, and net reverse
repo amount. The units are all in billions of U.S. dollars. The sample period is from January 1, 2007 to
December 31, 2008.

36

shorting cost Γt , which affects the repo spread and Treasury-OIS spread negatively in our model
(as shown in Figure 7 Panel B). The top panel of Figure 9 plots monthly series of the GCF-Triparty
repo spread from January 2007 to December 2008. Indeed, the repo spread is mostly negative, and
reached as low as −80 basis points in December 2007. From the middle panel, the 10-year TreasuryOIS spread also stays below zero mostly. That is, amid a flight-to-safety to long-term Treasuries
(with decreasing 10-year Treasury yield throughout the period as in the bottom panel), the large
shorting cost pushed the repo spread and Treasury-OIS spread to negative levels, consistent with
our model. Both moved up notably after the Fed’s TSLF program introduced in March 2008,
which likely eased the shortage of Treasuries and decreased the shorting cost Γt . In addition, we
also observe that the 3-month Treasury-OIS spread stays slightly more negative, showing that the
excess demand for T-bills is even stronger.

5

Regression Analysis of Dealer Constraints and Costs

The empirical evidence we have presented so far, in Sections 2.1, 4.2, and 4.3, following an eventstudy approach like Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011), reveals that (a) the shock to
the demand of long-term Treasuries is negative in the COVID-19 crisis and positive in the 2007-09
financial crisis, (b) dealers incur a balance sheet cost in holding long-term Treasuries and intermediating repos in the COVID-19 crisis, and (c) dealers incur a cost in short-selling Treasuries in the
2007–09 crisis. In this section, we conduct formal regression analysis using the full sample from
2006 to 2020 and provide further supporting evidence to our model.

5.1

Dealer Constraints and Costs across Sub-periods

Guided by the model, we first break up the full sample period according to variations of dealers’
balance sheet cost and shorting cost (Λt and Γt in the model, respectively). As shown in Section
4, the former positively affects the repo spread and Treasury-OIS spread, while the latter affects
them negatively when there is excess demand for Treasuries.
The post-crisis implementation of SLR that drives dealers’ balance sheet cost phased in from
2015 onward (see Section 2.2.2). Hence, we define pre-SLR and post-SLR as before and after

37

-.4

-.2

0

Figure 9: Treasury-OIS and GCF-Triparty Repo Spreads during the 2007–09 Crisis

9/15/2008

-.8

-.6

11/25/2008
7/31/2007

01jan2007

01jul2007

01jan2008

01jul2008

01jan2009

.5

GCF - Triparty Spread

7/31/2007

9/15/2008

-1

-.5

0

11/25/2008

01jan2007

01jul2007

01jan2008

01jul2008

01jan2009

Treasury-OIS: 10y

5.00

Treasury-OIS: 3m

7/31/2007

9/15/2008

0.00

1.00

2.00

3.00

4.00

11/25/2008

01jan2007

01jul2007

01jan2008
CMT: 3m

01jul2008

01jan2009

CMT: 10y

Notes: This figure plots monthly series of the GCF-Triparty repo spread (top panel), the 3-month and 10year Treasury-OIS spreads (middle panel), and the constant maturity Treasury (CMT) yields of 3-month
and 10-year maturities (bottom panel), from January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2008.

38

July 2015, respectively, and expect Λt to be effectively positive post-SLR but negligible pre-SLR.23
Moreover, according to the NBER Business Cycle classifications, the Great Recession (GR) ended
in June 2009, so we define pre-GR and post-GR as before and after June 2009, respectively. Given
that primary dealers entered the GR with large net short positions of Treasuries, we expect Γt to be
effectively positive. However, the shorting cost likely decreased significantly in the period of March
2008–June 2009 during which the Fed increased the supply of Treasuries by allowing dealers to
obtain Treasuries against non-Treasury collateral in the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF).
We hence define pre-TSLF and post-TSLF as before and after March 2008, respectively.
In sum, our sample period consists of four segments roughly together the respective interpretation of our model: (1) pre-TSLF, when Γt is positive and Λt is zero, (2) post-TSLF and pre-GR,
when Γt is reduced substantially but still positive and Λt is zero, (3) post-GR and pre-SLR when
both Γt and Λt are zero, and (4) post-SLR when Γt is zero and Λt is positive.

5.2

Empirical Results

Figure 10: Average GCF-Triparty Repo and Treasury-OIS Spreads of Sub-periods
Average Treasury-OIS Spread

-.6

-.4

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.2

percent

0

percent
-.1

0

.2

.1

.4

Average GCF-Triparty Repo Spread

Pre-TSLF

Post-TSLF

Post-GFC

Post-SLR

Pre-TSLF

Post-TSLF

Post-GFC

Post-SLR

Notes: This figure plots the average GCF-triparty repo spread (left panel) and Treasury-OIS spread (right
panel) in percent of four sub-periods. The “Post-TSLF” period is constrained to pre-GR, while the “PostGR” period is constrained to pre-SLR, successively. For each average spread, we report the 99% confidence
intervals based on standard errors clustered at calendar quarters.

The left panel of Figure 10 reports the average GCF-Triparty repo spread over these four subperiods. Consistent with our characterizations of these sub-periods based on the costs Γt and Λt ,
23

Though not in effect officially until 2018, banks could have had reputation concerns due to the disclosures and
also begin to prepare for the final adoption long before, which would make the SLR exert influence much earlier.

39

the GCF-triparty repo spread is indeed negative pre-TSLF because of the positive shorting cost,
about −23 bps, which was greatly reduced to only −3 bps with the Fed’s TSLF program that eased
the shortage of Treasuries. The average GCF-triparty repo spread turns positive post-GR, reaching
only about 5 bps before the SLR formally phased in but about 11 bps afterwards when Γt turns
positive. Column (1) of Table 1 reports regressions of the repo spread on the sub-period dummies
to formally test the significance of its change:

GCF − T ripartyt =α + β1 DP ost-T SLF + β2 DP ost-GR + β3 DP ost-SLR + εt ,

(25)

where the full sample is used (note that the repo spread is monthly from October 2006 to July 2012
and daily from August 1, 2012 to March 31, 2020, as detailed in Appendix B.1). The significant
coefficients match the changes of the GCF-triparty spread across the sub-periods and confirm the
significance of these changes.
Regarding the balance sheet cost Γt , the effect of the SLR rule is likely to come in over an
extended period of time during which dealers gradually adjust their policies rather than as an
immediate effect, so the post-SLR dummy in column (1) of Table 1 captures its average effect
accordingly. However, the change over an extend period of time may be confounded by other
factors. We explore a variation based on quarter-end shocks to mitigate this concern and further
quantify the potential effect of SLR on repo spread. In particular, foreign bank dealers’ repo
intermediation activities contract at quarter ends when snapshots of their balance sheet are used
to calculate leverage ratio (Duffie (2018)). In consequence, post-SLR when Λt becomes positive,
U.S. dealers receive higher demand for repo intermediation, resulting effectively in a higher λ on
quarter ends than other days within the same quarter. This difference on quarter ends versus other
days should be weak pre-SLR.
Columns (2) and (3) of Table 1 report regressions of the repo spread on quarter-end dummies
(DQuarterEnd ), for both post-SLR and pre-SLR respectively. We control for quarter fixed effects
so that the coefficient DQuarterEnd captures the difference of the repo spread between the quarterend and other days within the same quarter. Indeed, the repo spread is about 23 bps higher on
quarter-ends post-SLR, but negative and insignificant pre-SLR. Column (4) reports regressions on
the interaction term of DQuarterEnd and DP ost-SLR , where the difference in quarter-end effects before

40

Table 1: Regressions of Repo Spread

Intercept
DP ost-T SLF
DP ost-GF C
DP ost-SLR

(1)
All

(2)
Post-SLR

(3)
Pre-SLR

(4)
All

-0.225***
(-3.007)
0.196**
(2.377)
0.080**
(2.317)
0.060***
(5.826)

0.109***
(42.058)

-0.014
(-1.467)

-0.014
(-1.467)

DQuarterEnd

0.226**
(2.073)

-0.029
(-1.012)

1,162
0.237
Yes

807
0.695
Yes

DQuarterEnd ×DP ost-SLR
Obs
Adj R2
Quarter FE

1,969
0.220
No

-0.004
(-1.541)
-0.029
(-1.012)
0.255**
(2.263)
1,969
0.444
Yes

(5)
Post-GR
& Pre-SLR
0.006
(0.743)

0.033
(1.449)

777
0.548
Yes

(6)
Post-GR
0.006
(0.743)

-0.004
(-1.541)
0.033
(1.449)
0.192*
(1.727)
1,939
0.367
Yes

Notes: Column (1) reports regressions of the GCF-Triparty repo spread on dummy variables for the subperiods over the full sample period of October 2006 to March 2020. Columns (2) and (3) report regressions
of the GCF-Triparty repo spread on the dummy for quarter ends (DQuarterEnd ) for post-SLR and pre-SLR
samples, respectively, while column (4) reports regressions on DP ost-SLR , DQuarterEnd , and their interaction
term for the full sample. Columns (5) and (6) report regressions similar to those in columns (3) and (4),
respectively, but on the post-GR sample. Quarter fixed effects are controlled in all regressions except that
in column (1). The t-statistics based on standard errors clustered at calendar quarters are reported in
parentheses. The significance levels are represented by *p<0.1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.

and after the SLR phases in is confirmed to be significant. In addition, the pre-SLR period examined
in column (3) includes the pre-TSLF period when primary dealers hold large short positions of
Treasuries and Γt is positive. In columns (5) and (6), we regress repo spread on quarter end dummies
using the post-TSLF sample. The coefficient on DQuarterEnd is positive but insignificant, likely
reflecting some effects of SLR before 2015. The coefficient on the interaction term of DQuarterEnd
and DP ost-SLR is positive and significant, confirming the difference in quarter-end effects before
and after the SLR phases in.
Turning to the Treasury-OIS spread, the right left panel of Figure 10 reports the average
Treasury-OIS spread over the four sub-periods. Again, consistent with our characterizations of
these sub-periods based on the shorting and balance sheet costs, the average Treasury-OIS spread
is about −45 bps, which was greatly reduced to only -9 bps with the Fed’s TSLF program. It

41

Table 2: Regressions of Treasury-OIS Spread and its Relation to Repo Spread

Intercept
DP ost-T SLF
DP ost-GR
DP ost-SLR

All
Treasury-OIS 10y
-0.455***
(-24.736)
0.367***
(4.017)
0.246***
(2.725)
0.206***
(9.501)

Treasury-OIS 10y
Obs
Adj R2

1,956
0.719

Pre-GR
GCF-Triparty
-0.024
(-1.093)

Post-GR & Pre-SLR
GCF-Triparty
0.057***
(3.409)

Post-SLR
GCF-Triparty
0.043
(1.481)

0.380***
(3.276)
30
0.194

-0.039
(-0.429)
766
0.002

0.188**
(2.161)
1,160
0.034

Notes: The first column reports regressions of the 10-year Treasury-OIS spread on dummy variables for
sub-periods over the full sample period of October 2006 to March 2020. The next three columns report
regressions of the GCF-Triparty repo spread on the 10-year Treasury-OIS spread for the sample of pre-GR,
of post-GR and pre-SLR, and of post-SLR, respectively. The t-statistics based on standard errors clustered at
calendar quarters are reported in parentheses. The significance levels are represented by *p<0.1, **p<0.05,
***p<0.01.

also turns positive post-GR, reaching about 16 bps before the SLR formally phased in but about
36 bps afterwards. The first column of Table 2 reports a regression similar to (25) of the 10-year
Treasury-OIS spread on dummies for sub-periods. The significant coefficients match the changes
of the Treasury-OIS spread across the sub-periods and confirm the significance of these changes.
The last three columns of Table 2 report contemporaneous time-series regressions of the repo
spread on the 10-year Treasury–OIS spread for the three sub-periods featuring different combinations of Γt and Λt . As shown in Figure 5 and 7, our model implies a positive relation between
them for the cases of both positive (positive Λt ) and negative supply shocks (positive Γt ). Indeed,
the regression coefficient is positive and significant for both the pre-TSLF and post-SLR periods.
For the sample period after the TSLF program was implemented but before the SLR phased in,
the regression coefficient is insignificant, as both Γt and Λt are negligible and there should be no
detectable association between the repo spread and Treasury-OIS spread.

42

6

Conclusion

In sharp contrast to most previous crisis episodes, the Treasury market experienced severe stress
and illiquidity in March 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic, raising concerns that the safe-haven
status of U.S. Treasuries could be eroding. We document that some large owners of Treasuries
substantially reduced their holdings during March 2020 and the intermediary sector struggled to
absorb this demand shock.
To understand the inelastic response of the intermediary sector, we build a model in which
balance sheet constraints of dealers and demand shocks from habitat agents interact with each
other, affecting the term structure of Treasury yields. A novel element of our model is to introduce
repo financing as an important part of dealers’ intermediation activities, through which levered
investors obtain leverage. Both direct holdings of Treasuries and reverse repo positions of dealers
are subject to a balance sheet constraint related to regulation reforms since the 2007–09 crisis such
as the supplementary leverage ratio. Consistent with model implications, the spread between the
Treasury yield and overnight-index swap rate (OIS) and the spread between dealers’ reverse repo
and repo rates are both highly positive in the COVID-19 crisis, and both greatly negative in the
2007–09 crisis. Over the whole sample of 2006–2020, the Treasury-OIS spread and repo spread
increased after 2015 when the regulatory reforms phased, and their correlation is significantly
positive.

43

References
Adrian, T., Crump, R. K., and Vogt, E. 2019. Nonlinearity and Flight-to-Safety in the Risk-Return
Trade-Off for Stocks and Bonds. The Journal of Finance 74: 1931–1973.
Amihud, Y., and Mendelson, H. 1980. Dealership market: Market-making with inventory. Journal
of Financial Economics 8: 31 – 53.
Andersen, L., Duffie, D., and Song, Y. 2019. Funding Value Adjustments. The Journal of Finance
74: 145–192.
Baele, L., Bekaert, G., Inghelbrecht, K., and Wei, M. 2019. Flights to Safety. The Review of
Financial Studies 33 (06): 689–746.
Baklanova, V., Copeland, A., and McCaughrin, R. 2015. Reference guide to U.S. repo and securities
lending markets. Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 740.
Bansal, R., and Coleman, W. J. 1996. A Monetary Explanation of the Equity Premium, Term
Premium, and Risk-Free Rate Puzzles. Journal of Political Economy 104: 1135–1171.
Bansal, R., Coleman, W. J., and Lundblad, C. 2011. Endogenous Liquidity Supply. working paper.
Bartolini, L., Hilton, S., Sundaresan, S., and Tonetti, C. 2011. Collateral Values By Asset Class:
Evidence from Primary Securities Dealers. Review of Financial Studies 24(1): 248–278.
Boyarchenko, N., Eisenbach, T. M., Gupta, P., Shachar, O., and Tassel, P. V. 2018. Bankintermediated arbitrage. Report, No 858.
Broner, F. A., Lorenzoni, G., and Schmukler, S. L. 2013. Why Do Emerging Economies Borrow
Short Term?. Journal of the European Economic Association 11: 67–100.
Caballero, R. J., Farhi, E., and Gourinchas, P.-O. 2017. The Safe Assets Shortage Conundrum.
Journal of Economic Perspectives 31: 29–46.
Caballero, R. J., and Simsek, A. 2013. Fire Sales in a Model of Complexity. The Journal of Finance
68: 2549–2587.

44

Campbell, J. Y., Pflueger, C., and Viceira, L. M. 2019. Macroeconomic Drivers of Bond and Equity
Risks. Journal of Political Economy Forthcoming.
Campbell, J. Y., Sunderam, A., and Viceira, L. M. 2017. Inflation Bets or Deflation Hedges? The
Changing Risks of Nominal Bonds. Critical Finance Review 6: 263–301.
Cieslak, A., and Vissing-Jorgensen, A. 2020. The economics of the “Fed put". Review of Financial
Studies forthcoming.
Clark, J., Cameron, C., and Mann, G. 2016. Examining Liquidity in On-the-Run and Off-the-Run
Treasury Securities. Treasury Notes Blog.
D’Amico, S., Kurakula, V., and Lee, S. 2020. Impacts of the Fed Corporate Credit Facilities through
the Lenses of ETFs and CDX. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago WP 2020-14.
Du, W., Im, J., and Schreger, J. 2018. The U.S. Treasury Premium. Journal of International
Economics 112: 167 – 181.
Duffee, G. R. 1996. Idiosyncratic Variation of Treasury Bill Yields. The Journal of Finance 51:
527–551.
Duffie, D. 1996. Special repo rates. Journal of Finance 51: 493–526.
Duffie, D. 2018. Financial Regulatory Reform After the Crisis: An Assessment. Management Science 64: 4835–4857.
Duffie, D. 2020. Still the World’s Safe Haven? Redesigning the U.S. Treasury market after the
COVID-19 crisis. Brookings Institution Hutchins Center Working Paper 62.
Duffie, D., Garleanu, N., and Pedersen, L. H. 2002. Securities lending, shorting, and pricing. Journal
of Financial Economics 66: 307–339.
Farhi, E., and Maggiori, M. 2017. A Model of the International Monetary System*. The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 133: 295–355.
Fleckenstein, M., and Longstaff, F. 2018. Floating Rate Money? The Stability Premium in Treasury
Floating Rate Notes. .
45

Fleckenstein, M., and Longstaff, F. A. 2020. Renting Balance Sheet Space: Intermediary Balance
Sheet Rental Costs and the Valuation of Derivatives. The Review of Financial Studies (03)
hhaa033.
Fleming, M., and Myers, S. 2013. Primary Dealers’ Waning Role in Treasury Auctions. Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics.
Fleming, M., and Ruela, F. 2020. Treasury Market Liquidity during the COVID-19 Crisis. Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Liberty Street Economics.
Fleming, M. J. 1997. The Round-the-Clock Market for U.S. Treasury Securities. Federal Reserve
Bank of New York Economic Policy Review 3: 9–32.
Fleming, M. J., and Garbade, K. D. 2003. The Repurchase Agreement Refined: GCF Repo. Federal
Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance 9.
Fleming, M. J., and Garbade, K. D. 2004. Repurchase agreements with negative interest rates.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance 10.
Fleming, M. J., and Rosenberg, J. V. 2007. How do treasury dealers manage their positions?.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 299.
Garbade, K., Keane, F. M., Logan, L., Stokes, A., and Wolgemuth, J. 2010. The introduction of
the TMPG fails charge for U.S. Treasury securities. Economic Policy Review 16: 45–71.
Garleanu, N., and Pedersen, L. H. 2011. Margin-based asset pricing and deviations from the law of
one price. The Review of Financial Studies 24: 1980–2022.
Gorton, G. 2017. The History and Economics of Safe Assets. Annual Review of Economics 9:
547–586.
Gorton, G., and Metrick, A. 2012. Securitized banking and the run on repo. Journal of Financial
Economics 104: 425–451.
Gorton, G., and Pennacchi, G. 1990. Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation. The Journal
of Finance 45: 49–71.

46

Greenwood, R., Hanson, S. G., and Stein, J. C. 2015. A Comparative-Advantage Approach to
Government Debt Maturity. The Journal of Finance 70: 1683–1722.
Greenwood, R., and Vayanos, D. 2014. Bond Supply and Excess Bond Returns. The Review of
Financial Studies 27: 663–713.
Gromb, D., and Vayanos, D. 2010. Limits of arbitrage. Annu. Rev. Financ. Econ. 2: 251–275.
Haddad, V., Moreira, A., and Muir, T. 2020. When Selling Becomes Viral: Disruptions in Debt
Markets in the COVID-19 Crisis and the Fedâs Response. Working Paper 27168 National Bureau
of Economic Research.
He, Z., Kelly, B., and Manela, A. 2017. Intermediary Asset Pricing: New Evidence from Many
Asset Classes. Journal of Financial Economics 126: 1–35.
He, Z., Khorrami, P., and Song, Z. 2019. Commonality in Credit Spread Changes: Dealer Inventory
and Intermediary Distress. Working Paper 26494 National Bureau of Economic Research.
He, Z., and Krishnamurthy, A. 2012. A Model of Capital and Crises. The Review of Economic
Studies 79 (09): 735–777.
He, Z., and Krishnamurthy, A. 2013a. Intermediary asset pricing. American Economic Review 103:
732–70.
He, Z., and Krishnamurthy, A. 2013b. Intermediary Asset Pricing. American Economic Review 103
(April): 732–70.
He, Z., and Krishnamurthy, A. 2018. Intermediary Asset Pricing and the Financial Crisis. Annual
Review of Financial Economics 10: 173–197.
He, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., and Milbradt, K. 2019. A Model of Safe Asset Determination. American
Economic Review 109: 1230–62.
He, Z., and Song, Z. 2019. Agency MBS as Safe Assets. working paper.
Ho, T., and Stoll, H. R. 1981. Optimal dealer pricing under transactions and return uncertainty.
Journal of Financial Economics 9: 47 – 73.
47

Hu, G., Pan, J., and Wang, J. 2019. Tri-Party Repo Pricing. Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis forthcoming.
Jermann, U. 2019. Negative Swap Spreads and Limited Arbitrage. The Review of Financial Studies
33 (03): 212–238.
Jiang, Z., Krishnamurthy, A., and Lustig, H. 2019. Foreign Safe Asset Demand and the Dollar
Exchange Rate. Stanford University Graduate School of Business Research Paper No. 18-16.
Kacperczyk, M., Pérignon, C., and Vuillemey, G. 2019. The Private Production of Safe Assets.
Working paper. .
Kargar, M., Lester, B., Lindsay, D., Liu, S., Weill, P.-O., and Zuniga, D. 2020. Corporate Bond
Liquidity During the COVID-19 Crisis. working paper.
Klingler, S., and Sundaresan, M. S. 2019. An explanation of negative swap spreads: Demand for
duration from underfunded pension plans. Journal of Finance 72: 675–710.
Krishnamurthy, A., Nagel, S., and Orlov, D. 2014. Sizing up Repo. Journal of Finance 69-6: 2381–
2417.
Krishnamurthy, A., and Vissing-Jorgensen, A. 2011. The Effects of Quantitative Easing on Interest
Rates: Channels and Implications for Policy. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
Krishnamurthy, A., and Vissing-Jorgensen, A. 2012. The Aggregate Demand for Treasury Debt.
Journal of Political Economy 120: 233–267.
Lenel, M., Piazzesi, M., and Schneider, M. 2019. The short rate disconnect in a monetary economy.
Journal of Monetary Economics.
Longstaff, F. 2004. The Flight-to-Liquidity Premium in U.S. Treasury Bond Prices. The Journal
of Business 77: 511–526.
Nagel, S. 2016. The Liquidity Premium of Near-Money Assets. The Quarterly Journal of Economics
131: 1927–1971.
O’Hara, M., and Zhou, A. 2020. Anatomy of a Liquidity Crisis: Corporate Bonds in the Covid-19
Crisis. working paper.
48

Polk, D. 2014. Supplementary Leverage Ratio (SLR) Visual Memorandum. Davis Polk and Wardwell LLP.
Qiu, Y., and Nozawa, Y. 2020. The Corporate Bond Market Reaction to Quantitative Easing
During the COVID-19 Pandemic. working paper.
Schrimpf, A., Shin, H. S., and Sushko, V. 2020. Leverage and margin spirals in fixed income markets
during the Covid-19 crisis. BIS Bulletin 2.
Song, Z., and Zhu, H. 2019. Mortgage Dollar Roll. The Review of Financial Studies 32: 2955–2996.
Sunderam, A. 2014. Money Creation and the Shadow Banking System. The Review of Financial
Studies 28: 939–977.
Vayanos, V., and Vila, J.-L. 2020. A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term-Structure of Interest
Rates. Working Paper London School of Economics.
Xie, L. 2012. The Seasons of Money: ABS/MBS Issuance and the Convenience Yield. Working
paper. Yale University.

49

Appendix
A

Euler Equations for Treasury Pricing

We derive the ODE system for {C0 (·) , Cβ (·)} based on the dealer’s Euler equation first. We then
offer a detailed numerical procedure to solve the ODE system, and then give the results on the
equilibrium OIS curves.

A.1

Euler Equation and ODE System

Guess that

τ
Pβt
= exp [− (A (τ ) rt + C0 (τ ))]
τ
Pβt
= exp [− (A (τ ) rt + Cβ (τ ))]

and recall the yield is defined as ytτ = −
Return dynamics.

log P τ

β̃t

τ

=

A(τ )rt +Cβ̃ (τ )
.
τ

One can show that (where dNt denotes the Poisson shock with intensity

ξβ̃ )
#

"

τ
n
o
dP0t
σ2 2
0
C0 (τ )−Cβ (τ )
0
r)
+
C
(τ
)
+
A
(τ
)
dt
+
e
−
1
dNt − A (τ ) σdZt ,
=
A
(τ
)
r
+
A
(τ
)
κ
(r
−
t
t
0
τ
P0t
2

(26)
τ
n
o
dPβt
σ2 2
0
0
Cβ (τ )−C0 (τ )
=
A
(τ
)
r
+
A
(τ
)
κ
(r
−
r)
+
C
(τ
)
+
A
(τ
)
dt
+
e
−
1
dNt − A (τ ) σdZt .
t
t
β
τ
Pβt
2

"

#

(27)

We perform the calculation for

τ
τ
dPβt
dP0t
;
τ
τ
Pβt
P0t

follows similarly. First,

h

τ
dPβt
= exp [− (A (τ ) rt + Cβ (τ ))] A0 (τ ) rt dt + A (τ ) κ (rt − r) dt + Cβ0 (τ ) dt − A (τ ) σdZt

h
i
1
+ exp [− (A (τ ) rt + Cβ (τ ))] A2 (τ ) σ 2 dt + e−(A(τ )rt +C0 (τ )) − e−(A(τ )rt +Cβ (τ )) dNt ,
2

50

i

which implies that
τ
n
o
dPβt
A2 (τ ) σ 2
0
0
Cβ (τ )−C0 (τ )
=
A
(τ
)
r
dt
+
A
(τ
)
κ
(r
−
r)
dt
+
C
(τ
)
dt
+
dt
−
A
(τ
)
σdZ
+
e
−
1
dNt .
t
t
t
β
τ
Pβt
2



It is easy to calculate that Et

τ
dPβt
τ
Pβt



= µτβt dt with



1
µτβt ≡ A0 (τ ) rt + A (τ ) κ (rt − r) + Cβ0 (τ ) + A2 (τ ) σ 2 + ξβ eCβ (τ )−C0 (τ ) − 1 .
2

Euler equations.

(28)

As before let us focus on the distress state. The arbitrager is maximizing the

mean-variance objective over
Z T
0

τ
dPβt
τ − rt dt − Λ0t dt dτ.
Pβt

!

xτβt

Given (26), we have
"Z

Et

T

0

"Z

V art
0

T

xτβt

Z T
τ
dPβt
xτβt (µτt − rt − Λβt ) dτ dt
τ − rt dt − Λβt dt dτ =
Pβt
0

xτβt

τ
dPβt
τ − rt dt − Λβt dt dτ =
Pβt

!

!

#

#

Z Tn

xτβt

0



e

Cβ (τ )−C0 (τ )



− 1 dτ

!
o 2

Z T

ξ0 dt +
0

!2

xτβt A (τ ) dτ

Therefore the dealer’s FOC with respect to xτβt is (we omit dt from now on)
µτβt − rt − Λβt = A (τ )

σ2
ρd

Z T
0

 ξ Z Tn

 o
β
xu eCβ (u)−C0 (u) − 1 du .



xuβt A (u) du + eCβ (τ )−C0 (τ ) − 1 ·

ρd

0

βt

Expanding µτβt in (28) and collecting terms we have



1
A0 (τ ) − 1 rt − Λβt + A (τ ) κ (rt − r) + Cβ0 (τ ) + A2 (τ ) σ 2 rt + ξβ eCβ (u)−C0 (u) − 1
2
"Z
#
Z
2


 o
T
σ
ξ0 T n u  Cβ (u)−C0 (u)
u
Cβ (u)−C0 (u)
− 1 dτ .
=A (τ ) ·
xβt A (u) du + e
−1 ·
xt0 e
ρd 0
ρd 0

Because this equation holds for all rt we must have A (τ ) κ + A0 (τ ) = 1; with initial condition
A (0) = 0 we have
A (τ ) =

1 − e−κτ
.
κ

51

(29)

σ 2 dt

Moving on to the function C0 (·), and collecting terms, we have
Cβ0



(τ ) + ξβ e

=A (τ ) ·

σ2
ρd

Z T
0

Cβ (u)−C0 (u)



−1

1
1−
ρd

Z Tn

xuβt

0



Cβ (u)−C0 (u)

e

!
o



− 1 du

1
xuβt A (u) du + Λβ + A (τ ) κr − A2 (τ ) σ 2 .
2

(30)

This is the equation when β̃t = β.
For the normal state βt = 0 we have
τ
n
o
dP0t
τ
C0 (τ )−Cβ (τ )
=
µ
dt
+
e
−
1
dN̂t − A (τ ) σdZt
0t
τ
P0t

where


1
µτ0t ≡ A0 (τ ) rt + A (τ ) κ (rt − r) + C00 (τ ) + A2 (τ ) σ 2 + ξ0 eC0 (τ )−Cβ (τ ) − 1 .
2

And the ODE for C0 (·) based on the dealer’s Euler equation at the stress state can be derived
analogously:




C00 (τ ) + ξ0 eC0 (τ )−Cβ (τ ) − 1
σ2
=A (τ ) ·
ρd

Z T
0

1
1−
ρd

Z Tn
0





!
o

xutβ eC0 (τ )−Cβ (τ ) − 1 du

1
xu0t A (u) du + Λβ + A (τ ) κr − A2 (τ ) σ 2 .
2

(31)

We hence have arrived at the ODE system (30) and (31) for {C0 (·) , Cβ (·)}, with boundary
conditions
C0 (0) = Cβ (0) = 0, C00 (0) = Λ0 = λB0 , Cβ0 (0) = Λβ = λBβ .

A.2

Numerical Methods

This section outlines the numerical procedure in solving for (30) and (31). Denote
σ2 T u
1
x A (u) du + Λ0 + A (τ ) κr − A2 (τ ) σ 2 ,
ρd 0 t0
2
Z T
2
σ
1
Dβ (τ ) ≡ A (τ ) ·
xutβ A (u) du + Λβ + A (τ ) κr − A2 (τ ) σ 2 ,
ρd 0
2
D0 (τ ) ≡ A (τ ) ·

Z

52

which have been solved in closed-form given xut0 and A (τ ) =

1−e−κτ
κ

(recall Eq. (29)).

The numerical procedure is as follows.
(0)

(0)

1. Start with K0 = Kβ = 1.


(n)

(n)

2. With K0 , Kβ



, define
(n)

(n)

D̂0 (τ ) ≡ D0 (τ ) + K0 , D̂β (τ ) ≡ Dβ (τ ) + Kβ .
We now obtain the solution by solving the ODE system (32)



C00 (τ ) + K0(n) eC0 (τ )−Cβ (τ )

= D̂0 (τ )



C 0 (τ ) + K (n) eCβ (τ )−C0 (τ )
0
β

= D̂β (τ )

(32)

with the initial conditions
C0 (0) = Cβ (0) = C00 (0) = Cβ0 (0) = 0,

by following these steps.
(a) First of all, from the first equation in (32) we have

eC0 (τ )−Cβ (τ ) =

D̂0 (τ ) − C00 (τ )
(n)

.

(33)

K0

Taking derivative with respect to τ on both sides of the first equation in (32), and
plugging in eC0 (τ )−Cβ (τ ) , we get


C000 (τ ) + D̂0 (τ ) − C00 (τ )





C00 (τ ) − Cβ0 (τ ) = D̂00 (τ ) .

(n)

(b) Now, using Cβ0 (τ ) = D̂β (τ ) − Kβ eCβ (τ )−C0 (τ ) from the second equation, and plugging
in (33), one can get,


C000 (τ ) + D̂0 (τ ) − C00 (τ )





(n)

(n)

C00 (τ ) − D̂β (τ ) + Kβ K0

53

= D̂00 (τ ) .

(c) Letting z(τ ) ≡ C00 (τ ), we have a Riccati equation for z (τ )


(n)

(n)

z 0 (τ ) = D̂00 (τ ) + D̂β (τ ) D̂0 (τ ) − Kβ K0







− D̂β (τ ) + D̂0 (τ ) z (τ ) + z 2 (τ )

with a boundary condition z (0) = 0. Once we numerically solve for z (τ ), we can
calculate C0 (τ ) =
(n+1)

3. Calculate K0

Rτ
0

(n+1)

, Kβ

z (u) du and derive Cβ (τ ) according to Eq. (33).

based on the new solution using (34):




K0(n+1) ≡


K (n+1) ≡
β

4. If



(n+1)

K0

(n)

(n+1)

− K0 , Kβ

ξ0 1 −

1
ρd

 o
R T n u  C (u)−C (u)
β
x e 0
− 1 du



1
ρd

 o
R T n u  C (u)−C (u)
0
x
e β
− 1 du ,



ξβ 1 −

(n)

− Kβ



0

0

t0

(34)

tβ

<  then terminate. Otherwise set n = n + 1 and go to

Step 2.

A.3

Derivation of Equilibrium OIS Curves

We guess and verify that the equilibrium OIS prices take the following forms with A (τ ) =
h



i

h



i

OIS,τ
= exp − A (τ ) rt + C0OIS (τ )
P0t
OIS,τ
= exp − A (τ ) rt + CβOIS (τ )
Pβt

n

o

1−e−κτ
κ

where C0OIS (·) , CβOIS (·) are to be determined endogenously. Note that the Treasury-OIS spread
at tenor τ , denoted by ∆y τ , then can be calculated as

∆y τ =

ln P τ − ln P OIS,τ
C OIS (τ ) − C (τ )
=
.
τ
τ

54

Based on similar derivations as in Section A.1, we arrive at
C0OIS 0 (τ )



+ ξ0 e

C0OIS (τ )−CβOIS (τ )

−1



1
1−
ρd

Z Tn
0

xut0



C0OIS (τ )−CβOIS (τ )

e

1
σ2
= A (τ ) κr − A2 (τ ) σ 2 + A (τ )
2
ρd
CβOIS 0 (τ )



+ ξβ e

CβOIS (τ )−C0OIS (τ )

−1



1
1−
ρd

Z Tn
0

xut0



Z T
0

CβOIS (τ )−C0OIS (τ )

e

1
σ2
= A (τ ) κr − A2 (τ ) σ 2 + A (τ )
2
ρd

Z T
0



!
o

− 1 du

xut0 A (u) du


(35)

!
o

− 1 du

xutβ A (u) du

(36)

with initial conditions C0OIS (0) = C0OIS 0 (0) = CβOIS (0) = CβOIS 0 (0) = 0.

B

Data and Additional Evidence
In this appendix, we first provide details of the data and variables used in empirical analysis.

We then present two sets of additional empirical evidence, one highlighting the flight-to-cash nature
of the COVID-19 shock and the other breaking down primary dealers’ repo positions into different
tenor buckets.

B.1

Data

We obtain daily series of constant-maturity Treasury (CMT) yields from the H.15 reports of the
Federal Reserve, which are equal to the coupon rates on par bonds. We obtain daily series of
overnight index swap (OIS) rates from Bloomberg. The OIS is a fully collateralized interest rate
swap contract that exchanges a constant cash flow against a flow of floating payment indexed to
the geometric average of the daily effective federal funds rate. OIS contracts with maturities of up
to one year have only one final payment, while cash payments for those with maturities of over
one year are made quarterly. Hence, OIS rates are effectively zero-coupon yields for maturities of
up to one year and par yields for maturities of over one year, both comparable to the CMT yields.
We then take the difference between the CMT yield and the maturity-matched OIS rate as the
Treasury-OIS spread.
We use overnight repo rates of Treasury securities of both the tri-party market and the GCF
market. Daily series of GCF repo rates are provided by the Depository Trust & Clearing Corpo-

55

ration (DTCC), available starting from 2005, calculated as the average interest rate across repo
transactions weighted by volume within a day.24 The tri-party repo rates are from multiple sources.
First, we obtain daily series of the Tri-party General Collateral Rate (TGCR) computed by the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, available from August 22, 2014. The TGCR is calculated as
the volume-weighted median of transaction-level tri-party repo data, excluding GCF Repo transactions and transactions to which the Federal Reserve is a counterparty.25 Second, we obtain daily
series of tri-party repo rates from August 1, 2012 to August 21, 2014 calculated by the Bank of
New York Mellon, the largest of the two clearing banks. These repo rates are also calculated as
volume-weighted medians on each business day for new, overnight repo trades with U.S. Treasuries
(excluding Strips) as collateral assets.26 Third, for November 2010–July 2012, we obtain monthly
series of tri-party repo rates using the overnight tri-party repo trades between MMFs and dealers
reported in the N-MFP fillings with the SEC, similar to Hu, Pan, and Wang (2019). Specifically,
we calculate the volume-weighted medians of all overnight tri-party repo trades on the last business
day of each month. Fourth, for October 2006 – April 2010, we use the month-end value-weighted
average overnight repo rates (weighted by notional amounts) constructed in Krishnamurthy, Nagel,
and Orlov (2014) based on quarterly N-CSR, N-CSRS, and N-Q fillings with SEC. MMFs file these
reports at different month-ends throughout each quarter, so monthly series of repo rates can be
calculated.
The weekly series of primary dealers’ net positions and financing amounts of Treasury securities
are obtained from the FR2004 data collected by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The data
are reported on a weekly basis, as of the close of business each Wednesday.27 The reported series
are netted and aggregated across all primary dealers, available for four categories, including T-bills,
coupon-bearing nominal securities (coupons), Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS), and
Floating Rate Notes (FRNs) that began to be issued in January 2014 and reported from 2015. The
24

The series can be downloaded at http://www.dtcc.com/charts/dtcc-gcf-repo-index#download.
The TGCR is one of the three overnight repo rates provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York as
important reference rates to financial markets, together with the Broad General Collateral Rate (BGCR) and the
Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR). The calculation of BGCR includes all trades used in the calculation
of TGCR plus the GCF Repo transactions. The calculation of SOFR includes all trades used in the calculation
of BGCR plus the bilateral Treasury repo transactions cleared through the Delivery-versus-Payment (DVP) service
offered by the FICC but filtered to remove a portion of transactions considered “specials.” For further details, see
https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/treasury-repo-reference-rates-information.
26
The data can be found at https://repoindex.bnymellon.com/repoindex/.
27
For details, see https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/gsds/search.
25

56

net positions include both spot cash positions and Treasury derivatives like futures (Fleming and
Rosenberg (2007)).
Regarding financing amounts, the FR2004 data separate repo from other financing activities like
security lending contracts from April 3, 2013, but repo and securities lending contracts are blended
together earlier. Hence, we use the amounts of repo and reverse repo from April 3, 2013 onward,
but total financing amounts of cash in and cash out before, which will be referred to as repo and
reverse repo for convenience. Note that the financing contracts are defined from the perspective
of dealers, so dealers borrow cash through repo and lend cash out through reverse repo. For both
repo and reverse repo, the amounts are available for overnight and term contracts separately. We
mainly focus on the total amount by adding the overnight and term financing amounts together,
but will briefly discuss the breakdown in the next section.
The daily VIX series are obtained from the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE). We
obtain daily series of constant-maturity yields of TIPS also from the H.15 reports of the Federal
Reserve. We compute the breakeven inflation rate as the difference between the CMT nominal
yield and TIPS yield of the same maturity, which is a market-based measure of expected inflation.
We also obtain daily series of inflation swap rates from Bloomberg as an alternative measure of
expected inflation. To measure the uncertainty and tail event probability of inflation, we obtain
weekly series of the standard deviation and the probability of a large increase in inflation (of more
than 3%) based on inflation density estimates using 5-year inflation caps and floors.28
We obtain the amounts of Treasury holdings and issuance from various sources. First, the
monthly series of net issuance amount (gross minus retirement) of Treasury notes and bonds are
obtained from the SIFMA.29 Second, series of net new cash flows into long-term government bond
mutual funds are obtained from the Investment Company Institute (ICI), available at the monthly
frequency through March 2020 and at the weekly frequency afterwards.30 Third, monthly series of
foreign net purchases of U.S. long-term Treasury securities are obtained from the Treasury International Capital (TIC) system.31 We group them into four categories: Europe, Asia, Caribbean
28

These
series
are
available
at
https://www.minneapolisfed.org/banking/
current-and-historical-market--based-probabilities.
29
The
series
can
be
found
at
https://www.sifma.org/resources/research/
us-marketable-treasury-issuance-outstanding-and-interest-rates/.
30
The series can be found at https://www.ici.org/research/stats/flows.
31
The series can be found at https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/tic/Pages/
ticsec.aspx.

57

(including a lot popular tax haven countries), and Other (including all other countries and international organizations). The nonmarketable Treasuries are excluded. Fourth, weekly series of the
total face value of U.S. Treasury securities held by the Federal Reserve are provided in their H.4.1
release.32 We group these series into T-bills, nominal coupons, and TIPS.
We obtain weekly series of total net assets (TNA) of prime, government, and tax-exempt money
market funds from the ICI. We obtain weekly seasonally adjusted series of the commercial and
industrial loans (C&I), cash assets, treasury and agency securities, fed funds sold and cash lent out
through reverse repo,33 and deposits, of all commercial banks, provided in the H.8 release of the
Federal Reserve.34

B.2

Additional Empirical Evidence

We provide two sets of additional empirical evidence. First, Figure B1 presents series of fund
flows of MMFs and banks. The top panels show that there are negative net flows out of prime
MMFs and positive net flows into government MMFs, while the middle panels show that bank
deposits increased significantly, in both the COVID-19 and 2007–09 crises. The bottom panels
show that banks allocate the incoming deposits into cash assets significantly and into long-term
Treasuries and agency securities slightly. All these features are characteristic of flight-to-safety and
flight-to-liquidity.
Second, Figure B2 provides a breakdown of primary dealers’ repo and reverse repo amounts into
overnight and term contracts. The net reverse repo amounts show that primary dealers conduct
maturity transformation in their Treasury repo intermediation, borrowing overnight and lending
term funds in both the COVID-19 and 2007-09 crises. Yet, the net borrowing amount through
overnight repo is much larger in 2020 than in 2007–09, while the net lending amount through term
reverse repo is similar in these two time periods. That is, primary dealers become more of a net
cash borrower in the repo market post-crisis.

32

The series can be found at https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h41/.
These include total federal funds sold to, and reverse repos with, commercial banks, brokers and dealers, and
others, including the Federal Home Loan Banks.
34
The series can be found at https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h8/.
33

58

9/15/2008
11/25/2008

Money Market Funds: COVID-19
1/30/2020

3/9/2020
3/23/2020

0

1000

1000

2000

2000

3000

4000

7/31/2007

5000

Money Market Funds: the 2008 Crisis

3000

4000

Figure B1: Fund Flows of MMFs and Banks During the COVID-19 and 2007–09 Crises

01jan2007

01jul2007

01jan2008
All
Prime

01jul2008

01jan2009 01jan2020

Government

All
Prime

14200

3/9/2020 3/23/2020

13600
13400
01jul2008

13200

01jan2008

01jan2009 01jan2020

9/15/2008
11/25/2008

500

500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000

7/31/2007

0

01jan2020
01jul2007

01jan2008

01feb2020

01mar2020

01apr2020

Bank Assets: COVID-19

1000

1500

1/30/2020

13800

billion
6600
6800
6400
6200

01jul2007

Bank Assets: the 2008 Crisis

01jan2007

01apr2020

Government

14000

7000

9/15/2008
11/25/2008

01jan2007

01mar2020

Bank Deposits: COVID-19

7200

Bank Deposits: the 2008 Crisis

7/31/2007

01feb2020

01jul2008

01jan2009

C&I Loans
Cash Assets
Treasuries and Agency Securities

1/30/2020

01feb2020

3/9/2020 3/23/2020

01mar2020

01apr2020

C&I Loans
Cash Assets
Treasuries and Agency Securities
Funds Lent in Federal Funds and Repo Markets

Notes: The top panels plot weekly series of the flows of money market funds (MMFs). The middle panels
plot weekly series of the the amounts of deposits of commercial banks. The bottom panels plot weekly series
of the amounts of commercial and industrial loans (C&I), cash assets, Treasuries and agency securities, and
funds lent in the federal funds and repo markets, on the asset side of commercial banks. The units are all in
billions of U.S. dollars. The sample period is from January 1, 2007 to December 31, 2008 for the left panels,
and from January 1, 2020 to April 13, 2020 for the right panels.

59

Figure B2: Breakdown of Primary Dealers’ Treasury Repo Positions
3/23

Primary Dealers' Term Repo: COVID-19
1/30

1000

3/9

300

1/30

1600

-350

Primary Dealers' Overnight Repo: COVID-19

3/9

1600

200

1400

100

1200

0

1000

-100

900
800

250

700
600
500
01apr2020

Primary Dealers' Term Repo: the 2008 Crisis
7/31/2007

9/15/2008

01jul2007

01jan2008

Net RRP: ON (left)
RP: ON (right)

01jul2008

01jan2009

RRP: ON (right)

01jan2007

1500

RRP: Term (right)

11/25/2008

50

-200

01mar2020

0

300

9/15/2008

01feb2020
Net RRP: Term (left)
RP: Term (right)

11/25/2008

01jan2007

200

RRP: ON (right)

Primary Dealers' Overnight Repo: the 2008 Crisis
7/31/2007

01jan2020

1000

Net RRP: ON (left)
RP: ON (right)

01apr2020

500

01mar2020

100 150 200 250 300 350 400

01feb2020

1800

01jan2020

150

800

-600

-550

1000

-500

1200

-450

1400

-400

3/23

01jul2007

01jan2008

Net RRP: Term (left)
RP: Term (right)

01jul2008

01jan2009

RRP: Term (right)

Notes: This figure plots weekly series of the primary dealers’ gross repo amount, gross reverse repo amount,
and net reverse repo amount for the overnight (left panels) and term (right panels) contracts. The sample
period is from January 1, 2020 to April 13, 2020 for the top panels, and from January 1, 2007 to December
31, 2008 for the bottom panels. The units are all in billions of U.S. dollars.

60

