Misinformation During a Pandemic
Leonardo Bursztyn, Aakaash Rao, Christopher P. Roth, and David H. Yanagizawa-Drott
NBER Working Paper No. 27417
June 2020, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. D1,I31,Z13

                                           ABSTRACT

Media outlets often present diverging, even conflicting, perspectives on reality — not only
informing, but potentially misinforming audiences. We study the extent to which misinformation
broadcast on mass media at the early stages of the coronavirus pandemic influenced health
outcomes. We first document large differences in content between the two most popular cable
news shows in the US, both on the same network, and in the adoption of preventative behaviors
among viewers of these shows. Through both a selection-on-observables strategy and an
instrumental variable approach, we find that areas with greater exposure to the show downplaying
the threat of COVID-19 experienced a greater number of cases and deaths. We assess magnitudes
through an epidemiological model highlighting the role of externalities and provide evidence that
contemporaneous information exposure is a key underlying mechanism.


Leonardo Bursztyn                               Christopher P. Roth
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Chicago                           University of Warwick
1126 E. 59th Street                             Coventry CV4 7AL
Chicago, IL 60637                               United Kingdom
and NBER                                        Christopher.Roth@warwick.ac.uk
bursztyn@uchicago.edu
                                                David H. Yanagizawa-Drott
Aakaash Rao                                     Department of Economics
Harvard University                              University of Zurich
Department of Economics                         Schönberggasse 1
Littauer Center of Public Administration        Zurich, 8001
1805 Cambridge St                               Switzerland
Cambridge, MA 02138                             david.yanagizawa-drott@econ.uzh.ch
arao@g.harvard.edu
                     Misinformation During a Pandemic∗
                                              Leonardo Bursztyn†
                                                 Aakaash Rao‡
                                               Christopher Roth§
                                            David Yanagizawa-Drott¶
                                                September 1, 2020



                                                       Abstract
      Media outlets often present diverging, even conflicting, perspectives on reality — not only informing, but
      potentially misinforming audiences. We study the extent to which misinformation broadcast on mass
      media at the early stages of the coronavirus pandemic influenced health outcomes. We first document
      large differences in content between the two most popular cable news shows in the US, both on the same
      network, and in the adoption of preventative behaviors among viewers of these shows. Through both a
      selection-on-observables strategy and an instrumental variable approach, we find that areas with greater
      exposure to the show downplaying the threat of COVID-19 experienced a greater number of cases and
      deaths. We assess magnitudes through an epidemiological model highlighting the role of externalities
      and provide evidence that contemporaneous information exposure is a key underlying mechanism.

      JEL Codes: D1, I31, Z13.
      Keywords: Media, Misinformation, Health, Coronavirus




   ∗ We thank Alberto Alesina, Luis Candelaria, Davide Cantoni, Bruno Caprettini, Rebekah Dix, Michael Droste, Eliana La

Ferrara, Ed Glaeser, Raymond Han, Ross Mattheis, Nathan Nunn, Ziad Obermeyer, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, Andreas Stegman,
David Yang, and seminar participants at Harvard, Bocconi, and the IMF for very helpful comments and suggestions. We thank
Silvia Barbareschi, Jasurbek Berdikobilov, Hrishikesh Iyengar, Rebecca Wu, Alison Zhao, and especially Vanessa Sticher for
outstanding research assistance. We are grateful to the Becker Friedman Institute for financial support.
   † University of Chicago and NBER, bursztyn@uchicago.edu
   ‡ Harvard University, arao@g.harvard.edu
   § University of Warwick, CAGE Warwick, CESifo, CEPR, briq, christopher.roth@warwick.ac.uk
   ¶ University of Zurich and CEPR, david.yanagizawa-drott@econ.uzh.ch
1     Introduction
In a “post-truth” world of “alternative facts,” different media outlets present diverging, and often conflicting,
perspectives on reality. Americans are increasingly divided, not only by their political preferences but also
by their dramatically different beliefs about objective facts (Alesina et al., 2018, 2020).
    A growing literature uses information provision experiments to study the determinants and behavioral
consequences of beliefs (Barrera et al., 2020; Cantoni et al., 2019; Cruces et al., 2013; Perez-Truglia and
Cruces, 2017), sometimes focusing specifically on the role of news media (Chen and Yang, 2019; Nyhan et al.,
2020). Yet identifying the causal effect of information on behavior in natural settings is challenging for several
reasons. Most importantly, ruling out alternative explanations for differences in behavior among consumers
of different media sources — such as different prior beliefs, different ideologies, or different preferences —
generally requires a setting in which two media sources that are ex ante similar, both in their content and
in the characteristics of their viewers, suddenly and sharply diverge in their coverage of a given topic, and
moreover that this topic can be linked to naturally-occurring outcomes.
    In this paper, we examine a setting in which high-stakes outcomes depend on viewers holding accurate
beliefs: the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States, a period characterized by considerable
uncertainty about the extent of the virus’ severity. Misinformation in this setting is particularly concerning
given the large externalities inherent to contagious diseases (Miguel and Kremer, 2004): it may have harmful
effects far beyond those who are directly exposed, if it leads the exposed to take actions which affect disease
trajectories in the broader population.
    To overcome the aforementioned empirical challenges, we examine the two most popular cable news
shows in the United States: Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. These shows are aired back-to-back on
the same network (Fox News) and had relatively similar content prior to January 2020, yet differed sharply
in their coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic. Focusing on two shows within the same network enables
us to compare two ex ante similar viewer populations, allowing us to examine how exposure to different
informational content drives beliefs, behavior, and downstream health outcomes.1
    We first document how the two shows diverged as the coronavirus began to spread beyond China using
qualitative evidence, text-analysis methods, and human coding of the shows’ scripts. Carlson warned viewers
that the coronavirus might pose a serious threat from early February, while Hannity first ignored the topic
on his show and then dismissed the risks associated with the virus, claiming that it was less concerning than
the common flu and insisting that Democrats were using it as a political weapon to undermine the president.
We also show that Hannity began to moderate his tone in early March, and that the two shows had largely
converged in their coverage of the coronavirus by mid-March.
    Radical behavioral changes, such as stay-at-home behavior, did not become widespread until mid-to-late
March by which time coverage of the pandemic on the two shows had mostly converged. To shed light on the
timing of more subtle behavioral adjustments at the early stages of the pandemic (such as washing hands
more often, cancelling travel plans, and maintaining physical distance from others), we fielded a survey
among 1,045 Fox News viewers aged 55 or older. Consistent with a persuasive effect of content on behavior,
we find that viewership of Hannity is associated with changing behavior four days later than other Fox News
   1 By using the term “misinformation,” we mean statements that ex post turned out to be false. We do not claim that figures

who made these statements were intentionally misrepresenting the facts, nor that these statements were unreasonable given the
data available at the time.



                                                             1
viewers; while viewership of Tucker Carlson Tonight is associated with changing behavior three days earlier
(controlling for demographics and viewership of other shows and networks). Given the critical importance of
early preventive measures (Bootsma and Ferguson, 2007; Markel et al., 2007), these differences in the timing
of adoption of cautious behavior may have significant consequences for health outcomes. For example, Pei et
al. (2020) estimate that approximately half of all COVID-19 deaths in the United States at the early stages
of the pandemic could have been prevented had non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) such as mandated
social distancing and stay-at-home orders been implemented one week earlier. While the behavioral changes
our survey respondents report are likely not as extreme, and our survey is representative only of Republicans
over the age of 55, this evidence nonetheless suggests that these differences in timing may have directly
affected the spread of the pandemic.
    Motivated by our survey evidence of persuasive content, we examine disease trajectories in the broader
population using county-level data on COVID-19 cases and deaths. In our primary analysis, we focus
on health outcomes during the early stages of the pandemic where we would expect first-order effects of
treatment – late February to mid-April – though in additional analyses we report our main outcomes until
the time of writing.2 We first show that, controlling for a rich set of county-level demographics (including
the local market share of Fox News), greater local viewership of Hannity relative to Tucker Carlson Tonight
is associated with a greater number of COVID-19 cases starting in early March and a greater number of
deaths resulting from COVID-19 starting in mid-March. In a set of permutation tests across socio-economic,
demographic, political, and health-related covariates, as well as across geographical fixed effects accounting
for unobservable factors, we show that the established relationship is highly robust.3
    Even so, it is likely that areas where people prefer Hannity over Carlson might differ on a number of
unobservable dimensions that could independently affect the spread of the virus. Thus, to identify our effect
of interest, we employ an instrumental variable approach that shifts relative viewership of the two shows, yet
is plausibly orthogonal to local preferences for the two shows and to any other county-level characteristics
that might affect the virus’ spread.
    In particular, we predict this difference in viewership using the product of (i) the fraction of TVs on
during the start time of Hannity (leaving out TVs watching Hannity) and (ii) the local market share of Fox
News (leaving out Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight). The idea of our instrument is simple: if people
like to turn on their TVs to watch something when Hannity happens to be on instead of Tucker Carlson
Tonight, the likelihood that viewers are shifted to watch Hannity is disproportionately large in areas where
Fox News is popular in general.4 We show that, conditional on a minimal set of controls and the main effects,
the interaction term is uncorrelated with any among a larger number of variables that might independently
affect the local spread of the coronavirus. We then show it strongly predicts viewership in the hypothesized
direction. Using this instrument, we confirm the OLS findings that greater exposure to Hannity relative to
Tucker Carlson Tonight is associated with a greater number of COVID-19 cases and deaths. Our results
   2 In principle, there could be second-order effects due to behavioral adjustments and policy responses when local infections

and deaths rise sharply due to the treatment. To estimate these endogenous dynamic effects is beyond the scope of the paper,
which is why we focus on the early time period.
   3 Indeed, an exercise following Oster (2019) to estimate the bias generated by omitted variables suggests that our estimated

coefficients are negatively biased.
   4 Leaving out Fox News from the first term and Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight from the second allows us to ensure

that the variation we exploit is driven by general preferences for when to watch TV and general preferences for watching Fox
News, rather than specific, potentially endogenous, preferences for the two shows.




                                                              2
indicate that a one standard deviation increase in relative viewership of Hannity relative to Tucker Carlson
Tonight is associated with approximately 34 percent more COVID-19 cases on March 14 and approximately
24 percent more COVID-19 deaths on March 28. Consistent with the gradual convergence in scripts between
the two shows beginning in late February, the effects on cases plateau and begin to decline in mid-March,
while effects on deaths follow two weeks later.5 Our results survive a large number of robustness checks
and two alternative instrumental variables strategies designed to rule out further endogeneity concerns by
predicting TV viewership in each timeslot based upon variation in local sunset times. We also use a multi-
group epidemiological model from Acemoglu et al. (2020) to show that the delay in the adoption of cautious
behaviors that we document in the survey can generate treatment effects similar in magnitude to those we
estimate. The model suggests that the persuasive effect of show content on the relatively small fraction of
viewers generates significant externalities within the broader population, particularly in the early stages of
the pandemic.
    The timing of the estimated effects suggests an important role of the informational content of the two
shows in explaining health outcomes. We construct two indices: a “pandemic coverage gap” quantifying
the day-by-day differential coverage of the pandemic on Tucker Carlson Tonight and Hannity, based on
the shows’ content; and a “behavioral change gap” quantifying the day-by-day correlation between show
viewership and behavioral change, based on our survey. The “behavioral change gap” lags the “pandemic
coverage gap” by approximately two weeks, and trajectories of cases and deaths follow with an additional lag.
The timing of effects is thus inconsistent with alternative potential drivers of our estimated treatment effects,
such as time-invariant unobservables correlated with our instrument and differential effects of exposure to
the shows that are unrelated to their reporting about COVID-19. Instead, these findings suggest that the
documented effects on health outcomes are driven by the differences in how the two shows covered the
pandemic in February and early March.
    We also allow for potential spillover effects of viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight onto
other Fox News evening shows. We investigate the information provision mechanism in greater depth,
allowing for arbitrary spillovers and generalizing our analysis to all Fox News evening shows. We combine
detailed information on local viewership shares of different Fox News shows with a measure of how seriously
each show portrayed the threat of the coronavirus on each day, based on independent coding of episode
scripts. We show that our instrumental variable for the relative viewership between Hannity and Tucker
Carlson Tonight strongly increases predicted exposure to coverage downplaying the threat of the virus, as
measured by our index. We also show that our index strongly predicts case and death trajectories.
    Our work contributes to the literature on the effects of media and propaganda on political behavior
and health outcomes (Durante and Zhuravskaya, 2018; Eisensee and Strmberg, 2007; La Ferrara, 2016;
Banerjee et al., 2019a; DellaVigna and La Ferrara, 2015; La Ferrara et al., 2012; Bursztyn et al., 2019;
Jensen and Oster, 2009; Chiang and Knight, 2011; Martinez-Bravo and Stegmann, 2017). Previous work
has shown that media exposure can influence mass killings (Yanagizawa-Drott, 2014); it can also affect
domestic violence (Card and Dahl, 2011; Banerjee et al., 2019b), fertility choices (La Ferrara et al., 2012;
Kearney and Levine, 2015), and responses to natural disasters (Long et al., 2019). More closely related
to our paper, prior work has highlighted that Fox News causally affects voting choices (DellaVigna and
   5 It is important to note that we cannot account for county to county externalities: riskier behavior by individuals in one

area may expose other people in different areas to the virus.



                                                              3
Kaplan, 2007; Martin and Yurukoglu, 2017).6 Relating to the literature on the effects of biased media, we
show that even short-term variation in content can affect high-stakes outcomes: our approach holds fixed
important mechanisms that may operate through exposure to biased media over an extended period of time,
such as increased partisanship or lower trust in science.7 We are thus able to identify a mechanism of
contemporaneous information as the driver of the treatment effects by exploiting variation in informational
content. Our analysis also highlights the quantitatively important role of externalities in the propagation
of misinformation, though we cannot empirically separate the role of informational spillovers (as studied by
Banerjee et al. 2020) from the behavioral externalities in our setting. Thus, while viewers may select into
slanted media for ideological and/or partisan reasons (Gentzkow and Shapiro, 2010), we show that slanted
media can have significant consequences for the broader population.
     We also contribute to the literature studying the role of information in shaping people’s behaviors and
beliefs (Alsan et al., 2020; Banerjee et al., 2020; Cruces et al., 2013; Perez-Truglia and Cruces, 2017; Alesina
et al., 2018; Stantcheva, 2020; Fetzer et al., 2020). For example, Barrera et al. (2020) examine how effective
fact checking is in countervailing “alternative facts,” i.e., misleading statements by politicians. In the context
of health behaviors, Nyhan and Reifler (2015) and Nyhan et al. (2014) study the effects of information about
vaccines. Banerjee et al. (2020) show that messaging on COVID-19 prevention in India increased symptoms
reporting and adherence to preventive behaviors among 25 million recipients, with similar effects on non-
recipient members of their communities, highlighting an important role of behavioral and informational
spillovers. Our work contributes to this literature by examining how viewers’ exposure to differing information
sets within a natural setting affects high-stakes behavior.
     Related to our study is contemporaneous work studying correlations between political ideology and
responses to the coronavirus. A number of studies find that areas with higher Republican vote shares practice
less social distancing, as measured by cell phone GPS data (Allcott et al., 2020b; Barrios and Hochberg, 2020;
Andersen, 2020; Wright et al., 2020). Allcott et al. (2020b) additionally present survey evidence documenting
substantial partisan differences in individual beliefs about personal risk and pandemic severity, while Barrios
and Hochberg (2020) find that more Republican areas perceive lower risk, as measured by internet searches.
Adolph et al. (2020) show that both governors from states with more Trump supporters and Republican
governors were slower to implement social distancing policies such as stay-at-home orders and school and
business closures.8 Analyzing Brazil’s case, Ajzenman et al. (2020) and Mariani et al. (2020) show that
following public speeches of the president opposing social isolation policies, social distancing immediately
fell in municipalities with higher support for the president. Egorov et al. (2020) show that areas with greater
levels of xenophobia and ethnic fractionalization show the greatest reductions in mobility following the first
local COVID-19 case. Besley and Dray (2020) consider cross-country variation and investigate the role of
the media in shaping governments’ reporting on and response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
     Recent studies (Simonov et al., 2020; Ash et al., 2020; Ananyev et al., 2020) use the channel numbers
instrument developed by Martin and Yurukoglu (2017) to establish a causal effect of exposure to Fox News
on mobility. We complement these findings through our analysis of COVID-19 cases and deaths (in addition
   6 Our identification strategy also relates to a literature on inattention to particular news events (Eisensee and Strmberg,

2007; Durante and Zhuravskaya, 2018).
   7 Our work thus relates to a small literature focusing on the content of specific TV shows (Banerjee et al., 2019a; Kearney

and Levine, 2015).
   8 Taken together, this evidence is consistent with a broader literature finding that Republicans and Democrats hold different

beliefs about objective facts (e.g. Alesina et al. 2020).


                                                               4
to stay-at-home behavior, the primary outcome studied in these papers) and our use of 2020 rather than 2015
viewership data (albeit at a coarser geographical level). More importantly, our work differs by identifying
the role of a specific mechanism — contemporaneous exposure to slanted information — through a novel
instrument that compares two relatively similar populations: counties that disproportionately watch Tucker
Carlson Tonight vs. counties that disproportionately watch Hannity. In contrast, the channel number of
Fox News has been relatively stable since the channel’s 1996 rollout; long-term exposure to Fox News has
been shown to causally affect Republican vote share (Martin and Yurukoglu, 2017) and may influence stay-
at-home behavior through a number of additional mechanisms, including ideology and partisanship, trust in
science, and health investments.9 Our work also complements these papers through its focus on the early
stages of the pandemic; the coverage gap between Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight had closed before
stay-at-home behavior became widespread, and we present evidence that slanted coverage affected COVID-
19 outcomes by influencing other, less-extreme, forms of behavior: hand-washing, physical distancing, and
cancelling planned trips.
    The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we provide a brief overview of media
coverage of the coronavirus, with a particular focus on the differences in coverage between Hannity and
Tucker Carlson Tonight. In Section 3, we present our survey results relating viewership of different Fox
News shows to behavioral change in response to coronavirus. In Section 4, we describe our primary datasets.
In Section 5, we present OLS estimates of the effects of differential viewership of Hannity and Tucker
Carlson Tonight on health outcomes. In Section 6, we introduce an instrumental variable approach, and
present results. In Section 7, we conduct a number of exercises to examine the robustness of our estimates.
In Section 8, we assess effect sizes through the lens of an epidemiological model. In Section 9, we provide
evidence on mechanisms by combining information from the scripts of the shows with local day-by-day
viewership shares. Section 10 concludes.


2     Setting
2.1     The early stages of the coronavirus pandemic in the US
The rapid spread of COVID-19 (Zhu et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020) has fundamentally disrupted the modern
world. The first confirmed case in the United States was reported on January 21, 2020 (Holshue et al., 2020).
A few days later, the World Health Organization declared a global public health emergency.10 Throughout
most of February, there remained uncertainty about the extent of the coronavirus outbreak and the threat it
posed; on February 25, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warned the US public that the virus
was likely to spread rapidly in the United States (Jernigan, 2020). On March 11, the WHO declared the
COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic; two days later, President Donald Trump declared a national emergency
(Cucinotta and Vanelli, 2020). By late March, the US had 186,082 cases, the highest number of confirmed
COVID-19 cases in the world, and at least 3,806 COVID-19-related deaths (Dong et al., 2020). By April 7,
   9 For example, Hmielowski et al. (2014) find that viewership of Fox News decreases trust in scientists, and Brzezinski et al.

(2020) find that counties with lower trust in science (as measured by the prevalence of climate change skepticism) practice less
social distancing.
  10 “Statement on the second meeting of the International Health Regulations (2005) Emergency Committee regarding the

outbreak of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). World Health Organization, January 30, 2020.




                                                               5
95 percent of the US population were under stay-at-home orders banning them from leaving their places of
residence for all but “essential reasons.”11


2.2     Media coverage of COVID-19 on Fox News
Fox News is the most watched cable network in the United States, with an average of 3.4 million total
primetime viewers in the first quarter of 2020, compared to 1.9 million for MSNBC and 1.4 million for CNN
(the other two of the “Big Three” US cable news networks).12 Moreover, the median age of primetime Fox
News viewers is 68, substantially higher than that of CNN and MSNBC viewers.13 Both due to its reach
and the fact that more than half of its audience is over the age of 65 — a group that the CDC warns is at
elevated risk from COVID-19 — Fox News may exert substantial influence on COVID-19 outcomes. This
is particularly true given that the elderly both watch more TV in general than the average US citizen and
because they disproportionately rely on television for news and information (Martin and Yurukoglu, 2017).

Primetime shows on Fox News There are seven different news shows on Fox News running between
5pm and 11pm across the four major time zones in the continental US: The Five (5pm-6pm ET); Special
Report with Bret Baier (6pm-7pm ET); The Story with Martha MacCallum (7pm-8pm ET); Tucker Carlson
Tonight (8pm-9pm ET); Hannity (9pm-10pm ET); The Ingraham Angle (10pm-11pm ET); and Fox News at
Night (11pm-12pm ET). Most of our paper focuses on the two most widely-viewed news shows on Fox News
— indeed, in the United States: Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight — with an average of 4.2 million and
4 million daily viewers in the first quarter of 2020, respectively.14 Before the coronavirus began to spread in
January 2020, Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight were relatively similar in content and viewership: both
covered the news from a conservative perspective and were broadly supportive of President Trump’s policy
agenda. Yet as we document using qualitative evidence, text-analysis methods, and human coding of the
shows’ scripts, the two shows differed sharply in coverage of the coronavirus.

Qualitative evidence: Carlson vs. Hannity News outlets and politicians across the ideological spec-
trum, and even experts such as National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases director Anthony Fauci,
suggested throughout much of February that COVID-19 was unlikely to be a serious threat to the country.15
Many observers have identified Sean Hannity of Fox News as advancing a particularly dismissive narrative
toward the virus.16 Tucker Carlson, on the other hand, stood out not only among his colleagues at Fox
News, but also among anchors across the ideological spectrum, for his insistence as early as the beginning
of February that the coronavirus posed a serious threat to the United States.17 For example, on January 28
— more than a month before the first COVID-19-related death in the US — Tucker Carlson spent a large
portion of his show discussing the subject:
 11 “Coronavirus:   These US states refuse to issue stay-at-home orders.” Al Jazeera, April 15, 2020.
 12 “Fox   News Channel ratings for first quarter of 2020 are the highest in network history.” Fox News, March 31, 2020.
  13 “Half of Fox News’ Viewers are 68 and Older.” The Atlantic, January 27, 2014.
  14 Authors’ calculations based upon Nielsen data.
  15 See “What went wrong with the media’s coronavirus coverage?” Vox, April 13, 2020.
  16 See, for example, “Fox News has succeeded – in misinforming millions of Americans.” The Washington Post, April 1, 2020;

“Fox’s Fake News Contagion.” The New York Times, March 31, 2020.
  17 See, for example, “His colleagues at Fox News called coronavirus a ‘hoax’ and ‘scam.’ Why Tucker Carlson saw it

differently.” The LA Times, March 23.



                                                             6
     All of a sudden the Chinese coronavirus is looking like a real threat, that could be a global
     epidemic or even a pandemic. It’s impossible to know. But, it’s the kind of thing that could be
     very serious – very serious.

On February 5, Carlson emphasized the large death toll due to COVID-19 in China and the emergence of
COVID-19 cases in the US:

     The Chinese coronavirus continues to spread tonight. The death toll now exceeding 500, that’s
     the official number. In the United States, there are now 12 confirmed cases of it. Meanwhile,
     alarming videos trickling out of China indicate the virus is far from under control.

On February 25, Carlson warned his viewers about the deadly consequences of the coronavirus:

     Currently, the coronavirus appears to kill about two percent of the people who have it. So let’s
     be generous for a moment and imagine that asymptomatic carriers are not detected and the real
     death rate is only say half a percent — that would be one quarter of the current estimates. Even
     under that scenario, there would still be 27 million deaths from coronavirus globally. In this
     country, more than a million would die.

In contrast, Hannity covered the coronavirus and its consequences substantially less than Carlson and other
Fox shows — particularly in February, when the virus was first beginning to spread in the United States.
Even after he began discussing it more prominently in February, he downplayed the threat the virus posed.
For example, in his show on February 27, Hannity stated:

     And today, thankfully, zero people in the United States of America have died from the coron-
     avirus. Zero. Now, let’s put this in perspective. In 2017, 61,000 people in this country died from
     influenza, the flu. Common flu. Around 100 people die every single day from car wrecks.

In his show on March 2, Hannity strongly emphasized that Democrats were politicizing the virus, claiming
that “[Democrats] are now using the natural fear of a virus as a political weapon. And we have all the
evidence to prove it, a shameful politicizing, weaponizing of, yes, the coronavirus.” While he began in early
March to discuss the mortality statistics in more detail, he continued to emphasize that the virus still posed
a relatively minor threat to US citizens. For example, on March 10, Hannity stated:

     So far in the United States, there has been around 30 deaths, most of which came from one
     nursing home in the state of Washington. Healthy people, generally, 99 percent recover very fast,
     even if they contract it. Twenty six people were shot in Chicago alone over the weekend. You
     notice there’s no widespread hysteria about violence in Chicago.

By mid-March, after President Trump declared a national emergency in response to the coronavirus, Han-
nity’s coverage had converged to that of Carlson and other Fox News shows, emphasizing the seriousness of
the situation and broadcasting CDC guidelines:

     If you feel sick, stay at home. If your kids feel sick, don’t send them to school or day care. If
     someone in your household has tested positive for coronavirus, please self-quarantine your entire
     household. Keep them at home. If you are an older person or an individual with underlying

                                                      7
      medical conditions, a compromised immune system, maybe you are receiving chemotherapy,
      radiation, have autoimmune issues, whatever the underlying diseases are, please stay away, almost
      quarantine yourself from other people.

Taken together, the qualitative evidence highlights that (i) Carlson warned his viewers early on about the
potential threat posed by the coronavirus; and (ii) Hannity did not cover the coronavirus throughout most
of February, and he downplayed its seriousness until as late as mid-March. To more systematically evaluate
differences in the extensive margin of coverage between primetime Fox News shows, we turn to a simple
word-counting procedure.

Word counts: Carlson vs. Hannity For each of the seven shows on Fox News airing between 5pm and
11pm local time across the four major time zones, we download episode transcripts from LexisNexis. We
count the number of times any of a small list of coronavirus-related terms are mentioned on each day and
plot the results in Panel A of Figure 1.18 In particular, the y-axis of the panel displays the log of one plus
the word count on each day.
    Compared to the other three primetime shows, both Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight stand out.
Both anchors first discussed the coronavirus in late January when the first US case was reported, but Carlson
continued to discuss the subject extensively throughout February whereas Hannity did not again mention it
on his show until the end of the month. The other three shows fell somewhere between these two extremes.
By early March, the word counts of all shows had converged.19
    However, this simple procedure does not entirely capture differences in how shows discussed the coron-
avirus. The qualitative evidence above suggests that while Hannity discussed the coronavirus as frequently
as Carlson during early March, he downplayed its seriousness and accused Democrats of using it as a partisan
tool to undermine the administration. To capture these differences in the intensive margin of coverage, we
turn to human coding of the scripts.

Mechanical Turk script validation Between April 2 and April 6, we recruited workers on Amazon
Mechanical Turk to assess how seriously each of the seven shows portrayed the threat of the coronavirus
between early February and mid-March. For each episode that contained at least one coronavirus-related
term, five MTurk workers read the entire episode script and answered “Yes” or “No” to the following question:
“Did [the show] indicate that the virus is likely to infect many people in the US, causing many deaths or
serious illnesses, or that many have already become infected and have died or become seriously ill?” We
explicitly asked respondents to answer the question based only on the scripts, not their own views on the
subject. We impute “No” for each script that does not mention any coronavirus-related terms, and we code
“Yes” as 1 and “No” as 0.20
    Panel B of Figure 1 displays one-week rolling means of this variable for Carlson, Hannity, and the other
four shows. Throughout almost the entire period, MTurk workers rate Carlson as portraying the threat of
  18 The words are “coronavirus”, “virus,” “covid,” “influenza”, and “flu.”
  19 We also conduct a similar content analysis of all major primetime shows on CNN and MSNBC and find little variation
across shows in terms of the coverage of the coronavirus (see Appendix Figure A22); this also holds for .
  20 We calculate Fleiss’ Kappa of inter-rater agreement, a commonly used measure to assess the reliability of agreement among

more than two sets of binary or non-ordinal ratings, as κ = 0.629 (p < 0.001), suggesting “substantial agreement” (Landis and
Koch, 1977).



                                                              8
the coronavirus more seriously than the other three shows, and in turn rate the other shows as portraying
the threat more seriously than Hannity. In line with the qualitative evidence highlighted above, Hannity
converges to Carlson in early to mid-March.
   Together, our evidence suggests that coverage of the coronavirus differed enormously between Tucker
Carlson Tonight and Hannity. We next present survey evidence that these differences may have affected
viewers’ behavior during the period of initial spread of the coronavirus in the United States.


3     Survey
In this section, we present correlations between viewership of different primetime Fox news shows and viewers’
self-reported timing of behavioral change in response to the coronavirus. Radical behavioral changes, such
as stay-at-home behavior, did not become widespread until mid-to-late March, when the pandemic coverage
gap between Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight had already closed.21 Indeed, using data from SafeGraph,
a GPS-based location vendor widely used by studies examining stay-at-home behavior, we find no significant
association between viewership and stay-at-home behavior at the Designated Media Market (DMA) level
during the period when stay-at-home behavior became more widespread. Thus, to capture other behavioral
changes that may have occurred in February and March, and to shed light on which types of behavioral
change were most common, we fielded a survey on April 3, 2020.
    Our survey targeted a representative sample of approximately 1500 Republicans aged 55 or older in
cooperation with Luc.id, a survey provider widely used in social science research (Wood and Porter, 2019).
We focused on this subsample both because such individuals are more likely to watch Fox News and because
the elderly are at increased risk from the coronavirus.22 As we show in Appendix Table A1, our sample
is broadly representative of Republicans aged above 55 and older. All survey materials are available in
Appendix E.

Survey design After eliciting demographics, we ask respondents which, if any, of the “Big Three” TV
news stations (CNN, MSNBC, and Fox News) they watch at least once a week. 1045 individuals reported
that they watched any show on Fox News at least once a week; this is the sample we use in our analysis,
given our focus on Fox News viewers. We ask respondents to indicate the frequency with which they watch
the major primetime shows on each network on a three-point scale (“never”; “occasionally”; “every day or
most days”).
    We then ask our respondents about any changes in their behavior in response to the coronavirus outbreak.
First, we ask whether they have changed any of their behaviors (e.g., canceling travel plans, practicing social
distancing, or washing hands more often) in response to the coronavirus. For those respondents who answer
that they have changed behavior, we elicit the date on which they did so. Finally, we ask an open-ended
question asking respondents to describe which behaviors they changed.

Sample characteristics Of viewers in our sample who regularly watch Hannity, approximately 69 per-
cent also regularly watch Tucker Carlson Tonight; of viewers who regularly watch Tucker Carlson Tonight,
 21 See,e.g. Social Distancing, but Mostly During the Workweek? Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, May 26, 2020.
 22 The median age among Fox News viewers is 68. See, e.g. “Half of Fox News’ Viewers Are 68 and Older.” The Atlantic,
January 27, 2014.


                                                          9
approximately 77 percent also regularly watch Hannity.23 In Table 1, we plot demographic characteristics
of exclusive Tucker Carlson Tonight and Hannity viewers. Hannity viewers are somewhat more likely to
be white, somewhat more likely to be male, somewhat more likely to be working full-time, and more likely
to watch CNN and MSNBC. However, taken together, the observable differences between the two groups
appear to be modest.

Results To examine the correlation between viewership of different news shows and the timing of behavioral
change, we estimate the following simple specification:



                                        TimingChangei = α0 + βSi + ΠXi + εi ,

where TimingChangei is the number of days after February 1, 2020 on which the respondent reported having
significantly changed any of their behaviors in response to the coronavirus, Si is a vector of indicators for
whether the respondent occasionally or regularly watches each of the seven shows, and Xi is a vector of
demographic controls.24 The dependent variable for respondents who report that they have not changed any
of their behaviors at the time of the survey is recoded to the date on which the survey was administered
(April 3). We employ robust standard errors throughout our analysis.
    Panel A of Figure 2 plots the smoothed density function of the reported date of behavioral change
separately for viewers of Carlson, Hannity, and other Fox News shows. (The majority of viewers watch more
than one show and thus appear in multiple panels.) We also display these results in regression table form in
Table 2. Column 1 shows that viewers of Hannity changed their behavior four to five days later than viewers
of other shows (p < 0.001), while viewers of Tucker Carlson Tonight changed their behavior three to four
days earlier than viewers of other shows (p < 0.01); the difference in coefficients is also highly statistically
significant (p < 0.01).25 Column 2 reports a linear probability model in which the dependent variable is
an indicator for whether the respondent reported changing behavior before March 1; Carlson viewers were
11.7 percentage points more likely and Hannity viewers 11.2 percentage points less likely to have changed
their behavior before March 1 than viewers of other Fox shows.26 We estimate identical linear probability
models for each day between February 1 and April 3 (the date on which we administered the survey) and
report the coefficients on both Hannity viewership and Tucker Carlson Tonight viewership for each day in
  23 Our survey focuses on the population aged 55 or older, which also consumes the most television in general. Thus, the extent

of the overlap between viewers of the two shows in our sample likely overstates the overlap for viewers as a whole.
  24 The elements of S are neither mutually exclusive nor jointly exhaustive; viewers who watch multiple shows will have
                        i
multiple indicators set to one, while viewers that watch none of the five shows will have none of the indicators set to one.
  25 In independent work, Ash et al. (2020) also find survey evidence that Republican Hannity viewers adopt social distancing

measures significantly later than Republicans who do not watch Hannity, while Republican Tucker Carlson Tonight viewers
adopt social distancing measures significantly earlier than Republicans who do not watch Tucker Carlson Tonight.
  26 To benchmark the plausibility of the estimated effects, we calculate the persuasion rate of viewership on the outcome of

changing behavior by March 1, following the approach proposed by DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2010). The implied persuasion
rate of Hannity viewership relative to Tucker Carlson Tonight viewership is 24.1 percent, well within the range of comparable
estimates; for example, Martin and Yurukoglu (2017) find a Fox News persuasion rate on voting behavior of 58 percent in 2000,
27 percent in 2004, and 28 percent in 2008; Adena et al. (2015) finds a persuasion rate of up to 36.8 percent; and Enikolopov
et al. (2011) finds persuasion rates rating from 7 to 66 percent. On one hand, we might expect a lower persuasion rate in
our context because exposure is over a much shorter period; on the other hand, we might expect a higher persuasion rate (1)
because the outcomes we study are arguably lower-stakes than the outcomes in other settings, (2) because viewers likely hold
weak priors about the seriousness of the pandemic during the period under consideration, and (3) because regular viewers of a
show likely place significant weight on the anchors’ opinions.



                                                              10
Panel B of Figure 2. By this measure, the difference between the two anchors peaks around March 1, then
declines. The difference between the coefficients are significant at the one percent level throughout most
of mid-February through mid-March; the individual coefficients are also significantly different from the one
percent level throughout most of this period. To ensure that our results are robust to different specification
choices, in Appendix Figure A1, we report a “coefficient stability plot” (Rao, 2020) displaying specifications
under every possible combination of demographic controls, with and without state fixed effects. In every
specification, the difference between the two coefficients is significant at the one percent level; and in almost
all specifications, the individual coefficients are significantly different from 0 at the five percent level.
    We also examine the timing of specific margins of behavioral adjustment by manually coding the open-
ended responses to the question of which behaviors respondents changed. Figure 3 highlights that increased
hand washing and physical distancing are the most frequently mentioned behavioral changes, particularly in
February, the period during which the differences in show content were largest. Canceling travel plans and
staying at home are also frequently mentioned, though primarily in mid and late March.27
    Our survey suggests that show content may have affected individual behaviors relevant for the spread
of the coronavirus. However, the correlations might be driven by omitted variable bias or reverse causality:
viewers who did not want to believe that the coronavirus was a serious problem or viewers less inclined to
changing their behavior may have selected into watching Hannity. Moreover, our outcome is self-reported,
which may bias our estimates if respondents systematically misremember that they changed their behavior
earlier or later than they actually did. To address these issues, we turn to outcome data on COVID-19 cases
and deaths, and later turn to an instrumental variable strategy shifting relative viewership of Hannity and
Tucker Carlson Tonight.


4     Overview of Data Sources
Aside from our survey and the show transcripts we use in our previously-described content validation, we
employ six primary categories of data in our observational analysis: (1) show viewership data provided
by Nielsen at the day-by-show-by-Designated Market Area (DMA) level; (2) COVID-19 cases and deaths
data from the Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Research Center at the county-by-day level; (3) county-level
demographics from a variety of sources; (4) county-level data on 2016 Republican vote share from the MIT
Election Lab; (5) measures of health system capacity from the Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care; and (6)
data on sunset timing from www.timeanddate.com.

Viewership data Our show viewership data is provided by Nielsen. Nielsen reports viewership at the
Designated Market Area (DMA) level, of which there are 210 in the US.28 We focus on the continental
  27 The responses highlight the importance of distinguishing between two types of social distancing. Following the Federal

Reserve, we distinguish stay-at-home behavior — remaining at home for all or a substantial part of the day — from physical
distancing — continuing with day-to-day activities, but keeping a distance (e.g. of six feet) from others. While stay-at-home
behavior becomes widespread only in mid-to-late March (see, e.g. Allcott et al. 2020b), our survey responses suggest that
physical distancing was widespread even in February, at least among the population we survey.
  28 Comprehensive viewership data is not available at more granular levels after 2015. It is possible to approximate ZIP-level

(and thus county-level) viewership in 2015 or earlier, as in Simonov et al. (2020). This approximation involves aggregating
“headends,” or cable systems, to ZIP codes, a procedure that requires discarding all but the largest headend in each ZIP
code; (Simonov et al. 2020 find that 47% of ZIP codes have more than one headend, though the largest headend accounts for
at least half of subscribers in the vast majority. Aside from this measurement error and the possibility that the change in



                                                              11
United States, excluding the two DMAs in Alaska (Anchorage and Fairbanks) and the single DMA in Hawaii
(Honolulu).29 Our dataset contains viewership data between 5pm and 11pm (local time) at the DMA-
by-timeslot-by-day level (i.e. hourly ratings). In addition to the fraction of TVs watching Fox News, we
observe the fraction of TVs turned on during each timeslot. We supplement this dataset with 2018 data,
previously acquired, on the local market share of each of the “Big Three” networks: CNN, MSNBC, and
Fox News. To avoid using variation based on Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight, these market shares are
calculated based on evening time slots outside of those two shows. Our primary analysis uses January and
February viewership data; however, given the high degree of persistence in show viewership, our results are
quantitatively extremely similar and qualitatively identical if we instead use only January data (to rule out
concerns about reverse causality in our OLS estimates) or if we use data from January 1 through March 8
(the beginning of Daylight Savings Time, a natural stopping point given the structure of our identification
strategy).

COVID-19 cases and deaths data We use publicly-available county-level data on confirmed COVID-19
cases and deaths from Johns Hopkins University (Dong et al., 2020). The data is a panel at the day-by-county
level, with data sourced from a variety of agencies, including the World Health Organization, the Centers
for Disease Control, state health departments, and local media reports. Throughout our main analyses, we
take the logarithm of one plus the cumulative number of cases and deaths, both to correct for outliers with
a large number of cases and because the exponential nature by which a virus spreads makes the logarithm
normalization natural. However, our results are qualitatively identical and quantitatively extremely similar if
we instead transform cases and deaths by the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) rather than the natural logarithm.
Appendix D displays all our main results under the IHS transformation.
    Data on COVID-19 cases are potentially subject to both classical and non-classical measurement error.
For example, many COVID-19 cases are unreported (Lachmann, 2020; Stock et al., 2020), and if differential
media coverage of the pandemic influences the rate of case detection, then our coefficient estimates will be
biased. If viewers of Hannity are less concerned about the virus, and thus counties with greater viewership of
Hannity have lower rates of case detection — this should bias our estimates downward. Classical measurement
error will not bias our estimates, but will decrease their precision. Nonetheless, we urge caution in interpreting
our estimated effects on cases given these potential data limitations. Data on COVID-19 deaths is far less
subject to both classical and non-classical measurement error.
    In our primary analysis, we focus on outcomes during the early stages of the pandemic — from late
February to April 15 — given that stay-at-home orders were widely enacted in late March and the estimated
1-3 week lag between infections and deaths.30 However, in Appendix A.8, we report our main outcomes up
viewership between 2015 and 2020 is endogenous, we use 2020 DMA-level data for two reasons: first, because we are interested
in the effects of contemporaneous exposure to misinformation on pandemic outcomes and thus require viewership data from the
period of interest; and second, because Tucker Carlson Tonight first aired in 2016, and thus constructing accurate ZIP-code
level estimates of differential viewership is not feasible using currently-available data.
  29 We also exclude Palm Springs, CA; this DMA is so small that it does not contain a county centroid, and thus we are unable

to consistently map any counties to Palm Springs.
  30 The earliest stay-at-home order was enacted in California on March 19; other states followed suit between March 20 and

April 7. While our primary specification is estimated separately for each day and employs state fixed effects, thus controlling for
any state-specific policies, it is possible that the timing of regional stay-at-home orders (e.g. at the municipal, county, or DMA
level) are directly influenced by coverage of the pandemic on Fox News, though such effects are likely of limited quantitative
significance. It is, however, likely that the timing of regional stay-at-home orders were affected by the trajectories of cases and
deaths in the county, which, as we show, are themselves affected by Fox News coverage; we view this as a mechanism.



                                                                12
until the time of writing.31

Demographics We collect demographic data at the county level from a wide variety of sources. Our data
on age, racial composition, and household income and educational attainment is drawn from the 2018 round
of the American Community Survey. We use data on county rurality from the 2010 Census and data on
population drawing from the Annual Estimates of the Resident Population for Counties in the United States
provided by the U.S. Census Bureau. Our measures of poverty and health insurance are provided by the US
Census Bureau under the 2018 Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates (SAIPE) and 2018 Small Area
Health Insurance Estimates (SAHIE) programs. Our data on unemployment is from the US Bureau of Labor
Statistics’ 2019 Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS). Finally, our data on physical health is from
the CDC’s Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS).

2016 Republican vote share We obtain county-level voting data for the 2016 US Presidential election
from the MIT Election Lab, which contains the total number of votes cast and the number of votes cast for
each of the major parties.

Health system capacity We use standard measures of health capacity from the Dartmouth Atlas of
Health Care’s Hospital and Physician Capacity dataset. Data are at the Hospital Referral Region level,
defined by the Atlas as “regional health care markets for tertiary care”; we use the most recent version of
the dataset (2012). We include all three measures included in the data — the number of nurses, hospital
personnel, and hospital beds — and divide by population to construct per capita measures.

Sunset timing Our data on sunset timing is drawn from www.timeanddate.com. We extract sunset times
for every day from January 1, 2020 to March 1, 2020 for all counties based on their centroids, and we
construct the sunset time of each DMA for each day as the population-weighted mean sunset time on that
day of all counties in that DMA.


5     OLS Estimates on Health Outcomes
In this section, we first discuss the empirical challenge in identifying causal effects. We then present OLS
evidence on the effects of differential viewership of the two shows on COVID-19 cases and deaths.


5.1     Empirical challenge
Obviously, show viewership is not randomly assigned: people self-select into television shows that they like
to watch. For example, it is well known that Fox News viewers are over-represented among older individuals
and that age is a determinant of COVID-19 mortality. Our object of interest, though, is not to understand
the effect of watching Fox News per se, but to understand the role of differential information spread by the
different shows. Since selection into viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight is less well known,
we begin by examining county-level correlates of their relative popularity. As Appendix Figure A2 displays,
  31 In addition to the larger confidence intervals, interpretation of these results is complicated by the fact that treatment effects

on cases and deaths are endogenous to earlier trajectories, motivating our choice to focus on results until April 15.


                                                                 13
counties with a relative preference for Hannity differ from counties with a relative preference for Tucker
Carlson Tonight on a number of observable dimensions, including racial composition and education. For
example, a high share of blacks is positively correlated with popularity of Hannity, while a high share of
Hispanics is negatively correlated. Rural areas, areas with less education and with less health insurance
coverage tend to favor Hannity over Tucker Carlson Tonight. In contrast, the relative popularity of the two
shows is not strongly associated with the share of people over the age of sixty five.32
   Together, these patterns suggest that a simple OLS estimate may be biased. The direction of this bias,
however, is unclear. For example, COVID-19 has severely affected African-American communities, for many
reasons beyond Hannity’s relative popularity, which would positively bias our coefficient. On the other hand,
Hannity is also more popular in areas with greater local health capacity, suggesting a negative bias.
   In what follows, we will show in a transparent manner how OLS estimates evolve under various combi-
nations of county-level controls and fixed effects. We will then present an instrumental variable approach
aimed at addressing any lingering concerns.


5.2     OLS estimates
Specification Our explanatory variable of interest is the DMA-level average difference between viewership
of Hannity and viewership of Tucker Carlson Tonight across all days in January and February 2020 when
both shows are aired. We standardize this variable to take mean zero and a standard deviation of 1 for ease
of interpretation. In our primary analysis, we estimate the following specification separately for each day
between February 24 and April 15 (for cases) and between March 1 and April 15 (for deaths):

                                           Ymct = αt + βt Dmc + Πt Xmc + εmct                                                 (1)

where Ymct is an outcome (log one plus cases or log one plus deaths) in media market m, county c on day t,
Dmc is the standardized difference between viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight, and Xmc is
a vector of county-level controls.

Identifying variation and potential confounders To see the potential threats to identifying causal
effects, it is useful to understand where the variation in the main exposure variable, Dmc , comes from. By
definition, it is the difference between the share of households that regularly watch Hannity (vmc,H ) and the
share that regularly watch Tucker Carlson Tonight (vmc,T ). More broadly, for any show that airs at a certain
hour-long time slot h in the evening, we can define the share of households that watch any channel on TV as
smc,h and, among those, the share at that moment that tunes in to Fox News as fmc,h . Letting h ∈ {H, T }
represent viewership during Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight, respectively, we plot the distribution of
smc,H and smc,T across DMAs, along with the distribution of smc,H − smc,T across DMAs, in Figure 4.
    Thus, Dmc is driven by four factors:

                                       Dmc = (smc,H × fmc,H ) − (smc,T × fmc,T )
   32 Differences are reduced, though not eliminated entirely, when we include state fixed effects (our preferred empirical speci-

fication, as described below).




                                                               14
This means that the OLS specification effectively exploits variation arising from differences in timing pref-
erences and channel preferences:

                     Ymct = αt + βt (smc,H × fmc,H − smc,T × fmc,T ) + Πt Xmc + εmct                       (2)

Since we are interested in examining the effects of differential exposure to two major shows on Fox News,
Equation (2) makes it clear that if areas where Fox News is relatively popular experience more COVID-19
cases for any other (observable or unobservable) reason – for example if populations in these areas live
further away from high quality hospitals, tend to trust science less or have certain life styles which make
them more or less vulnerable to the virus – our estimate will be biased. To deal with this issue, we always
control for the average evening TV market share of Fox News: f mc,h , where h denotes 8pm to 11pm Eastern
Time. Moreover, since there may be selection into competing cable news networks specifically, rather than
TV watching per se, we analogously always control for the “Big Three” cable TV market shares of Fox News
and MSNBC (with CNN omitted since it is collinear with the other two). The inclusion of these controls
will arguably hold fixed many potential confounders related to channel preferences.
    Equation (2) also makes clear that if localities which have a tendency to watch evening TV per se
around the time of Hannity, rather than Tucker Carlson Tonight, consist of populations which differ in their
vulnerability to the virus, the OLS estimate could easily be biased. (Again, ex ante it is unclear to us which
way the bias would go, given that we are comparing differential exposure to two shows on the same network.)
For example, Hannity goes live at 9pm locally in the Eastern time zone, 8pm local time in the Central time
zone, 7pm in the Mountain time zone and 6pm in the Pacific time zone. Tucker Carlson Tonight goes live
an hour earlier. To address concerns about local preferences for watching TV per se at certain times in the
evening correlating with other determinants of COVID-19 trajectories – such as the extent to which people
like to socialize in restaurants and bars (in ways which spread the virus) instead of staying home watching
TV – we always include the average share of households with TVs turned on during each hourly slot between
8pm and 11pm Eastern Time (three variables, each capturing one hour): smc,8−9pm , smc,9−10pm , smc,10−11pm .
These controls will arguably hold fixed many potential confounders related to timing preferences.
    Given this approach, the remaining (residual) variation in exposure effectively comes from the difference
in the two interaction terms of Equation (2), holding constant local preferences for watching TV in general,
and watching Fox News in general. Obviously, including additional observable characteristics as control
variables is informative and desirable. For example, since we study the early stages of the COVID-19
pandemic and initial outbreaks occurred around metropolitan hot spots (e.g., Seattle, New York City and
the Bay Area), one concern may be that viewership patterns across the two shows correlate with such hot
spot locations. For this reason, we will show results with and without controls for rurality and population
density and transparently show how much the estimate fluctuates as a result. More broadly, in addition to
population controls, we will show results with and without county-level controls for a range of observable
characteristics: race (the share of the population white, Hispanic, and black); education (the share lacking
high school degrees and the share lacking college degrees, for women and men separately); age (the share
over the age of sixty-five); economic factors (the share under the federal poverty line, log median household
income, the unemployment rate); health factors (the share lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure
of the average physical health in the county from 2018); health capacity (the number of different types of


                                                     15
health personnel per capita); and political factors (Republican vote share and the log total number of votes
cast in the 2016 Presidential election). To see the spatial distribution of the remaining variation when all
covariates are included, Figure 5 displays the values of Dmc across the U.S., residualized by the controls
described above. To account for additional unobservable determinants of health outcomes that differ across
localities, we will show results using (1) no geographical fixed effects, (2) Census division (nine in total) fixed
effects, and (3) state fixed effects. Since time zones are absorbed by the geographical indicator variables in
the latter two cases, the fixed effects imply that we hold constant what time the two shows air locally. Our
most extensive OLS specification – which is preferable in that it helps rule out a whole host of concerns
beyond the ones explicitly outlined above – will include state fixed effects and a full set of control variables.
    To capture the effects in a transparent manner over time, our preferred approach is to run separate
cross-sectional regressions each day; in specifications including state fixed effects, this implicitly controls
for state-level policies varying at the day level, such as shelter-in-place orders and closures of nonessential
businesses. Because our viewership data is at the DMA level and to allow for within-market correlation in
the error term, we cluster standard errors at the DMA level (m), resulting in a total of 204 clusters.33

Results We report day-by-day results for cases and deaths in Figure 6, including all controls and state
fixed effects. The association between relative viewership and both cases and deaths becomes stronger over
time until the coefficient on cases peaks in late March and then begins to decline; at the time of writing,
the coefficient on deaths follows with a two weak lag, consistent with the approximately two-to-three week
lag between the appearance of COVID-19 symptoms and deaths (Wu et al., 2020). Effects on cases are
statistically significant at the 5 percent level throughout the majority of the period, while effects on deaths
are only statistically significant at the 5 percent level in late March and April. Effects on cases start to rise
in late February and peak in mid-to-late March before starting to decline, consistent with the convergence in
coronavirus coverage between Hannity and Carlson. A one standard deviation greater viewership difference
is associated with approximately 2 percent more cases on March 7 (p < 0.05), 5 percent more cases on
March 14 (p < 0.01), and 10 percent more cases on March 21 (p < 0.01). A one standard deviation greater
viewership difference is associated with 2 percent more deaths on March 21, 4 percent more deaths on March
28, and 9 percent more deaths on April 11.34 We report these results at weekly intervals in regression table
form in Table 3.

Robustness To probe the robustness of our estimates, we choose a single day for cases — March 14, two
weeks into March — and a single day for deaths — March 28, two weeks after our chosen date for cases (given
the lag between cases and deaths). We then run our specifications under every possible combination of our
eight sets of county-level controls (population density and rurality, race, age, economic, education, health,
health capacity, politics) and our three levels of fixed effects (no fixed effects, census division fixed effects,
and state fixed effects). Panel A of Appendix Figure A4 reports coefficient estimates for each of these 768
models for cases as of March 14; Panel A of Figure 7 reports the analogous estimates for deaths as of March
28. The majority of coefficient estimates on cases and deaths are statistically significant at the 1 percent
  33 Our  results are also statistically significant if we instead cluster at the state level, as we show in Appendix Figure A3.
  34 In Appendix Figure A19, we report day-by-day results for cases and deaths extending until the time of writing. Point
estimates remain positive; effects on cases increase slightly, while effects on deaths decrease slightly. However, these coefficients
are less precisely estimated, and we cannot rule out null effects on deaths past late April.



                                                                 16
level. Almost all coefficient estimates from specifications including state fixed effects, our most demanding
and most precisely estimated specifications, are significant at the 1 percent level. Moreover, our coefficient
estimates are relatively stable.35 Appendix Figure A5 shows a generally positive correlation between the
R2 of each model and the coefficient estimate, suggestive evidence that omitted variable bias seems to be
downward biasing our coefficients of interest. Indeed, a simple exercise to estimate omitted variables bias,
following best practice recommendations from Oster (2019), suggests that the true effect may be several
times larger.36
    To ensure that our results are not driven by a small number of outliers, we residualize our outcome
variables and the standardized difference in viewership by our controls and fixed effects, then plot the
residuals of our outcome variables against the residuals of the viewership difference in Appendix Figure A6;
the positive relationship between relative viewership and cases and deaths appears consistent throughout
the distribution of residuals. To further ensure that counties with a large number of cases or deaths are
not driving our results, in Appendix Figure A7, we estimate our time series figures leaving out entire states
containing prominent COVID-19 hotspots: California, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, Washington,
and all five states. Our estimates remain qualitatively identical and quantitatively similar in each case.
    A limitation of the OLS approach is that, ultimately, it requires an assumption based on selection-on-
observables. We may still be concerned about unobservable factors driving both viewership preferences for
Hannity over Tucker Carlson Tonight and COVID-19 outcomes. To address this concern, we develop an
instrumental variables strategy to isolate plausibly exogenous variation in relative viewership.


6     Instrumental Variables Estimates on Health Outcomes
To address concerns about unobservables biasing our estimates, we need an instrument that shifts relative
viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight, yet is orthogonal to (i) underlying preferences for the
shows and (ii) any socioeconomic and demographic factors relevant for the spread of coronavirus or for
coronavirus mortality, such as income, racial composition, and health system capacity. In this section, we
describe our approach to generate plausibly exogenous variation in relative viewership of these two shows.
For now, we will leave aside potential spillover effects onto viewership of other evening shows on Fox News
beyond Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. However, in Section 9, where we investigate mechanisms more
in depth, we will allow for arbitrary spillovers and generalize our analysis to all Fox News evening shows.


6.1     Leave-out IV
As Equation (2) makes clear, the underlying variation in Dmc is driven by the combination of timing prefer-
ences and channel preferences. A lingering concern may be that these preferences are correlated with other
  35 We repeat this exercise for every date between February 24 and April 15 for cases and between March 1 and April

15 for deaths (768 regressions per day). The resulting coefficient stability plots for each day are accessible at https:
//raw.githubusercontent.com/AakaashRao/aakaashrao.github.io/master/files/ols-cases.gif (cases) and https://raw.
githubusercontent.com/AakaashRao/aakaashrao.github.io/master/files/ols-deaths.gif (deaths).
  36 The method requires assuming a maximum amount of variation that a hypothetical regression including all observable and

unobservable covariates could explain; we follow the recommendation provided in Oster (2019) of using 1.3 times the R2 value of
the most extensive specification. The method also requires specifying the relative importance of observables and unobservables
in explaining variation in the outcome variable; we again follow the guidance in Oster (2019) and assume observables and
unobservables are equally important.



                                                              17
unobservable determinants. In particular, while the political slant of different shows on Fox News are similar
and arguably cater the content towards viewers with similar beliefs and political viewpoints, the shows are
not identical. Therefore, it could be that Fox News viewers that primarily favor Hannity over other Fox
News shows, such as Tucker Carlson Tonight, are somehow fundamentally different along dimensions that
matter for health outcomes. Here, we alleviate some of these concerns by employing a leave-out approach,
isolating cleaner variation that is less subject to confounders.37
    The logic of the instrument is as follows. We know that the share of households regularly watching
Hannity is determined by the interaction of timing preferences and channel preferences, smc,H × fmc,H . The
OLS estimations already flexibly control for the tendency to watch TV per se at certain hours in the evening.
Under the assumption of generic timing preferences that are homogeneous across Fox and non-Fox viewers,
timing preferences that determine health outcomes do not bias the OLS estimates. However, if timing
preferences are heterogeneous across people that regularly watch Fox compared to those that prefer other
channels, estimates may be biased. For example, if around the time Hannity airs, regular Fox viewers tend to
prefer to stay home and watch TV while non-Fox viewers like to socialize in restaurants and bars (facilitating
the spread of the virus), the OLS estimates would be (negatively) biased. To purge the treatment variable
Dmc from any such variation, we isolate variation in timing preferences among only non-Fox viewers: s̃mc,H ,
the average share of households that watch TV when Hannity airs while leaving out households that watch
Fox News.
    We use an analogous approach for channel preferences, i.e. for the other factor in the interaction term.
The OLS estimations already control for the market share of Fox News, which may correlate with other
determinants of health outcomes. Under the assumption that these other determinants do not also correlate
with the interaction between channel preferences and timing preferences, the OLS estimates are not biased.
However, we cannot rule out that such a correlation structure exists. For example, if regular Fox viewers
that like to socialize in restaurants and bars prefer to watch TV slightly later in the evening when Hannity
airs, whereas regular Fox viewers that seldom go to restaurants and bars stay home and watch TV earlier,
Tucker Carlson Tonight is on, the OLS estimates would be (negatively) biased. To purge the treatment
variable Dmc from such variation, we isolate variation in channel preferences during other timeslots outside
of when Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight is live on air: f˜mc,−HT , the average market share of Fox News,
leaving out ratings during the 8-10pm Eastern Time.
    Based on this logic, our leave-out instrument, Zmc , consists of the interaction s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT . The
resulting first-stage regression is:

                             Dmc = α + β1 Zmc + β2 s̃mc,H + β3 f˜mc,−HT + Πt Xmc + εmc                                   (3)

    The 2SLS strategy is therefore based on two identifying assumptions. First, that there is a cross-sectional
first stage relationship: β1 > 0. Second, the exclusion restriction assumes that conditional on the main effects
of the individual leave-out variables, s̃mc,H and f˜mc,−HT , the interaction term Zmc only affects outcomes
through Dmc . The intuition is as follows: the interaction terms shifts viewers not only into Fox News in
general, but in particular into the timeslot when Hannity airs, as opposed to slots when other Fox News
shows, such as Tucker Carlson Tonight, air (resulting in β1 > 0). The variation is driven by the purged
 37 The   logic of the leave-out approach is discussed in Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2020) and Burchardi et al. (2019).



                                                              18
interaction of timing preferences unrelated to Fox News viewership and channel preferences for Fox News
unrelated to viewership of Hannity or Tucker Carlson Tonight. In short, it is driven by local habits to turn
on the TV during certain time-slots – habits not specific to regular Fox News viewers – together with a
preference to watch Fox News whenever the TV is turned on (but not specific to the time slots of interest).
This interaction should push people into watching Hannity over Tucker Carlson Tonight.
    We will also show robustness of the 2SLS estimates when two instruments are included (see Section 7.3.3):
the instrument for Hannity as specified above and an analogously constructed instrument for Tucker Carlson
Tonight, s̃mc,T × f˜mc,−HT . In this case, the two instruments identify a causal effect using a similar logic as
above, provided the first stage relationship is sufficiently strong.38
    Our identification strategy leverages distinct sources of identifying variation depending on the set of fixed
effects that we include. In specifications without any geographic fixed effects, we exploit variation across
time zones, thus exploiting variation in local airing time of the shows relative to the local “prime time” —
the period in the evening where the number of TVs turns on peaks. For example, Hannity airs one hour
after the prime time in EST, while it airs two hours before the prime time in PST. On the other hand,
specifications with Census division and state fixed effects only exploit variation within a given time zone.
Reassuringly, our coefficient estimates are relatively similar in magnitude across different choices of controls
and fixed effects.

Correlation with pre-determined characteristics To illustrate the spatial distribution of the induced
variation, Figure 8 maps the residuals of our instrument, where the instrument has been residualized ac-
cording to the specification above with the baseline controls. In Appendix Figure A9, we report regressions
using each county-level covariate as an outcome, scaled to a standard normal distribution to facilitate in-
terpretation, on our instrument. Only one coefficient is significantly different from zero at the 5 percent
level, and coefficient magnitudes are generally small.39 This lends credibility to the identification strategy.
Nevertheless, as in the OLS approach, we will show in a transparent manner the extent to which results are
robust to permutations across all possible combinations of the groups of covariates.

Exclusion restriction Our approach is motivated by the fact that (1) Hannity and Tucker Carlson
Tonight are the most-viewed shows in the United States, and by the fact that (2) the differences in coronavirus
coverage were greatest between Hannity and Carlson, with the divergence emerging in early February and
lasting for several weeks until eventual convergence by mid-March. In this sense, the instrument variable
approach is designed to shift exposure to misinformation in the early stages of the pandemic through its
effects on the two most popular and most relevant shows on Fox News. At a first-order approximation, this
seems reasonable. However, as we will discuss more thoroughly in Section 9, even if our instrument is relevant
so that β1 > 0 in Equation (3), it is important to consider potential violations of a more narrowly defined
  38 While instrumenting D                                ˜                       ˜
                              mc using both s̃mc,H × fmc,−HT and s̃mc,T × fmc,−HT makes sense conceptually, one concern
is that because the instruments imply using variation in timing preferences in adjacent timeslots, the two instruments are
highly correlated, potentially leading to weak instrument problems. Indeed, as we report in Appendix Table A2, the first-stage
Kleibergen-Paap F -statistic is significantly lower when we use both instruments, even though the resulting 2SLS coefficients are
extremely similar in magnitude and statistical significance. As there remains uncertainty in how to test for and overcome weak
instruments in over-identified models, as opposed to in simpler just-identified settings (see Andrews et al. 2019 for a discussion),
our primary specification uses only the instrument for Hannity’s timeslot.
  39 Indeed, the coefficient that is significantly different from zero is the percentage uninsured, which is lower in areas with a

high value of our instrument — suggesting that any bias should work against finding an effect.


                                                                19
exclusion restriction and how such violations influence the interpretations of our results. In particular, if
one assumes that all of the effects of the instrument on COVID-19 outcomes operate exclusively through
differential exposure to Hannity over Tucker Carlson Tonight – the outcome variable in the first-stage
regressions – then one would also have to assume that our instrument does not have any spillovers, negative
or positive, onto other shows. This is, of course, a strong assumption. For example, it may be that our
instrument pushes Fox viewers into regularly watching more Hannity and less Tucker Carlson Tonight; but
this in turn could make them less (or more) interested in watching some other Fox News show. Such spillovers
could be very complex, as they would depend on underlying preferences – how shows are complements and
substitutes. Patterns of complementarity or substitution between relative viewership of Hannity versus
Tucker Carlson Tonight and viewership of other shows would then violate that exclusion restriction and
complicate interpretation of the two-stage least squares regressions.
    For these reasons, while we will proceed in this section under the assumption that the exclusion restriction
described above holds, it is important to keep in mind the aforementioned limitations of the approach. In
Section 9, we will relax the exclusion restriction assumption and employ a more general approach allowing
for arbitrary spillovers across Fox News programs, while still allowing us to investigate the hypothesized
mechanism of exposure to differential coverage of the coronavirus crisis.

Instrument relevance As we show in Table 4, our instrument strongly predicts viewership of Hannity
relative to Tucker Carlson Tonight. The first-stage F -statistic of our preferred specification (Column 6) is
substantially higher than 10, and the first-stage coefficient estimates remain relatively constant over Census
division and state fixed effects and as we include controls for population and population density, MSNBC’s
share of cable, and our rich set of county-level covariates: a one standard deviation higher value of the
instrument is associated with approximately a one standard deviation higher viewership of Hannity relative
to Tucker Carlson Tonight (p < 0.001), with somewhat tighter confidence intervals when fixed effects are
included. For consistency and transparency, we will show 2SLS results across all specifications in Appendix
Table 4, as well as permutations across all of the additional combinations.


6.2        Results on COVID-19 cases and deaths
We next turn to our instrumental variable estimates on downstream health outcomes: COVID-19 cases and
deaths.
    Figure 9, which for consistency and ease of comparison mirrors the OLS specification of Figure 6 (that
is, the specification with the most extensive set of controls and fixed effects), shows the day-by-day 2SLS
estimates of the effects of the standardized Hannity-Carlson viewership difference on cases and deaths. As in
the OLS specification, we cluster standard errors at the DMA level.40 Effects on cases start to rise in early
March and peak in mid-March before gradually declining, consistent with Hannity’s changing position on
the coronavirus. Consistent with estimated lags between case and death reporting, effects on deaths start
emerging approximately three weeks after cases.41 A one standard deviation higher viewership of Hannity
relative to Tucker Carlson Tonight is associated with approximately 15 percent more cases on March 7
(p < 0.001), 34 percent more cases on March 14 (p < 0.001), and 29 percent more cases on March 21
 40 The    analogous results with standard errors clustered at the state level are reported in Appendix Figure A10.
 41 See,   e.g., “A Second Coronavirus Death Surge is Coming.” The Atlantic, July 15, 2020.


                                                               20
(p < 0.05); the effect then declines to a statistically-insignificant 7 percent more cases on April 4. A one
standard deviation greater viewership of Hannity relative to Tucker Carlson Tonight is associated with 24
percent more deaths on March 28 (p < 0.01), 35 percent more deaths on April 4 (p < 0.05), and 30 percent
more deaths on April 11 (p < 0.10).42 The initial divergence and eventual plateauing of effects on COVID-19
cases are consistent with our proposed mechanism that differential reporting between Hannity and Carlson
about the coronavirus throughout February and early March are driving our results, as we will explore
more fully in the next subsection and in Section 6.3.43 We report reduced-form and 2SLS results at weekly
intervals in regression table form in Table 5.


6.3     Mechanism: differential coverage
Taken together, our evidence suggests that higher viewership of Hannity relative to Tucker Carlson Tonight
is associated with a greater number of COVID-19 cases and deaths during the early onset of the coronavirus
pandemic. Given the qualitative evidence highlighted in Section 2, the timing of these effects on cases and
deaths already suggests an important role of differences in information content between the two shows in
driving results. We now examine the timing of deaths and cases relative to the timing of differences in
content of the two shows more closely.
    We construct two indices measuring differences between the two shows. First, to construct the Carlson-
Hannity “pandemic coverage gap”, we use our Mechanical Turk coding results from Section 2.2. For each day,
our index is defined as the difference between the average of the five ratings of the Tucker Carlson Tonight
episode and the average of the five ratings of the Hannity episode on that day. Thus, higher values of the
index indicate that the Tucker Carlson Tonight episode that aired on that day portrayed the coronavirus
as a much more serious threat than the Hannity episode on the same day, while lower values of the index
indicate that the two episodes were similar in their coverage. Second, to construct the Carlson-Hannity
“behavioral change gap,” we return to our survey results from Section 3. In particular, for each day, the
gap is defined as the associated Hannity coefficient minus the same-day Carlson coefficient from Panel B of
Figure 2 — that is, the difference between the marginal effects of viewership of these two shows on the event
that the respondent had changed their behavior to act more cautiously in response to the coronavirus by
the date in question. Thus, we should expect the behavioral change gap to lag the pandemic coverage gap,
since viewers react to the differences in information sets presented on the two shows.
    Figure 10 plots the pandemic coverage gap and the behavioral change gap in tan diamonds and green
squares, respectively. To facilitate plotting on the same figure, we rescale the pandemic coverage and behav-
ioral change gaps by dividing each series’ coefficients by the maximum coefficient value over the series, such
that the maximum value is 1. Figure 10 also plots the 2SLS estimates of the Hannity-Carlson viewership
gap (instrumented by Zmc ) on log one plus cases and log one plus deaths in gray circles and red triangles,
respectively (as previously reported in Figure 9).
    The pandemic coverage gap peaks in mid-February, a period during which there was no discussion of
the coronavirus on Hannity and during which Tucker Carlson Tonight discussed the topic on virtually every
  42 In Panel B of Appendix Figure A20, we report day-by-day results for cases and deaths extending until the time of writing,

as discussed in Footnote 43.
  43 In Appendix Figure A20, we report day-by-day results for cases and deaths extending until the time of writing. Like the

OLS results, point estimates remain positive; effects on both cases and deaths increase, though these coefficients are imprecisely
estimated, and we cannot rule out null effects.


                                                               21
episode, before declining to zero by mid-March. The behavioral change gap follows a similar shape with a
two-week lag, peaking in early March before declining. The trend in coefficient estimates on cases closely
mirrors the trend in the pandemic coverage gap (with a lag of approximately one month) and the trend on
the pandemic coverage gap (with a lag of approximately two weeks), while the trend in coefficient estimates
on deaths follows with an additional two week lag. These findings suggest that the effects of differential
exposure to Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight that we document are not driven by longer-term past
differential exposure to the shows or unobservable factors correlated both with the spread of the virus and
preferences for one show over the other, but rather by differences in how the two shows covered the pandemic
as it began to spread.
    It is important to note that as of the time of writing, effects on cases and deaths have not reverted to
zero (see Section A.8). As we show in Section 8.2, a simple epidemiological model can, with reasonable
parameters, match the approximate magnitude of treatment effects throughout both our primary period of
focus (late February through mid-April) and our extended period of focus (late February through the time
of writing in August).


7     Robustness
In this section, we conduct a number of exercises to probe the robustness of our estimates.


7.1    Robustness to choice of controls, zero values, and outliers
Robustness to choice of specification As in Section 5.2, we run our specifications under every possible
combination of our eight sets of county-level controls (population density and rurality, race, age, economic,
education, health, health capacity, politics) and our three levels of fixed effects (no fixed effects, Census
division fixed effects, and state fixed effects). We again focus on March 14 for cases and March 28 for
deaths. Panel B of Appendix Figure A4 reports coefficient estimates for each of these 768 models for cases
as of March 14; Panel B of Figure 7 reports the analogous estimates for deaths as of March 28. Confidence
intervals for models without any geographical fixed effects are wider due to unobservable variation in the
outcome; once division or state fixed effects are included, the coefficients are relatively stable and tightly
estimated. The majority of coefficient estimates on cases and deaths are statistically significant at the 1
percent level, as are all estimates drawn from specifications with state fixed effects included.44
    The estimated OLS coefficients are generally increasing as we control for more observables, suggesting that
unobservables generate a negative bias. In contrast, the 2SLS coefficient estimates are relatively stable across
these same permutations of controls, suggesting less of a bias. The OLS estimates can thus be interpreted as
a plausible lower bound on the true causal effect of differential viewership on COVID-19 trajectories; indeed,
correcting the OLS coefficients for omitted variables bias by the method proposed in Oster (2019) yields
estimates very similar to our IV estimates.
  44 We repeat this exercise for every date between February 24 and April 15 for cases and between March 1 and

April 15 for deaths (768 regressions per day). The resulting coefficient stability plots for each day are accessible at
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/AakaashRao/aakaashrao.github.io/master/files/iv-cases.gif (cases) and https://
raw.githubusercontent.com/AakaashRao/aakaashrao.github.io/master/files/iv-deaths.gif (deaths).




                                                          22
Robustness to outliers and COVID-19 hotspots One potential concern is that COVID-19 hotspots
with a large numbers of cases or deaths may skew our results. We probe robustness to outliers by residualizing
our outcome variables and the instrument by our controls and fixed effects, then plotting the residuals of our
outcome variables against the residuals of the instrument in Appendix Figure A11. As in the OLS estimates,
neither plot gives cause for concern that our estimates are driven by outliers. To further ensure that counties
with large number of cases or deaths are not driving our results, in Appendix Figure A12, we estimate
our time series figures leaving out entire states containing prominent COVID-19 hotspots. In general, our
estimates remain quantitatively and qualitatively similar; if anything, point estimates are slightly higher,
suggesting the mechanism that we study is less relevant in explaining the trajectories of cases and deaths in
these states. However, these coefficients are less precisely estimated.

Robustness to zero values To ensure that our results are not driven by zero values, we construct
an unbalanced panel wherein a county only enters the panel once it has a COVID-19 case. In Appendix
Figure A13, we report 2SLS estimates. Because relatively few counties had a non-zero number of cases during
early March, our main specification (which includes a rich set of county-level controls, along with state fixed
effects) results in a singular or close-to-singular matrix until mid-March, and even afterward, confidence
intervals are relatively large. Nonetheless, our estimates are qualitatively similar (though quantitatively
smaller), and our estimates on deaths are statistically significant at the five percent level between mid-March
and early April. The somewhat smaller effects sizes are consistent with an important role of movements in
both the intensive and extensive margins in shaping our results. Estimates on cases are not statistically
significant at the five percent level.


7.2    Resampling inference
Finally, we conduct a number of resampling exercises to further probe the robustness of our estimates. We
conduct each exercise with 1000 repetitions.

Bootstrap To address sampling error, in Appendix Figure A14, we calculate our standard errors via
a block bootstrap procedure, randomly sampling DMAs with replacement and estimating counterfactual
treatment effects for each day. We employ a conservative approach to calculating standard errors: rather
than ex ante fixing the set of counties between the 0.025-quantile and the 0.975-quantile of average treatment
effects, we compute confidence intervals separately by day, using the 0.025-quantile and the 0.975-quantile
of the estimated treatments effects on each day as the upper and lower bounds on our confidence intervals,
respectively. Our bootstrapped standard errors are larger and thus our effects are statistically significant
for a somewhat shorter period of time: effects on cases are statistically significant from early-to-mid March,
while effects on deaths are statistically significant from mid-March to late April. However, our findings
remain qualitatively unchanged.

Randomization inference To address error arising from treatment variation (including spatial autocorre-
lation), in Appendix Figure A15, we employ a randomization inference approach (Athey and Imbens, 2017),
permuting the plausibly exogenous “shift” (s̃mc,H ) across DMAs while leaving the “shares” (f˜mc,−HT ), the



                                                      23
county-level covariates, and cases and deaths unchanged. For each repetition, we then regenerate our in-
strument as the interaction of the placebo s̃mc,H with f˜mc,−HT , then estimate placebo treatment effects as
before. Under this approach, we find that our effects on cases and deaths are statistically significant at the
5% level throughout essentially the same period as described above.

Permutation test To ensure that our results are not driven by statistical artifacts, in Appendix Figure A16
we randomly permute the joint tuple of case and death counts across counties and estimate counterfactual
treatment effects. The resulting distribution of estimates is centered around zero; and once more, our true
estimates for cases exceed the 0.975-quantile of counterfactual estimates from early to mid March, while our
true estimates for deaths exceed the 0.975-quantile of counterfactual estimates from late March to mid-April.


7.3     Robustness to alternative IV strategies
7.3.1    Predicted DMA level viewership curve

A key source of variation driving variation in our main leave-out instrument, Zmc , is differing preferences
across localities for when to watch TV. The use of leave-outs to generate cleaner and plausibly exogenous
variation in differential exposure to the two shows has the limitation that it is somewhat unclear what
remaining underlying factors are driving the residual variation in timing preferences. In particular, the
concern would be some confounding determinant of health outcomes still covarying with preferences for the
time slot of the respective shows, in ways which interact with the market share of Fox News. While this
possibility seems somewhat remote, it cannot be ruled out. By contrast, in an ideal experiment, one would
randomly assign Fox viewers to different timeslots, exposing some areas more to Hannity and other areas
more to Tucker Carlson Tonight. To get closer to this ideal, we now consider an extension of the instrument
which more explicitly exploits variation in timing preferences.
    Specifically, we show – and empirically exploit – important systematic patterns that drive TV viewership
over the course of the evening, in ways that are highly unlikely to interact with the leave-out Fox News
market share to drive health outcomes. In particular, DMAs across the country exhibit a relatively consistent
inverse-U shaped relationship between the time since sunset and total TV viewership. Panel A of Figure B1
plots a non-parametric local polynomial fitting the relationship between time since sunset and the fraction
of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels. On average across the country, TV viewership peaks 2.5 hours after
sunset and then declines smoothly. Panel A also shows a histogram depicting, at each twelve-minute interval
relative to sunset, the number of DMAs in which Tucker Carlson Tonight begins in that interval (blue) and
in which Hannity begins in that interval (purple). Because both shows are broadcast live — Tucker Carlson
Tonight at 8pm Eastern Time and Hannity at 9pm Eastern Time — both shows are aired much earlier and
closer to sunset in more Western time zones (e.g. 5pm and 6pm Pacific Time, respectively). Yet as Panel B of
Figure B1 highlights, even holding constant what (clock) time shows air, there remains substantial variation
in start time relative to sunset. 45 While DMAs differ in the precise shape of their viewership curve over
the course of the evening, the vast majority exhibit a clear inverted-U pattern.46 For example, on February
  45 Appendix Figure A8 highlights this phenomenon across the continental United States, plotting sunset times in each county

on February 1, 2020.
  46 Episodes of Tucker Carlson Tonight and Hannity are generally re-run three hours after they first air, and because our

data spans 5pm to 11pm, we observe repeats in more western time zones but not in Eastern Time. In order to avoid making



                                                             24
1, 2020, the sun set at 6:05pm in Louisville, KY, whereas it set at 5:19pm in Philadelphia, PA — nearly an
hour earlier. Thus, predicted viewership during Hannity’s timeslot is larger in Louisville, as “prime time”
is at approximately 8:30pm, only 30 minutes before Hannity airs. Predicted viewership during Hannity’s
timeslot is lower in Philadelphia, where the local prime time of TV consumption is forty five minutes earlier.
    Our identification strategy exploits cross-DMA variation in sunset timing and viewership preferences
alongside timezone-specific variation in local airtimes of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight, such that
cross-DMA variation in the predicted amount of total TV viewership during Hannity’s timeslot — or more
precisely, total non-Fox TV viewership during this timeslot — generates variation in relative viewership of
Tucker Carlson Tonight vs. Hannity.
    Let bsmc,H denote the predicted fraction of TVs turned on in DMA d at the time slot of Hannity, leaving
out TVs watching Fox News (i.e. leaving out TVs watching Hannity).47 We predict smc,H parametrically
for each DMA using a second-degree polynomial. Denoting by nmt the sunset time in DMA m on day t, we
have:
                              smc,H = αm + δm1 (s − nmt ) + δm2 (s − nmt )2 + dst                        (4)

    As before, letting fmc denote the viewership share of Fox News in DMA m, leaving out Hannity and
Tucker Carlson Tonight, the modified instrument is given by bsmc,H × f˜mc,−HT . The underlying logic for this
modified version is the instrument is simple: if people like to turn on their TVs to watch something when
Hannity happens to be on rather than when another Fox show happens to be on, simply as a function of
when shows air relative to when it gets dark locally (and not just what official time it is locally), the number
of viewers shifted into watching Hannity is disproportionately large in areas where Fox News is popular in
general, for arguably exogenous reasons. As before, conditional upon the small set of controls accounting
for local viewership patterns, this instrument is not significantly correlated with demographic characteristics
(Appendix Figure B2) and has a strong first stage on viewership (Columns 3-4 of Appendix Table A2). In
Appendix B, we replicate all of our analysis with this alternative instrument and find qualitatively identical
and quantitatively similar results.

7.3.2    Division-level viewership curve

One possible concern with both our main instrument and our sunset instrument is that they might rely
excessively on local preferences (that is, DMA-specific preferences) for watching TV over the course of the
evening. We now consider a prediction of the share of TVs turned on during Hannity and Tucker Carlson
Tonight using Census division-wide, rather than DMA-specific, preferences for TV viewership over the course
of the evening. Thus, our identifying variation is driven by the interaction of the viewership curve at the
division level with DMA-specific market shares of Fox News, controlling for the main effects at the DMA
level. To allow DMAs to differ in their absolute preference for TV viewership while keeping our identifying
variation — the viewership curve over the course of the evening — constant, we allow the level and scale
of the viewership curve to differ between DMAs within a division but hold the shape of the curve fixed. In
assumptions about viewership patterns in western time zones relative to Eastern Time by failing to include Eastern Time
viewership that falls outside of the window covered by our data, we simply set viewership to the average viewership across both
airings in DMAs in which we observe re-runs. However, our results are robust to only using viewership of the live broadcasts.
  47 As mentioned above, we leave out TVs watching Fox News in order to capture a general DMA preference for TV viewership

at a given time rather than specific preferences for Fox News. The logic is analogous to the logic of the leave-one-out estimator
used in Bartik instruments (Bartik, 1991).


                                                               25
particular, we estimate the following first-stage regression separately for each of the nine Census divisions
in the United States:



                             log(smc,H ) = αm + δ1 (s − nm ) + δ2 (s − nm )2 + ms ,

where the DMA-specific fixed effect αm allows the level of the curve to vary between DMAs and the log trans-
formation of smc,H allows the scale of the curve to vary between DMAs. We re-define s\                  \
                                                                                          mc,H = exp(log smc,H )
and, as before, construct our instrument based on the interaction of s\   mc,H with the viewership share of Fox
News in DMA m, leaving out Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. Our first-stage specifications are other-
wise identical to those in Section 6.1.
     Like our main instrument, conditional upon the small set of controls accounting for local viewership pat-
terns, this alternative instrument is not significantly correlated with demographic characteristics (Appendix
Figure C1), and it has a first stage on viewership (Columns 5-6 of Appendix Table A2), though the relation-
ship is weaker than that which we find with our main instrument or the DMA-based sunset prediction. In
Appendix C, we replicate our analysis with this alternative instrument and find qualitatively identical and
quantitatively similar results. Although our confidence intervals are wider due to a weaker first stage, there
still remain approximately 2-week intervals in mid-March and in late March to early April where cases and
deaths, respectively, are statistically significant at the 5% level across all randomization exercises.

7.3.3    Two instruments

Table A2 shows robustness of the 2SLS estimates when two instruments are included, the one for Hannity as
specified in Section 6 and an analogously constructed instrument for Tucker Carlson Tonight, s̃mc,T ∗f˜mc,−HT .
Two-stage least squares estimates are similar in magnitude and statistical significance, but — as might be
expected given the correlation between the two instruments — the first stage F -statistic is smaller and
below the generally-accepted threshold of 10, suggesting that including both instruments may induce a weak
instruments problem and bias both our coefficients and standard errors. As there remains uncertainty in how
to test for and overcome weak instruments in over-identified models, as opposed to in simpler just-identified
settings (see Andrews et al. 2019 for a discussion), our primary specification uses only the instrument for
Hannity’s timeslot.


8       Assessing Effect Sizes
8.1     Assessing magnitudes along the COVID-19 curve
How should one interpret the magnitudes of the coefficients, given that they are estimated at different mo-
ments in time as the pandemic spreads? To illustrate, we perform a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation
using information on actual COVID-19 case trajectories across counties combined with the estimated effects
of viewership reported in Figure 9. By construction, the 2SLS coefficient for any given day will capture
the percent increase in cases from a one standard deviation greater viewership difference between Hannity
and Tucker Carlson Tonight. We use this information by first taking the actual mean cases for each day


                                                       26
— effectively capturing the COVID-19 trajectory for a ‘representative’ county — and adding the implied
percent increase as given by the estimated coefficient for that day. We then plot the logarithmic trajectory
for actual cases, together with the calculated counterfactual trajectory. We then conduct the same exercise
using the data and estimates on COVID-19 deaths.
    Panel A of Figure 11 plots the trajectories for cases: (i) log one plus cases for a representative county
(in black) and (ii) the implied counterfactual log one plus cases for counties with a one standard deviation
higher viewership of Hannity versus Tucker Carlson Tonight (in gray). The relative magnitude peaks around
March 15 at slightly above 0.3 log points, corresponding to approximately a 30 percent increase from the
base. However, given the logarithmic scale, the implied magnitude on cases keeps growing in economic
importance as the pandemic expands, before slowly converging and turning statistically insignificant. The
evidence is therefore consistent with differential viewership of Hannity over Tucker Carlson Tonight having
induced a steeper curve early on in the pandemic, in opposition to efforts aimed at “flattening the curve.”
    Panel B of Figure 11 plots the trajectories for estimated deaths. Similar patterns emerge, except they
arise approximately two weeks later. Here, the estimated coefficient of the relative effect peaks in the first
week of April, at around 0.4 log points, as Figure 9 also shows clearly, before starting to decline and turning
statistically insignificant.48


8.2     Assessing treatment effects through an epidemiological model
We now assess the effect sizes documented in Section 8.1 through a simple epidemiological model. The key
behavioral foundation is that Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight influence the behavior of viewers by
changing their beliefs about the threat posed by the coronavirus, thus influencing the extent to which they
take precautionary measures (such as washing hands or disinfecting more frequently) and in turn affect the
disease transmission rate among viewers.49
    Our model allows us to estimate the extent to which the shows would need to affect transmissibility
among viewers in order to generate treatment effects similar in magnitude to those we estimate. Our goal
is not to point-identify structural parameters of the model: estimating models of the COVID-19’s spread
is notoriously difficult (as evidenced by the wide variance in model predictions from different sources over
the course of the pandemic) and there may be multiple parameters that ; and moreover, our identification
strategy does not allow us to account for inter-county externalities, a crucial element in explaining the
virus’ spread (Kuchler et al., 2020). Instead, we view our exercise as a back-of-the-envelope calculation to
demonstrate that our observed treatment effects on deaths are consistent with reasonable changes in disease
transmissibility.
    Basic SIR (Susceptible-Infected-Removed) models, or most standard variants thereof, do not allow for
heterogeneous groups that differ in their mortality or transmission rates. We wish to account for heterogeneity
in age, since the elderly both have elevated COVID-19 fatality rates and are disproportionately likely to
  48 In Appendix Figure A17, we present results from an equivalent exercise using the OLS estimates. The magnitudes of the

estimated effects are in general smaller. In Appendix Figure A21, we extend the figure with treatment effects estimated until
the time of writing, as discussed in Footnote 43.
  49 Viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight may also affect transmissibility through indirect channels. For example,

these shows might change social norms associated with behavior such as wearing masks, temporarily closing businesses, and
providing employees with sick leave (Shadmehr and de Mesquita, 2020), or, relatedly, viewers might share the information they
learned on the shows with others. For simplicity, we do not model these channels.




                                                             27
watch Fox News. We also wish to account for heterogeneity in viewership of Tucker Carlson Tonight and
Hannity, since only a fraction of the population are exposed to these shows and an even smaller fraction are
“treated” (in the sense of being shifted into watching more Hannity relative to Tucker Carlson Tonight by
our instrument inducing a one standard deviation increase in relative viewership).
    We thus adapt the multi-group SIR model introduced in Acemoglu et al. (2020) to model four groups: the
“untreated” population between 25 and 64 (of size Nyu ); the “treated” population between 25 and 64 (of size
Nyt ); the “untreated” population aged 65 and older (of size Nou ); and the “treated” population aged 65 and
older (of size Not ). We calibrate Nj using ACS data on the age distribution of the US population alongside
our Nielsen data on daily viewership and our survey data on viewership frequency.50 Following Acemoglu et
al. (2020), we normalize the total population size N = j Nj to 1. 51 We assume that death and recovery
                                                         P

rates are invariant to time and the number of patients. To capture differential interaction patterns — the
fact that young agents are more likely to interact with other young agents (e.g. through the workplace) while
old agents are more likely to interact with old agents (e.g. in nursing homes), we calibrate the interaction
matrix ρ using the intergenerational interaction matrix from Akbarpour et al. (2020).52 While age affects the
probability of interaction between groups, treatment status does not: conditional on age, a treated person
is equally likely to interact with another treated person as with an untreated person. Following Allcott et
al. (2020a), we model the effect of cautious behaviors such as washing hands, wearing face masks, or social
distancing — and thus, the effect of differential viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight — by
assuming that they directly affect the transmission rate βj .53
    Denoting the susceptible, infected, recovered, and dead populations by S, I, R, and D, respectively, the
model is characterized by the following system of differential equations:
                                                                             !
                                                     X
                                        I˙j = Sj         c(βj , βk )ρjk Ik       − γj Ij − δj Ij
                                                     k

                                       Ṙj = γj Ij
                                       Ḋj = δj Ij
                                       Ṡj = −I˙j − Ṙj − Ḋj

   To fix notation, let X̄ denote the value of variable X in a representative county with a mean viewership
of Hannity relative to Tucker Carlson Tonight, and let X + denote the value of X in a representative
  50 As in our survey analysis, we include “occasional” viewers (those who watch the shows between one and three times per

week) alongside “regular” viewers (those who watch four or five times per week).
  51 We make a number of additional parameter assumptions to make the model more tractable. In particular, we assume α = 2

(quadratic matching in transmission, which most closely matches the dynamics of a standard SIR model); and we abstract away
from healthcare capacity constraints by assuming that ι = 1.
  52 The matrix is based on data provided by Replica, which uses anonymized cellphone GPS data to simulate a “synthetic

population” that “closely approximates both age and industry distributions from the Census ACS, as well as granular ground-
truth data on mobility patterns from a variety of different sources” (Akbarpour et al., 2020).
  53 Thus, in contrast to Acemoglu et al. (2020), there is no single transmission rate β governing the probability by which a

susceptible agent will be infected when they come into contact with an infected agent; this rate is an increasing function c
in the βj parameters of the infected agent and the susceptible agent. To our knowledge, there are no estimates of c(·, ·) for
COVID-19. For tractability, we assume that when agents from groups a and b with βa 6= βb come into contact, the “effective
transmission rate” is given by c(βa , βb ) = max{βa , βb }2 , intuitively capturing the intuition that it is the less cautious agent
that drives the transmission probability. (For example, the primary benefit of face masks is that they help prevent infected
people from spreading COVID-19 to others; they are less effective in protecting the wearer against contracting COVID-19 from
others Bai (2020). However, our results are qualitatively similar if we instead assume c(βa , βb ) = βa βb .



                                                                28
county with a one standard deviation higher viewership of Hannity relative to Tucker Carlson Tonight. By
construction, there is no “treated” population in the county with mean relative viewership: N̄yt = N̄ot = 0,
            +        +           +       +
N̄yu = Nyu     + Nyt   , N̄ou = Nou  + Not . Also by construction, transmissibility in the county with mean
relative viewership is always equal to transmissibility among untreated in the county with a one standard
                                                             +         +
deviation higher relative viewership: β̄yu (t) = β̄ou (t) = βyu (t) = βou (t), for all t. To ease notation, we write
                     +       +   +     +     +      +
β̄ := β̄yu = β̄ou , βu := βyu = βou , βt := βyt = βot . We report all parameter values in Table 6.
    We take the timing of behavioral changes in response to the coronavirus from our survey, which are
presented in Panel B of Figure 2, as primitives in our model. The treatment effect of Hannity viewership
relative to Tucker Carlson Tonight viewership on the total number of people who report having changed
their behavior to act more cautiously in response to the coronavirus is approximately 0 on February 1,
increases to peak on March 1, and then decreases. The difference had not yet returned to zero by the
date of the survey, but assuming the observed trend continued, we would expect it to return to zero by
mid-April. We thus fix β̄(t) = βn+ (t) = βc+ (t) for t = Feb 1 and t ≥ Apr 15. Since, in our survey, both
the increase in estimated treatment effects between February 1 and March 1 and the decrease between
March 1 and April 3 are approximately linear, we linearly interpolate values of β between February 1 and
March 1 and between March 1 and April 15. Informed by recent epidemiological estimates (e.g., Unwin
et al. 2020), we allow the transmission rate to decline linearly from April 15 to May 1. This leaves us
with five parameters to estimate: β̄(Feb 1) = βu+ (Feb 1) = βt+ (Feb 1), β̄(Mar 1) = βu+ (Mar 1), βt+ (Mar 1),
β̄(Apr 15) = βu+ (Apr 15) = βt+ (Apr 15), and β̄(May 1) = βu+ (May 1) = βt+ (May 1).
    COVID-19 cases are vastly underreported with some preliminary estimates suggesting that as many as
93% of cases may be undetected (Stock et al., 2020). This is particularly true in the United States, which
continues to suffer from testing shortages at the time of writing.54 As a result, we focus on fitting the
trajectories of deaths estimated in Section 8.1. We proceed by simulating death trajectories under different
values of parameters, selecting the combination that minimizes a loss function based on the sum of squared
residuals between the 2SLS estimates and the simulated trajectories.55
    Panel A of Figure 12 plots the fitted trajectories of β for the untreated (which comprise the entire county
with a mean viewership difference and the vast majority of the county with a one standard deviation higher
viewership difference) and for the treated (the remaining fraction of the county with a one standard deviation
higher viewership difference).56 The peak difference in β̄ and βt+ on March 1 is approximately 27%.57 The
estimated paths imply that the treated population did not adjust their behavior at all throughout most of
February and only began doing so in March, while the non-treated population gradually adjusted behavior
throughout the period before the April 15 convergence. For ease of comparison with other studies, we can
also calculate the trajectories of the effective reproduction number Rt : the expected number of susceptible
individuals an individual infected at time t will him or herself infect. At t = 0, this is approximated
             2
by R0 ≈ βγ = 3.18; Rt falls to approximately 1.81 by April 15 among the untreated and approximately
  54 See,for example, “Why America’s coronavirus testing barely improved in April”, The New York Times, May 1, 2020.
  55 We begin our simulations on February 1, five days before the day of the first confirmed COVID-19-related death in the US
(see “First Known U.S. COVID-19 Death Was Weeks Earlier Than Previously Thought”, NPR, April 22, 2020.)
  56 We repeat this exercise for our OLS estimates; the results are reported in Appendix Figure A18.
  57 This difference is approximately equal to the March 1 persuasion rate we identify from the survey data (24.1%), though

the two estimates are of course not directly comparable. Weighting by the size of each group, the maximum difference in the
average beta in the county with a mean viewership difference vs. the county with a 1 SD higher viewership difference is around
2%.



                                                             29
1.15 among both groups by May 1. These values are broadly similar to recent estimates of the effective
reproduction rate, e.g. Atkeson et al. (2020).
     Panel B of Figure 12 plots the implied simulated trajectories of deaths (dashed line) and the trajectories
of deaths implied by our 2SLS estimates (solid line) for a representative county with a mean Hannity-Tucker
Carlson Tonight viewership difference and for a representative county with a one standard deviation higher
viewership difference. Panel C of Figure 12 plots the simulated treatment effect, i.e. the difference between
the two dashed lines, and the 2SLS treatment effects, i.e. the difference between the solid lines. Our model
fits the estimated treatment effects fairly well.58
     Our model also allows us to examine what fraction of people who died were members of the treated group,
i.e. the group whose transmissibility was affected by a one standard deviation increase in relative viewership.
We estimate that approximately 5% of the additional deaths occur in the treated group, with the additional
deaths occurring in the untreated group. Since there is substantial uncertainty about the true values of the
exogenously taken input parameters of the model, and since our model fails to capture important features
such as county-to-county spillovers, we should be cautious when interpreting this estimate. Nonetheless,
the model highlights the relevance of externalities in generating our estimated treatment effects.59 Taken
together, our results suggest that behavioral responses among viewers early on in a pandemic – due to
differential media coverage of the virus – can give rise to modest but meaningful differences in transmissibility
among the broader population, which ultimately translate into effect sizes of roughly the same magnitude
as those we estimate.


9     Generalized Exposure across Fox News Shows
Our previous estimates focused on the effects of our instrument on differential viewership of Hannity and
Tucker Carlson Tonight. These two shows were the largest outliers on Fox News in their coverage of the
coronavirus (in opposite directions), and are the most widely-watched programs on the network and in the
United States, suggesting that the viewership gap between the two shows alone had effects on cases and
deaths. Yet as we discuss in Section 6.1, differences in viewership across those two Fox News shows may,
through various spillovers, also correlate with viewership of many other shows. Specifically, for any given
DMA, regular viewership of Tucker Carlson Tonight (airing 8pm-9pm ET) and Hannity (airing 9pm-10pm
ET) could lead to positive or negative selection into various combinations of: The Five (5pm-6pm ET);
Special Report with Bret Baier (6pm-7pm ET); The Story with Martha MacCallum (7pm-8pm ET); The
Ingraham Angle (10pm-11pm ET); and Fox News at Night (11pm-12pm ET).60 Despite the fact that the
other evening shows are neither as widely watched as Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight nor as extreme
  58 Adding additional degrees of freedom by modeling agent heterogeneity, “super-spreader” events, and network structure

would allow us to better fit the shape of estimated treatment effects (McGee, 2020), but these are beyond the scope of our
exercise.
  59 Our results are in line with those of Banerjee et al. (2020), which also finds large spillovers in the context of health behaviors

during the COVID-19 pandemic.
  60 Of course, there might also be spillovers to day-time Fox News shows, but such selection would arguably be less significant

given that TV is primarily viewed between 5pm and 11pm. Cross-network spillovers are also possible. Such spillovers are likely
minor given that viewers tend to favor shows within the same network; indeed, in the survey discussed in Section 3, 73 percent
of respondents report that Fox News is the only cable TV network they watch at least once a week. Moreover, as we show
in Appendix Figure A22, the other two dominant cable TV networks, CNN and MSNBC, featured far less variation between
shows in their coverage of COVID-19, limiting the extent that spillovers might bias our results.



                                                                  30
in their coverage, their content may also have influenced COVID-19 outcomes. In this case, the narrow
exclusion restriction, which requires that effects operate through viewership of Hannity or Tucker Carlson
Tonight, would be violated. Thus, we now turn to a more general approach to capture viewers’ (predicted)
exposure to misinformation on Fox News.
    Specifically, for each DMA, we first calculate a measure of local exposure to information about the
pandemic across all evening-time shows on Fox News, allowing us to consider the broad information set to
which Fox News viewers were exposed. We combine our data on viewership shares of the different shows at
the DMA-by-day level with our Mechanical Turk episode coding results to construct a measure of information
exposure, the pandemic coverage index, as the average of the degree to which each episode portrayed the
coronavirus as a serious threat to the United States, weighted by viewership of that episode within the
DMA. More formally, we define rst to be the average seriousness rating of show s on day t and msdt to be
the average viewership share of episde s in DMA d among all Fox News evening-time episodes on day t.
Then the daily exposure edt of a DMA is given by:

                                                     1 X
                                           edt :=         rst msdt .
                                                    |Sd |
                                                        s∈Sd


where Sd is the menu of shows between 5pm and 11pm in DMA d. We then construct the pandemic coverage
index for DMA d as the sum of ẽdt throughout the months of January and February:
                                                          X
                                            P CId :=                ẽdt .
                                                       t∈Jan, Feb


The index therefore captures an (inverse) local “stock” of exposure to news on Fox News underplaying
the pandemic threat throughout February relative to the mean exposure across DMAs in the same period.
For ease of interpretation, we scale the index to a standard normal distribution. Because we are broadly
interested in the effects of misinformation, and to be consistent with our previous figures, we use the inverse
of our pandemic coverage index, −1 × P CId throughout the rest of this section.
    Columns 1 and 2 of Table 7 highlight that our measure of viewership of Hannity relative to Tucker
Carlson Tonight strongly predicts the pandemic coverage index (p < 0.001), whether we include only the
minimum set of controls to capture local viewership patterns or we condition on the full set of controls
employed in Section 6. Next, we examine the extent to which our instrument, Zmc , is associated with the
pandemic coverage index. Columns 3 and 4 of Table 7 show that our instrument is strongly and significantly
associated with the pandemic coverage index, again whether we include only the minimum set of controls or
we condition on the full set of county characteristics. Finally, in Columns 5 and 6 of Table 7, we examine the
relationship between the pandemic coverage index and COVID-19 cases and deaths through 2SLS. We follow
the approach from Section 6, but we use the pandemic coverage gap as the endogenous variable instead of
the standardized difference in viewership of Hannity versus Tucker Carlson Tonight, allowing us to fully
capture spillovers between shows on Fox News. Our results suggest that a one percentage point increase
in the inverse of the pandemic coverage index increases the number of cases by 3.96 percent on March 14
(p < 0.001) and the number of deaths by 2.83 percent by March 28 (p < 0.001).
    In Appendix Figure A23, we estimate the same 2SLS specifications separately for each day, allowing us



                                                       31
to examine the relationship between the inverse pandemic coverage index and health outcomes over time.
The effect of the inverse pandemic coverage index on cases peaks in mid-March and then begins to decline,
while effects on deaths appear to level off in early April.


10     Conclusion
How can diverging media coverage influence beliefs and behavior? Examining this question is particularly
important during a pandemic, given the large externalities involved and the significant consequences of
misinformed behavior for individuals’ health and for the health care system as a whole. In this paper, we
show that differential exposure to information broadcast on mass media significantly affected behavior and
downstream health outcomes in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
    We examine the two most popular cable news shows in the United States: Hannity and Tucker Carlson
Tonight. These shows are aired back-to-back on the same network (Fox News) and had relatively similar
content prior to January 2020, yet differed sharply in their coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic. We validate
differences in content with independent coding of shows’ transcripts and present new survey evidence that,
consistent with these content differences, viewers of Hannity changed behavior in response to the virus
later than other Fox News viewers, while viewers of Tucker Carlson Tonight changed behavior earlier.
Using both a selection-on-observables strategy with a rich set of controls and different instrumental variable
strategies exploiting variation in the timing of TV viewership, we then document that greater exposure to
Hannity relative to Tucker Carlson Tonight increased the number of total cases and deaths in the initial
stages of the coronavirus pandemic. A standard epidemiological model matches the approximate magnitude
of our measured treatment effects and highlights the relevance of externalities. Finally, we also provide
additional evidence that contemporaneous information exposure is an important mechanism driving the
effects in the data. Together, our results indicate that misinformation on mass media can have significant
social consequences.




                                                     32
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Victor Chernozhukov, Ivan Werning, and Michael D Whinston, “Optimal
 Targeted Lockdowns in a Multi-Group SIR Model,” Working Paper 27102, National Bureau of Economic
 Research May 2020. Series: Working Paper Series.
Adena, Maja, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Ekaterina Zhu-
 ravskaya, “Radio and the Rise of The Nazis in Prewar Germany,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 November 2015, 130 (4), 1885–1939.

Adolph,    Christopher,      Kenya     Amano,      Bree     Bang-Jensen,       Nancy      Fullman,
 and John Wilkerson, “Pandemic politics:               Timing state-level social distancing re-
 sponses to COVID-19,” medRxiv, 2020.           tex.elocation-id:  2020.03.30.20046326 tex.eprint:
 https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/03/31/2020.03.30.20046326.full.pdf tex.publisher: Cold
 Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

Ajzenman, Nicols, Tiago Cavalcanti, and Daniel Da Mata, “More Than Words: Leaders Speech and
 Risky Behavior during a Pandemic,” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2020.
Akbarpour, Mohammad, Cody Cook, Aude Marzuoli, Simon Mongey, Abhishek Nagaraj,
 Matteo Saccarola, Pietro Tebaldi, Shoshana Vasserman, and Hanbin Yang, “Socioeconomic
 Network Heterogeneity and Pandemic Policy Response,” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3623593, Social Science
 Research Network, Rochester, NY June 2020.
Alesina, Alberto F, Armando Miano, and Stefanie Stantcheva, “The Polarization of Reality,”
 Working Paper 26675, National Bureau of Economic Research January 2020. Series: Working Paper
 Series.
Alesina, Alberto, Stefanie Stantcheva, and Edoardo Teso, “Intergenerational Mobility and Prefer-
 ences for Redistribution,” American Economic Review, February 2018, 108 (2), 521–554.
Allcott, Hunt, Levi Boxell, Jacob Conway, Billy Ferguson, Matthew Gentzkow, and Benny
 Goldman, “Economic and Health Impacts of Social Distancing Policies during the Coronavirus Pan-
 demic,” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3610422, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY May 2020.
  , , , Matthew Gentzkow, Michael Thaler, and David Yang, “Polarization and public health:
  Partisan differences in social distancing during COVID-19,” Working Paper, 2020.
Alsan, Marcella, Luca Braghieri, Sarah Eichmeyer, Joyce Kim, Stefanie Stantcheva, and David
 Yang, “Civil Liberties in the Time of Health and Economic Crises,” Slides, Harvard University April 2020.
Ananyev, Maxim, Michael Poyker, and Yuan Tian, “The Safest Time to Fly: Pandemic Response in
 the Era of Fox News,” Technical Report August 2020.
Andersen, Martin, “Early evidence on social distancing in response to COVID-19 in the united states,”
 Available at SSRN 3569368, 2020.
Andrews, Isaiah, James H. Stock, and Liyang Sun, “Weak Instruments in Instrumental Vari-
 ables Regression: Theory and Practice,” Annual Review of Economics, 2019, 11 (1), 727–753. eprint:
 https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics-080218-025643.
Ash, Elliott, Sergio Galletta, Dominik Hangartner, Yotam Margalit, and Matteo Pinna, “The
 Effect of Fox News on Health Behavior During COVID-19,” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3636762, Social
 Science Research Network, Rochester, NY June 2020.




                                                   33
Athey, S. and G. W. Imbens, “Chapter 3 - The Econometrics of Randomized Experimentsa,” in Abhi-
 jit Vinayak Banerjee and Esther Duflo, eds., Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, Vol. 1 of Handbook
 of Field Experiments, North-Holland, January 2017, pp. 73–140.
Atkeson, Andrew, Karen Kopecky, and Tao Zha, “Estimating and Forecasting Disease Scenarios for
 COVID-19 with an SIR Model,” Working Paper 27335, National Bureau of Economic Research June 2020.
 Series: Working Paper Series.

Bai, Nina, “The Science Behind How Face Masks Prevent Coronavirus,” June 2020.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Eliana La Ferrara, and Victor H Orozco-Olvera, “The Entertaining Way to
 Behavioral Change: Fighting HIV with MTV,” Working Paper 26096, National Bureau of Economic
 Research July 2019.
  , , and Victor Orozco, “Entertainment, education, and attitudes toward domestic violence,” in “AEA
  papers and proceedings,” Vol. 109 2019, pp. 133–37.
  , Marcella Alsan, Emily Breza, Arun G Chandrasekhar, Abhijit Chowdhury, Esther Duflo,
  Paul Goldsmith-Pinkham, and Benjamin A Olken, “Messages on COVID-19 Prevention in India
  Increased Symptoms Reporting and Adherence to Preventive Behaviors Among 25 Million Recipients with
  Similar Effects on Non-recipient Members of Their Communities,” Working Paper 27496, National Bureau
  of Economic Research July 2020. Series: Working Paper Series.
Barrera, Oscar, Sergei Guriev, Emeric Henry, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, “Facts, alternative
 facts, and fact checking in times of post-truth politics,” Journal of Public Economics, February 2020, 182,
 104123.
Barrios, John Manuel and Yael V Hochberg, “Risk perception through the lens of politics in the time
 of the COVID-19 pandemic,” University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working
 Paper, 2020, (2020-32).
Bartik, Timothy J, “Who benefits from state and local economic development policies?,” 1991.
 tex.publisher: WE Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Besley, Timothy and Sacha Dray, “The Political Economy of Lockdown: Does Free Media Make a
 Difference?,” Technical Report August 2020.
Bootsma, Martin CJ and Neil M Ferguson, “The effect of public health measures on the 1918 influenza
 pandemic in US cities,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2007, 104 (18), 7588–7593.
 tex.publisher: National Acad Sciences.
Brzezinski, Adam, Valentin Kecht, David Van Dijcke, and Austin L. Wright, “Belief in Science
 Influences Physical Distancing in Response to COVID-19 Lockdown Policies,” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID
 3587990, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY April 2020.
Burchardi, Konrad B, Thomas Chaney, and Tarek A Hassan, “Migrants, Ancestors, and Foreign
 Investments,” The Review of Economic Studies, July 2019, 86 (4), 1448–1486.
Bursztyn, Leonardo, Georgy Egorov, Ruben Enikolopov, and Maria Petrova, “Social media
 and xenophobia: evidence from Russia,” Working Paper 26567, National Bureau of Economic Research
 December 2019.
Cantoni, Davide, David Y. Yang, Noam Yuchtman, and Y. Jane Zhang, “Protests as Strategic
 Games: Experimental Evidence from Hong Kong’s Antiauthoritarian Movement,” The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, May 2019, 134 (2), 1021–1077.



                                                    34
Card, David and Gordon B Dahl, “Family violence and football: The effect of unexpected emotional
 cues on violent behavior,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2011, 126 (1), 103–143. tex.publisher:
 MIT Press.
Chen, Yuyu and David Y. Yang, “The Impact of Media Censorship: 1984 or Brave New World?,”
 American Economic Review, June 2019, 109 (6), 2294–2332.
Chiang, Chun-Fang and Brian Knight, “Media bias and influence: Evidence from newspaper endorse-
 ments,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2011, 78 (3), 795–820. tex.publisher: Oxford University Press.
Cruces, Guillermo, Ricardo Perez-Truglia, and Martin Tetaz, “Biased perceptions of income dis-
 tribution and preferences for redistribution: Evidence from a survey experiment,” Journal of Public Eco-
 nomics, February 2013, 98, 100–112.

Cucinotta, D and M Vanelli, “WHO declares COVID-19 a pandemic.,” Acta bio-medica: Atenei Par-
 mensis, 2020, 91 (1), 157.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Eliana La Ferrara, “Chapter 19 - Economic and Social Impacts of the Media,”
 in Simon P. Anderson, Joel Waldfogel, and David Stromberg, eds., Handbook of Media Economics, Vol. 1
 of Handbook of Media Economics, North-Holland, January 2015, pp. 723–768.
   and Ethan Kaplan, “The fox news effect: Media bias and voting,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2007, 122 (3), 1187–1234. tex.publisher: MIT Press.
   and Matthew Gentzkow, “Persuasion: Empirical Evidence,” Annual Review of Economics, 2010, 2
  (1), 643–669.
Dong, Ensheng, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner, “An interactive web-based dashboard to track
 COVID-19 in real time,” The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 2020. tex.booktitle: The lancet infectious diseases
 tex.date-added: 2020-03-06 15:00:59 +0000 tex.date-modified: 2020-03-06 15:00:59 +0000 tex.isbn: 1473-
 3099 tex.m3: doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30120-1 tex.publisher: Elsevier tex.ty: JOUR.
Durante, Ruben and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, “Attack when the world is not watching? US news and
 the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,” Journal of Political Economy, 2018, 126 (3), 1085–1133. tex.publisher:
 University of Chicago Press Chicago, IL.
Egorov, Georgy, Ruben Enikolopov, Alexey Makarin, and Maria Petrova, “Divided We Stay
 Home: Social Distancing and Ethnic Diversity,” Working Paper 27277, National Bureau of Economic
 Research May 2020. Series: Working Paper Series.

Eisensee, Thomas and David Strmberg, “News droughts, news floods, and US disaster relief,” The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (2), 693–728. tex.publisher: MIT Press.
Enikolopov, Ruben, Maria Petrova, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya, “Media and Political Persuasion:
 Evidence from Russia,” American Economic Review, December 2011, 101 (7), 3253–3285.
Ferrara, Eliana La, “Mass media and social change: Can we use television to fight poverty?,” Journal of
  the European Economic Association, July 2016, 14 (4), 791–827. tex.publisher: Oxford University Press.
  , Alberto Chong, and Suzanne Duryea, “Soap operas and fertility: Evidence from Brazil,” American
  Economic Journal: Applied Economics, October 2012, 4 (4), 1–31.
Fetzer, Thiemo, Lukas Hensel, Johannes Hermle, and Christopher Roth, “Coronavirus perceptions
  and economic anxiety,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.03848, 2020.




                                                    35
Gentzkow,     Matthew and Jesse M. Shapiro, “What Drives Media Slant?                             Evi-
 dence From U.S. Daily Newspapers,” Econometrica, 2010, 78 (1), 35–71.                          eprint:
 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.3982/ECTA7195.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Isaac Sorkin, and Henry Swift, “Bartik Instruments: What, When, Why,
 and How,” American Economic Review, August 2020, 110 (8), 2586–2624.

Hmielowski, Jay D., Lauren Feldman, Teresa A. Myers, Anthony Leiserowitz, and Edward
 Maibach, “An attack on science? Media use, trust in scientists, and perceptions of global warming,”
 Public Understanding of Science, October 2014, 23 (7), 866–883. Publisher: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Holshue, Michelle L, Chas DeBolt, Scott Lindquist, Kathy H Lofy, John Wiesman, Hollianne
 Bruce, Christopher Spitters, Keith Ericson, Sara Wilkerson, Ahmet Tural, and others,
 “First case of 2019 novel coronavirus in the United States,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2020.
 tex.publisher: Mass Medical Soc.
Jensen, Robert and Emily Oster, “The power of TV: Cable television and women’s status in India,”
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (3), 1057–1094. tex.publisher: MIT Press.
Jernigan, Daniel B, “Update: public health response to the coronavirus disease 2019 outbreak?United
  States, February 24, 2020,” MMWR. Morbidity and mortality weekly report, 2020, 69.
Kearney, Melissa S and Phillip B Levine, “Media influences on social outcomes: The impact of MTV’s
 16 and pregnant on teen childbearing,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (12), 3597–3632.
Kuchler, Theresa, Dominic Russel, and Johannes Stroebel, “The Geographic Spread of COVID-
 19 Correlates with Structure of Social Networks as Measured by Facebook,” Technical Report w26990,
 National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA April 2020.
Lachmann, Alexander, “Correcting under-reported COVID-19 case numbers,” medRxiv, 2020.
  tex.publisher: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
Landis, J. Richard and Gary G. Koch, “The Measurement of Observer Agreement for Categorical
  Data,” Biometrics, March 1977, 33 (1), 159.
Li, Qun, Xuhua Guan, Peng Wu, Xiaoye Wang, Lei Zhou, Yeqing Tong, Ruiqi Ren, Kathy SM
  Leung, Eric HY Lau, Jessica Y Wong, and others, “Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China,
  of novel coronavirusinfected pneumonia,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2020.
Long, Elisa F, M Keith Chen, and Ryne Rohla, “Political storms: Emergent partisan skepticism of
  hurricane risks,” 2019.
Mariani, Lucas Argentieri, Jessica Gagete-Miranda, and Paula Rettl, “Words can hurt: How
 political communication can change the pace of an epidemic,” Working Paper, Center for European Policy
 Research August 2020.

Markel, Howard, Harvey B Lipman, J Alexander Navarro, Alexandra Sloan, Joseph R
 Michalsen, Alexandra Minna Stern, and Martin S Cetron, “Nonpharmaceutical interventions
 implemented by US cities during the 1918-1919 influenza pandemic,” Jama, 2007, 298 (6), 644–654.
 tex.publisher: American Medical Association.
Martin, Gregory J. and Ali Yurukoglu, “Bias in Cable News: Persuasion and Polarization,” American
 Economic Review, September 2017, 107 (9), 2565–2599.
Martinez-Bravo, Monica and Andreas Stegmann, “In vaccines we trust? The effect of anti-vaccine
 propaganda on immunization: Evidence from pakistan,” CEMFI, 2017.


                                                  36
McGee, Ryan Seamus, “seirsplus,” May 2020. original-date: 2020-03-20T02:06:45Z.

Miguel, Edward and Michael Kremer, “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health
 in the Presence of Treatment Externalities,” Econometrica, 2004, 72 (1), 159–217. eprint:
 https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1468-0262.2004.00481.x.
Nyhan, Brendan and Jason Reifler, “Does correcting myths about the flu vaccine work? An experi-
 mental evaluation of the effects of corrective information,” Vaccine, January 2015, 33 (3), 459–464.

  , Ethan Porter, Jason Reifler, and Thomas J. Wood, “Taking Fact-Checks Literally But Not
  Seriously? The Effects of Journalistic Fact-Checking on Factual Beliefs and Candidate Favorability,”
  Political Behavior, 2020, 42 (3).
  , Jason Reifler, Sean Richey, and Gary L. Freed, “Effective Messages in Vaccine Promotion: A
  Randomized Trial,” Pediatrics, April 2014, 133 (4), e835–e842. Publisher: American Academy of Pediatrics
  Section: Article.
Oster, Emily, “Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Busi-
 ness & Economic Statistics, April 2019, 37 (2), 187–204.
Pei, Sen, Sasikiran Kandula, and Jeffrey Shaman, “Differential Effects of Intervention Timing on
 COVID-19 Spread in the United States,” medRxiv, May 2020, p. 2020.05.15.20103655. Publisher: Cold
 Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
Perez-Truglia, Ricardo and Guillermo Cruces, “Partisan Interactions: Evidence from a Field Experi-
 ment in the United States,” Journal of Political Economy, August 2017, 125 (4), 1208–1243.
Rao, Aakaash, “starbility: coefficient stability plots in R (v0.9),” Technical Report, Harvard University
 May 2020.
Shadmehr, Mehdi and Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, “Coordination and Social Distancing: Inertia in the
  Aggregate Response to COVID-19,” SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 3586839, Social Science Research Network,
  Rochester, NY April 2020.
Simonov, Andrey, Szymon Sacher, Jean-Pierre Dub, and Shirsho Biswas, “The Persuasive Effect
  of Fox News: Non-Compliance with Social Distancing During the Covid-19 Pandemic,” SSRN Scholarly
  Paper ID 3600088, Social Science Research Network, Rochester, NY May 2020.
Stantcheva, Stefanie, “Understanding Tax Policy: How Do People Reason?,” Working Paper 27699,
  National Bureau of Economic Research August 2020. Series: Working Paper Series.

Stock, James H., Karl M. Aspelund, Michael Droste, and Christopher D. Walker, “Estimates of
  the Undetected Rate among the SARS-CoV-2 Infected using Testing Data from Iceland,” medRxiv, April
  2020, p. 2020.04.06.20055582. Publisher: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.
Unwin, H, S Mishra, VC Bradley, A Gandy, M Vollmer, T Mellan, H Coupland, K Ainslie,
 C Whittaker, J Ish-Horowicz, S Filippi, X Xi, M Monod, O Ratmann, M Hutchinson,
 F Valka, H Zhu, I Hawryluk, P Milton, M Baguelin, A Boonyasiri, N Brazeau, L Cattarino,
 G Charles, L Cooper, Z Cucunuba Perez, G Cuomo-Dannenburg, A Djaafara, I Dorigatti,
 O Eales, J Eaton, S Van Elsland, R Fitzjohn, K Gaythorpe, W Green, T Hallett, W Hinsley,
 N Imai, B Jeffrey, E Knock, D Laydon, J Lees, G Nedjati Gilani, P Nouvellet, L Okell,
 A Ower, K Parag, I Siveroni, H Thompson, R Verity, P Walker, C Walters, Y Wang,
 O Watson, L Whittles, A Ghani, N Ferguson, S Riley, C Donnelly, S Bhatt, and S Flaxman,
 “Report 23: State-level tracking of COVID-19 in the United States,” Technical Report, Imperial College
 London May 2020.


                                                   37
Wood, Thomas and Ethan Porter, “The elusive backfire effect: Mass attitudes? Steadfast factual
 adherence,” Political Behavior, January 2019, 41 (1), 135–163.
Wright, Austin L., Konstantin Sonin, Jesse Driscoll, and Jarnickae Wilson, “Poverty and economic
 dislocation reduce compliance with COVID-19 shelter-in-place protocols,” University of Chicago, Becker
 Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper, 2020, (2020-40).
Wu, Joseph T., Kathy Leung, Mary Bushman, Nishant Kishore, Rene Niehus, Pablo M.
 de Salazar, Benjamin J. Cowling, Marc Lipsitch, and Gabriel M. Leung, “Estimating clinical
 severity of COVID-19 from the transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China,” Nature Medicine, 2020.
Yanagizawa-Drott, David, “Propaganda and Conflict: Evidence from the Rwandan Genocide,” The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2014, 129 (4), 1947–1994.

Zhu, Na, Dingyu Zhang, Wenling Wang, Xingwang Li, Bo Yang, Jingdong Song, Xiang Zhao,
 Baoying Huang, Weifeng Shi, Roujian Lu, and others, “A novel coronavirus from patients with
 pneumonia in China, 2019,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2020. tex.date-added: 2020-03-03 02:26:21
 +0000 tex.date-modified: 2020-03-03 02:26:21 +0000 tex.publisher: Mass Medical Soc.




                                                  38
Figures

                                      Figure 1: Show content validation
     Panel A: Counts of coronavirus-related terms by episode (one-week rolling means)




            Panel B: MTurk seriousness rating by episode (one-week rolling means)




Notes: Panel A shows counts of coronavirus-related terms (coronavirus, COVID, virus, influenza, and flu) separately
for Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and the other Fox News shows aired on Fox News between 5pm and 11pm local
time across all four major time zones in the continental US (The Five, Special Report with Bret Baier, The Story with
Martha MacCallum, Fox News at Night, and The Ingraham Angle). Panel B shows the seriousness rating for each episode,
constructed as an average of Amazon Mechanical Turk ratings. For each show containing at least one coronavirus-related
term, five MTurk workers read the entire script and answered “Yes” or “No” to the following question: “Did [the show]
indicate that the virus is likely to infect many people in the US, causing many deaths or serious illnesses, or that many have
already become infected and have died or become seriously ill?” We impute “No” for each episode that does not mention
any coronavirus-related terms and recode “Yes” to 1 and “No” to 0.



                                                             39
                     Figure 2: Timing of behavioral change by show viewership
                                                 Panel A: Densities




                                         Panel B: Coefficient estimates




Notes: Panel A of Figure 2 displays the density function of viewers’ reported day of behavior change in response to the
coronavirus. For respondents who report that they have not changed any of their behaviors by the date of the survey, we
impute the date of the survey (April 3). The dashed line indicates the mean date of behavior change among viewers of each
show. To mirror our regressions, the top pane includes only Tucker Carlson Tonight viewers that do not watch Hannity,
while the bottom pane includes only Hannity viewers that do not watch Tucker Carlson Tonight. Panel B reports coefficient
estimates from linear probability models in which the dependent variable is an indicator for whether the respondent reported
changing behavior before the date in question and the explanatory variables include an indicator for whether the respondent
watches Tucker Carlson Tonight, an indicator for whether the respondent watches Hannity, an indicator for whether the
respondent watches any other Fox News shows, and controls for gender, employment status, income, race, education, and
viewership of CNN and MSNBC. We report 95% confidence intervals.




                                                            40
                                   Figure 3: Margins of behavioral adjustment
41




     Notes: For each two-week interval between February 1 and April 1, Figure 3 shows the fraction of reported behavioral
     changes falling under each category. Behaviors were coded based upon responses to the following open-ended question from
     our survey: “When did you first significantly change any of your behaviors (for example, cancelling travel plans, washing
     hands or disinfecting significantly more than often, staying six feet away from others, asking to work from home, etc.) in
     response to the coronavirus? How did you change your behavior? Why did you change your behavior?”
          Figure 4: Total TV viewership during Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight




Notes: Figure 4 plots DMAs by the average share of TVs turned on during Tucker Carlson Tonight’s timeslot and the average
share of TVs turned on during Hannity’s timeslot.




                                                           42
                                Figure 5: Residualized Hannity-Carlson viewership difference
43




     Notes: Figure 5 plots the residual of the standardized difference in the viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight for each of the
     207 DMAs in the continental United States, where the difference in viewership has been standardized to mean zero and a standard deviation
     of one and the residual is taken with respect to our full set of controls: the November 2018 and January 2020 market share of Fox News,
     the November 2018 market share of MSNBC, log total population, population density, the share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during
     Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living
     in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high
     school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted
     measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median household income, the
     unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016.
        Figure 6: OLS estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths




Notes: Figure 6 displays effects of differential viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight on log one plus cases and
log one plus deaths. We report day-by-day results for the correlation between log deaths and log cases with the standardized
viewership difference between Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. All regressions are conditional on state fixed effects
and a large set of controls: the November 2018 and January 2020 market share of Fox News, the November 2018 market
share of MSNBC, log total population, population density, the share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity,
Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent in the
county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men
and women lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population
lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under
the federal poverty line, log median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log
total number of votes cast in 2016. We cluster standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                               44
   Figure 7: Estimates on deaths on March 28: robustness to combinations of controls
                                        Panel A: OLS estimates on deaths




                                         Panel B: IV estimates on deaths




Notes: Figure 7 shows robustness of our OLS and IV estimates for the specifications for log one plus deaths on March
28 under every possible combination of our eight sets of county-level controls (population density and rurality, race, age,
economic, education, health status, health capacity, politics) and our three levels of fixed effects (no fixed effects, Census
division fixed effects, and state fixed effects). We cluster standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence
intervals. Black points are not significant at the ten percent level; blue points are significant at the ten percent level; green
points are significant at the five percent level, and red points are significant at the one percent level.




                                                               45
                          Figure 8: Residualized Hannity-Carlson instrument values
46




     Notes: Figure 8 plots the values of our instrument, s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT , residualized by our full set of controls: the November
     2018 and January 2020 market share of Fox News, the November 2018 market share of MSNBC, log total population,
     population density, the predicted share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and
     The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the
     percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high school
     degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an
     age-adjusted measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line,
     log median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes
     cast in 2016.
                                Figure 9: 2SLS estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths
47




     Notes: Figure 9 shows day-by-day 2SLS estimates on log one plus cases and log one plus deaths. We report day-by-day effects of the standardized difference in
     viewership of Hannity vs. Tucker Carlson Tonight, instrumented by s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT and controlling for state fixed effects and a large set of controls: Fox News’ and
     MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the county’s total population,
     the predicted share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and
     longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women
     lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure
     of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016
     Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016. We cluster standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.
                                      Figure 10: Carlson-Hannity content gaps and effects on cases and deaths
48




     Notes: Figure 10 shows four time series. First, in tan diamonds corresponding to the left y-axis, we plot the “pandemic coverage gap”: the difference in portrayed
     seriousness of the coronavirus threat on Tucker Carlson Tonight vs. Hannity, as rated by Amazon Mechanical Turk coders (as previously reported in Panel B of
     Figure 1). Second, in green squares also corresponding to the left y-axis, we plot the “behavioral change gap”: the difference between the Hannity and Tucker Carlson
     Tonight coefficients in regressions of an indicator variable for whether the respondent has changed their behavior to act more cautiously in response to the coronavirus
     by the date in question on indicators for viewership of difference Fox News shows (as previously reported in Figure 2). To facilitate plotting on the same figure, we
     rescale both the pandemic coverage and behavioral change gaps by dividing each series’ coefficients by the maximum coefficient value over the series. Finally, in gray
     circles and red triangles, both corresponding to the right y-axis, we plot the 2SLS estimates of the Hannity-Carlson viewership gap (instrumented by s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT )
     on log one plus cases and log one plus deaths, respectively (as previously reported in Panel B of Figure 9). These latter two specifications control for state fixed effects,
     Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the county’s
     total population, the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted
     latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men
     and women lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted
     measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median household income, the unemployment rate, the
     2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016. We show one-week moving averages for each time series.
                                      Figure 11: Implied COVID-19 curves
                                             Panel A: Estimates on cases




                                            Panel B: Estimates on deaths




Notes: Panel A of Figure 11 plots, in black, the logarithm of (one plus the) mean number of cases in each day across all counties.
In gray, the figure plots the the implied counterfactual values (based on our 2SLS estimates) for a county with a one standard
deviation higher viewership difference between Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. Panel B replicates Panel A, taking log
one plus deaths as the outcome rather than log one plus cases. We report 95 percent confidence intervals on the counterfactual
estimates. Standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.




                                                               49
                                          Figure 12: MG-SIR simulations
                                         Panel A: Fitted beta trajectories




                            Panel B: Simulated vs. estimated death trajectories




                             Panel C: Simulated vs. estimated treatment effects




Notes: Panel A of Figure 12 plots, in orange, the β trajectory implied by our simulation for non-compliers (which comprise the
entire county with a mean viewership difference and almost the entire county with a one standard deviation higher viewership
difference) and, in blue, the corresponding trajectory for compliers (which comprise the remaining population of the county
with a one standard deviation higher viewership difference). Panel B plots the simulated trajectories of deaths (dashed line) and
the trajectories of deaths implied by our 2SLS estimates (solid line) for a representative county with a mean Hannity-Tucker
Carlson Tonight viewership difference (gray) and for a representative county with a one standard deviation higher viewership
difference (red). Panel C plots the simulated treatment effect, i.e. the difference between the two dashed lines, and the 2SLS
treatment effects, i.e. the difference between the solid lines.




                                                               50
Tables

                      Table 1: Demographics of Tucker Carlson Tonight vs. Hannity viewers

                        Demographic                 Tucker Carlson Tonight              Hannity
                        Age                         65.41                               64.9
                        Male                        0.52                                0.56
                        Retired                     0.57                                0.49
                        Works full time             0.2                                 0.27
                        Household income ($)        75982.14                            71816.41
                        White                       0.89                                0.96
                        Years of education          14.71                               14.44
                        Watches CNN                 0.16                                0.24
                        Watches MSNBC               0.07                                0.15
 Notes: Table presents mean values of each demographic characteristic among exclusive viewers of Hannity and Tucker
 Carlson Tonight, based on our survey of 1,045 Republican over the age of 65 who watch Fox News.



              Table 2: Correlation between show viewership and timing of behavior change

                                                                   Dependent variable:
                                                       —                     Changed before...
                                                 Change day        March 1       March 15        April 1
                                                      (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)
              Watches Hannity                      4.452∗∗∗       −0.112∗∗∗       −0.076∗       −0.051∗∗
                                                    (1.282)        (0.033)        (0.043)        (0.024)
              Watches Carlson                     −3.362∗∗∗        0.117∗∗∗         0.042         0.021
                                                   (1.188)          (0.031)        (0.039)       (0.022)

              p-value (Hannity=Carlson)            < 0.001          < 0.001         0.097         0.076
              DV mean                               39.016           0.163          0.680         0.922
                  2
              R                                      0.058           0.063          0.022         0.043
                  Notes: The dependent variable in Column 1 is the number of days after February 1, 2020
                  on which the respondent reported having significantly changed any of their behaviors in
                  response to the coronavirus. For respondents who report not changing behavior by the
                  date of the survey, we recode the dependent variable to the date of the survey (April
                  3). The dependent variables in Columns 2-4 are indicators for whether the respondent
                  reported having significantly changed their behaviors before the date specified in the col-
                  umn header. Demographic controls include age, a white/not Hispanic indicator, a male
                  indicator, a set of education indicators, and a set of household income indicators, and a
                  set of employment indicators. Other viewership controls include indicators for whether
                  the respondent watches CNN or MSNBC at least once a week. Robust standard errors
                  are reported.




                                                             51
                                  Table 3: OLS estimates of effect of differential viewership

                                                                               Dependent variable:
                                                                               COVID-19 outcomes
                                                  Feb 29      Mar 07      Mar 14       Mar 21      Mar 28      Apr 04      Apr 11
                                                    (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
     Panel A: Estimates on cases
     Hannity-Carlson viewership difference 0.006∗∗            0.022∗∗    0.053∗∗∗     0.101∗∗∗     0.100∗∗     0.097∗∗    0.083∗∗
                                           (0.002)            (0.009)     (0.019)      (0.033)     (0.039)     (0.045)    (0.042)

     Panel B: Estimates on deaths
     Hannity-Carlson viewership difference 0.001               0.005       0.004      0.022∗∗∗     0.044∗∗     0.065∗∗    0.092∗∗
                                           (0.001)            (0.004)     (0.005)     (0.008)      (0.018)     (0.030)    (0.037)

     Full controls                                  Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
     State FEs                                      Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
     Observations                                  3,100       3,100       3,100        3,100       3,100       3,100       3,100
52




       Notes: The dependent variable is the log of one plus the cumulative number of COVID-19 deaths in the county as of the
       date referenced in the column. Panel A reports OLS estimates of the log of one plus cases upon the standardized difference
       in Hannity-Carlson viewership; Panel B replicates for the log of one plus deaths. All specifications include controls for the
       share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, Fox News’ and
       MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county,
       the log of the county’s total population, MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, population-weighted latitude and longitude,
       the percent of the population living in a rural area, the population over the age of 65, the percent male with no high school
       degree, the percent female with no high school degree, the percent male with no college degree, the percent female with no
       college degree, an age-adjusted measure of the average physical health in the county, the percent uninsured, the percent below
       the federal poverty line, the log of the median household income, the unemployment rate, the Republican vote share in 2016,
       and the log of the total number of votes in the county in 2016. Standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.
                                         Table 4: First-stage regressions

                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                                      Difference in Hannity-Carlson viewership

     Non-Fox TVs on × Fox share 1.063∗∗∗             1.039∗∗∗     1.133∗∗∗     1.075∗∗∗    1.138∗∗∗     1.124∗∗∗
                                 (0.330)              (0.316)      (0.277)      (0.270)     (0.273)      (0.269)

     Controls                             Base          Full       Base          Full        Base          Full
     Fixed effects                        None         None       Division     Division      State        State
     Observations                         3,103        3,100       3,103        3,100        3,103        3,100
     R2                                   0.720        0.739       0.790        0.796        0.823        0.827
     F -statistic                         10.40        10.84       16.70        15.88        17.38        17.44
       Notes: Table reports regressions of the standardized difference between viewership of Hannity and Tucker
       Carlson Tonight on our instrument, s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT — that is, the number of TVs on during Hannity’s
       timeslot based on other DMAs in the same time zone, excluding TVs watching Hannity, multiplied by Fox
       News’ viewership share, excluding Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight.. Fox share and predicted viewership
       include the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity and during the show immediately
       before and immediately afterward, as well as Fox News’ share of cable, leaving out Hannity and Tucker Carlson
       Tonight. “Base controls” include the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker
53




       Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox
       News’ share of television in January population density and log population, and population-weighted latitude
       and longitude. “Full controls” additionally include the percent of the population living in a rural area, the
       population over the age of 65, the percent male with no high school degree, the percent female with no high
       school degree, the percent male with no college degree, the percent female with no college degree, an age-
       adjusted measure of the average physical health in the county, the percent uninsured, the percent below the
       federal poverty line, the log of the median household income, the unemployment rate, the Republican vote
       share in 2016, and the log of the total number of votes in the county in 2016. Standard errors are clustered
       at the DMA level.
                                Table 5: Effect of differential viewership on COVID-19 outcomes

                                                                                  Dependent variable:
                                                                                  COVID-19 outcomes
                                                   Feb 29       Mar 07       Mar 14       Mar 21       Mar 28       Apr 04      Apr 11
                                                     (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)
     Panel A: Estimates on cases
     Subpanel A.1: Reduced form
     Non-Fox TVs on × Fox share                   0.044∗∗∗     0.168∗∗∗     0.380∗∗∗      0.321∗∗       0.231        0.086       0.080
                                                   (0.011)      (0.040)      (0.088)      (0.139)      (0.171)      (0.184)     (0.183)

     Subpanel A.2: Two-stage least squares
     H-C viewership difference (predicted) 0.039∗∗∗            0.149∗∗∗     0.338∗∗∗      0.286∗∗       0.206        0.077       0.072
                                           (0.013)              (0.039)      (0.089)      (0.123)      (0.157)      (0.165)     (0.164)

     Panel B: Estimates on deaths
     Subpanel B.1: Reduced form
54




     Non-Fox TVs on × Fox share                    0.004∗        0.019        0.013       0.074∗∗     0.263∗∗∗     0.389∗∗∗     0.333∗∗
                                                   (0.002)      (0.012)      (0.017)      (0.030)      (0.064)      (0.127)     (0.160)

     Subpanel B.2: Two-stage least squares
     H-C viewership difference (predicted) 0.003∗∗              0.016∗        0.011      0.066∗∗∗     0.234∗∗∗      0.346∗∗     0.296∗
                                           (0.002)              (0.010)      (0.014)      (0.024)      (0.072)      (0.137)     (0.158)

     Full controls                                   Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     State FEs                                       Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     Observations                                   3,100        3,100        3,100        3,100        3,100        3,100       3,100
       Notes: The dependent variable is the log of one plus the cumulative number of COVID-19 cases in the county as of the date
       referenced in the column. Panel A.1 reports reduced-form estimates of the log of one plus cases upon the instrument, s̃mc,H ×
       f˜mc,−HT — that is, the number of TVs on during Hannity’s timeslot based on other DMAs in the same time zone, excluding TVs
       watching Hannity, multiplied by Fox News’ viewership share, excluding Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight.; Panel A.2 replicates
       for deaths. Panel B.1 reports two-stage least squares estimates of the log of one plus cases upon the standardized difference in
       Hannity-Carlson viewership, instrumented by s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT ; Panel B.2 replicates for deaths. All specifications include controls
       for the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle,
       Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of
       the county, the log of the county’s total population, MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, population-weighted latitude and
       longitude, the percent of the population living in a rural area, the population over the age of 65, the percent male with no high
       school degree, the percent female with no high school degree, the percent male with no college degree, the percent female with no
       college degree, an age-adjusted measure of the average physical health in the county, the percent uninsured, the percent below the
       federal poverty line, the log of the median household income, the unemployment rate, the Republican vote share in 2016, and the
       log of the total number of votes in the county in 2016. Standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.
                                                 Table 6: Exogenous model parameters

     Parameter   Description                                                              Value                 Source
     Po          Share of simulated population above the age of 65                        0.3216                American Comunity Survey (ACS)
     N̄yt        Share of treated among young in representative county with mean view-    0
                 ership
     N̄ot        Share of treated among old in representative county with mean view-      0
                 ership
      +
     Nyt         Share of treated among young in representative county with 1 SD higher   0.0097                Nielsen
                 viewership
      +
     Not         Share of treated among old in representative county with 1 SD higher     0.0112                Nielsen
                 viewership
     i(0)        Initial fraction of infected individuals                                 3.030 × 10−8          Estimated 10 infections in US on
                                                                                                                Feb 1
     Ij (0)      Initial share of infected individuals in group j                         i(0) × Nj
     Sj (0)      Initial share of susceptible individuals in group j                      Nj − Ij
55




     Rj (0)      Initial share of recovered individuals in group j                        0
     Dj (0)      Initial share of dead individuals in group j                             0
     γ           Estimated recovery arrival rate                                          0.125                 Allcott et al. (2020) (derived)
     δy          Estimated fatality arrival rate among young individuals                  6.354 × 10−4          Ferguson et al. (2020) (derived)
     δo          Estimated fatality arrival rate among older individuals                  0.0101                Ferguson et al. (2020) (derived)
     α           “Returns to scale” in matching of individuals                            2.000                 Acemoglu et al. (2020)
                                                                                          "                 #
                                                                                           1.51      0.57
     ρ           Matrix of group interaction rates (first row/column for young, second                          Akbarpour et al. (2020)
                                                                                              0.53   0.47
                 for old)
     Table 7: Differential coverage and COVID-19 outcomes across all Fox News evening shows

                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                                                              Cases       Deaths
                                                Inverse pandemic coverage index               Mar 14      Mar 28
                                               (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
     Panel A: OLS: inverse pandemic coverage index on relative viewership
     H-C viewership difference              0.548∗∗∗     0.545∗∗∗
                                            (0.053)       (0.052)

     Panel B: RF: inverse pandemic coverage index on instrument
     Non-Fox TVs on × Fox share                                       0.502∗∗     0.490∗∗
                                                                      (0.230)     (0.227)

     Panel C: 2SLS: cases and deaths on inverse predicted pandemic coverage index
     −1× coverage index (predicted)                                                           0.776∗∗     0.538∗
                                                                                              (0.364)     (0.281)
56




     Controls                                Base           Full       Base         Full        Full        Full
     State FEs                                Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
     Observations                            3,102         3,102       3,102       3,102       3,102       3,102
       Notes: Panel A reports OLS estimates of the (inverse of the) pandemic coverage index on the standardized
       difference between viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. Panel B reports reduced-form
       estimates of the inverse pandemic coverage index on our instrument, s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT — that is, the
       number of TVs on during Hannity’s timeslot based on other DMAs in the same time zone, excluding
       TVs watching Hannity, multiplied by Fox News’ viewership share, excluding Hannity and Tucker Carlson
       Tonight.. Columns (5) and (6) in Panel C report 2SLS estimates of the log of one plus the number of cases
       on March 14 and the log of one plus the number of deaths on March 28, respectively, on the standardized
       difference between viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight, instrumented by s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT .
       Base OLS controls include the share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson
       Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’
       share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, and the log of the county’s total
       population. Base controls for the reduced form and the two-stage least squares are identical, except the share
       of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle are
       replaced with the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during these timeslots. ‘Full controls”
       additionally include all controls described in Section 5.2. Standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.
                  Supplementary Appendix
    Our supplementary material is organized as follows. In Appendix A, we report appendix figures and
tables referenced in the main body of the text. In Appendix B, we report versions of the figures and tables
included in the main text, but using the alternative instrument described in Section 7.3.1. In Appendix C,
we report versions of the figures and tables included in the main text, but using the alternative instrument
described in Section 7.3.2. In Appendix D, we report versions of the figures and tables included in the main
text, but with cases and deaths transformed by the inverse hyperbolic sine rather than the natural logarithm.
In Appendix E, we include a copy of the survey instrument described in Section 3.


A     Appendix Tables and Figures
A.1    Survey

                                     Table A1: Sample representativeness

                        Variables:                            Survey       Gallup

                        Male                                   0.61          0.50
                        Age                                    65.34        67.31
                        Race: White                            0.95         0.93
                        At least high school degree             0.99         0.93
                        Bachelor degree or above                0.38         0.30
                        Employed full-time                     0.26          0.29
                        Annual household income (USD)        71758.37      60115.93

                        Observations                           1045         12932




                                                      57
A.2     Data and OLS

          Figure A1: Timing of behavioral change: robustness to inclusion of controls




      Notes: Figure A1 displays OLS estimates of the relationship between rerespondents’ reported day of behavior
      change in response to the coronavirus (from our survey of 1045 Republican Fox News viewers over the age of
      55) and viewership of Hannity (top) and Tucker Carlson Tonight (bottom). Respondents were asked to indicate
      the date on which they changed any of their behaviors (e.g. cancelling travel plans, practicing social distancing,
      or washing hands more often) in response to the coronavirus. In every specification, we control for viewership
      of the “opposing show” (i.e. all specifications include two indicator variables taking value 1 if the respondent
      watches Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight, respectively). We report coefficient estimates under every possible
      combination of the remaining covariates: age, gender, employment status, income, race, education, viewership of
      CNN and MSNBC, viewership of other Fox News shows, and state fixed effects. We report 95% confidence intervals.




                                                             58
                    Figure A2: Selection into watching Hannity versus Carlson




Notes: For each demographic characteristic, Figure A2 shows, in blue, ratios of the average value among counties in which
Hannity is the most popular show relative to the average value among counties in which neither Hannity nor Tucker Carlson
Tonight is the most popular show. Similarly, Figure A2 shows, in red, ratios of the average value among counties in which
Tucker Carlson Tonight is the most popular show relative to the average value among counties in which neither Hannity
nor Tucker Carlson Tonight is the most popular show.




                                                           59
Figure A3: OLS estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths (state
clustering)




Notes: Figure A3 displays OLS estimates of the effect of differential viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight
on log one plus cases and log one plus deaths. We report day-by-day results for the correlation between log deaths and
log cases with the standardized viewership difference between Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. All regressions are
conditional on state fixed effects and a large set of controls: the November 2018 and January 2020 market share of Fox
News, the November 2018 market share of MSNBC, log total population, population density, the share of TVs turned to
non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude
and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the
age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college
degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure of the average physical health in
the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median household income, the unemployment rate,
the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016. We cluster standard errors at the state
level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                              60
   Figure A4: Estimates on cases on March 14: robustness to combinations of controls
                                         Panel A: OLS estimates on cases




                                          Panel B: IV estimates on cases




Notes: Figure A4 shows robustness of our OLS and IV estimates for the specifications for log one plus cases on March
14 under every possible combination of our eight sets of county-level controls (population density and rurality, race, age,
economic, education, health status, health capacity, and politics) and our three levels of fixed effects (no fixed effects,
Census division fixed effects, and state fixed effects). All specifications control for a base set of controls: Fox News’ share
of television in January 2020, the log of the county’s total population, the share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during
Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, and Fox News’
and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018. We cluster standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence
intervals. Black points are not significant at the ten percent level; blue points are significant at the ten percent level; green
points are significant at the five percent level, and red points are significant at the one percent level.




                                                               61
        Figure A5: OLS: R2 vs. coefficient estimates under combinations of controls
                             Panel A: Estimates on log cases (March 14, 2020)




                            Panel B: Estimates on log deaths (March 28, 2020)




Notes: Figure A5 shows the relationship between the OLS coefficient estimates (y-axis) and the model R2 (x-axis) for log
cases on March 14 (Panel A) and for log deaths on March 28 (Panel B) from specifications with every possible combination
of our eight sets of county-level controls (population density and rurality, race, age, economic, education, health status,
health capacity, politics) and our three levels of fixed effects (no fixed effects, Census division fixed effects, and state fixed
effects). We cluster standard errors at the DMA level. Black points are not significant at the p < 0.1 level; blue points
are significant at the p < 0.1 level; green points are significant at the p < 0.05 level, and red points are significant at the
p < 0.01 level.




                                                               62
                                   Figure A6: OLS: residual-residual plot
                           Panel A: Estimates on log cases (March 14, 2020)




                          Panel B: Estimates on log deaths (March 28, 2020)




Notes: Figure A6 displays a binscatter of the residuals of log one plus cases (Panel A) and log one plus deaths (Panel B)
on the residuals of the standardized difference in viewership, where both outcome variables and the standardized difference
in viewership are residualized by state fixed effects and our full set of controls: Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in
January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the county’s
total population, the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The
Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent
white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high school degrees,
the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted
measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median
household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016.




                                                            63
Figure A7: Leave-out OLS estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths




Notes: Figure A7 displays effects of differential viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight on log one plus cases
and log one plus deaths, leaving out states containing known COVID-19 hotspots. We report day-by-day results for the
correlation between log deaths and log cases with the standardized viewership difference between Hannity and Tucker
Carlson Tonight. All regressions are conditional on state fixed effects and a large set of controls: the November 2018 and
January 2020 market share of Fox News, the November 2018 market share of MSNBC, log total population, population
density, the share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle,
the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic,
and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high school degrees, the share of
men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure
of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median household
income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016. We cluster
standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                               64
     A.3   Construction of Instrument

                                       Figure A8: Sunset time on February 1, 2020 by county
65




                  Notes: Map plots the time of sunset on February 1, 2020 for each county in the continental United States. Data from
                  www.timeanddate.com.
A.4      Instrument Exclusion and First Stage

                 Figure A9: Instrument correlation with county-level demographics




Notes: Figure A9 shows the coefficients from a series of regressions of each demographic characteristic on our instrument,
s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT , conditional on the two interactants and a small set of other controls accounting for local viewership
patterns (the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham
Angle, the local viewership share of MSNBC, log population and population density, and population-weighted latitude and
longitude). All dependent variables are standardized to mean zero and standard deviation one. We cluster standard errors
at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                             66
                       Table A2: 2SLS estimates: robustness to choice of controls and instrument variations

                                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                                                    COVID-19 outcomes
                                                     (1)            (2)          (3)      (4)         (5)                           (6)
     Panel A: COVID-19 cases on March 14
     H-C viewership difference (predicted) 0.338∗∗∗              0.313∗∗∗     0.354∗∗∗     0.338∗∗∗          0.736∗∗              0.558∗∗
                                           (0.089)                (0.087)      (0.095)      (0.093)          (0.303)              (0.226)

     Panel B: COVID-19 deaths on March 28
     H-C viewership difference (predicted) 0.234∗∗∗              0.228∗∗∗     0.267∗∗∗     0.263∗∗∗          0.517∗∗              0.477∗∗
                                           (0.072)                (0.073)      (0.079)      (0.080)          (0.230)              (0.212)

     F -statistic (Kleibergen-Paap)                 17.90          9.49         18.45         9.36             6.27                 3.17
     Controls                                       Full           Full          Full         Full            Full                 Full
     Instruments                                     H            H&T             H          H&T               H                  H&T
     Instrument                                  Leave-out      Leave-out      Sunset       Sunset      Division sunset      Division sunset
67




     State FEs                                      Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes             Yes                  Yes
     Observations                                  3,100          3,100         3,100        3,100           3,100                3,100
       Notes: Table reports 2SLS regressions of the log of one plus the number of cases on March 14 (Panel A) and the log of one plus the number
       of deaths on March 28 (Panel B) on the standardized difference between viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. In Column 1,
       we instrument this difference by s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT ; in Column 2, we additionally instrument by s̃mc,T × f˜mc,−HT — that is, an analogous
       instrument for viewership during the Tucker Carlson Tonight timeslot. Columns 3-4 are identical to Columns 1-2, except that we use fitted
       rather than actual values of s̃mc,H (fitted based on sunset time, where the viewership curve is estimated at the DMA level): that is, the
                         mc,H d × FoxShared and s̃mc,T d × FoxShared . Columns 5-6 are identical to Columns 1-2, except that we use fitted rather
       instruments are s̃\                         \
       than actual values of s̃mc,H (fitted based on sunset time, where the viewership curve is estimated at the Census division level): that is,
                             mc,H d × FoxShared and s̃mc,T d × FoxShared . “Full controls” include the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox
       the instruments are s̃\                         \
       channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox
       News’ share of television in January population density and log population, population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent of the
       population living in a rural area, the population over the age of 65, the percent male with no high school degree, the percent female with
       no high school degree, the percent male with no college degree, the percent female with no college degree, an age-adjusted measure of the
       average physical health in the county, the percent uninsured, the percent below the federal poverty line, the log of the median household
       income, the unemployment rate, the Republican vote share in 2016, and the log of the total number of votes in the county in 2016. As a
       test for weak instruments, we report first-stage Kleibergen-Paap F -statistics. Standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.
                  Figure A10: 2SLS estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths (state clustering)
68




     Notes: Figure A10 shows day-by-day 2SLS estimates on log one plus cases and log one plus deaths. We report day-by-day effects of the standardized difference in
     viewership of Hannity vs. Tucker Carlson Tonight, instrumented by s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT and controlling for state fixed effects and a large set of controls: Fox News’ and
     MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the county’s total population,
     the predicted share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and
     longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women
     lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure
     of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016
     Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016. We cluster standard errors at the state level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.
A.5     Robustness

                                    Figure A11: IV: residual-residual plot
                            Panel A: Estimates on log cases (March 14, 2020)




                           Panel B: Estimates on log deaths (March 28, 2020)




 Notes: Figure A11 displays a binscatter of the residuals of log one plus cases (Panel A) and log one plus deaths (Panel
 B) on the residuals of s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT , where both outcome variables and the instrument are residualized by state fixed
 effects and our full set of controls: Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television
 in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the county’s total population, the predicted share of TVs
 tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted
 latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent
 over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking
 college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure of the average physical
 health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median household income, the unemployment
 rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016.




                                                             69
Figure A12: Leave-out IV estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths




Notes: Figure A12 displays effects of differential viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight on log one plus cases
and log one plus deaths, leaving out states containing known COVID-19 hotspots. We report day-by-day results for the
correlation between log deaths and log cases with the standardized viewership difference between Hannity and Tucker
Carlson Tonight. All regressions are conditional on state fixed effects and a large set of controls: the November 2018 and
January 2020 market share of Fox News, the November 2018 market share of MSNBC, log total population, population
density, the predicted share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham
Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent white,
Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high school degrees, the
share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted
measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median
household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016.
We cluster standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.



                                                             70
                 Figure A13: 2SLS estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths (unbalanced panel)
71




     Notes: Figure A13 shows day-by-day 2SLS estimates on log one plus cases and log one plus deaths, in which a county only appears in the panel once it has a positive
     number of cases. We report day-by-day effects of the standardized difference in viewership of Hannity vs. Tucker Carlson Tonight, instrumented by s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT
     and controlling for state fixed effects and a large set of controls: Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020,
     the population density of the county, the log of the county’s total population, the predicted share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson
     Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and
     black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction
     of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line,
     log median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016. We cluster standard errors at
     the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.
A.6      Resampling Inference

                                   Figure A14: DMA-level block bootstrap




Notes: Figure A14 presents confidence intervals derived from a block bootstrapping procedure. We randomly sample
DMAs with replacement and estimate counterfactual treatment effects for each day. We repeat 1000 times to calculate a
distribution of counterfactual treatment effects for each day. Confidence intervals are calculated separately for each day:
the upper boundary of the confidence interval corresponds to the 0.975-quantile of treatment effects on that day, while the
lower boundary corresponds to the 0.025-quantile.




                                                              72
                                     Figure A15: Randomization inference




Notes: Figure A15 presents placebo treatment effects derived from a randomization inference procedure. We permute the
plausibly exogenous “shift” (s̃mc,H ) across DMAs while leaving the “shares” (FoxShared ), the county-level covariates, and
cases and deaths unchanged. For each repetition, we then regenerate our instrument as the interaction of the placebo s̃mc,H
with FoxShared , then calculate placebo treatment effects. We repeat 1000 times to calculate a distribution of counterfactual
treatment effects for each day. The upper boundary of the shaded region corresponds to the 0.975-quantile of treatment
effects on that day, while the lower boundary corresponds to the 0.025-quantile.




                                                               73
                                          Figure A16: Permutation test




Notes: Figure A16 presents placebo treatment effects derived from a permutation test. We permute the joint tuple of cases
and deaths across counties, leaving all other covariates unchanged, then estimate placebo treatment effects. We repeat 1000
times to calculate a distribution of counterfactual treatment effects for each day. The upper boundary of the shaded region
corresponds to the 0.975-quantile of treatment effects on that day, while the lower boundary corresponds to the 0.025-quantile.




                                                              74
A.7      Effect Sizes

                               Figure A17: Implied COVID-19 curves (OLS)
                                            Panel A: Estimates on cases




                                           Panel B: Estimates on deaths




Notes: Panel A of Figure A17 plots, in black, the logarithm of (one plus the) mean number of cases in each day across all
counties. In gray, the figure plots the the implied counterfactual values (based on our OLS estimates) for a county with a one
standard deviation higher viewership difference between Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. Panel B replicates Panel A,
taking log one plus deaths as the outcome rather than log one plus cases. We report 95 percent confidence intervals on the
counterfactual estimates. Standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.




                                                             75
                                   Figure A18: MG-SIR simulations (OLS)
                                         Panel A: Fitted beta trajectories




                            Panel B: Simulated vs. estimated death trajectories




                            Panel C: Simulated vs. estimated treatment effects




Notes: Panel A of Figure A18 plots, in orange, the β trajectory implied by our simulation for non-compliers (which comprise
the entire county with a mean viewership difference and the vast majority of the county with a one standard deviation higher
viewership difference) and, in blue, the corresponding trajectory for compliers (which comprise the remaining fraction of the
county with a one standard deviation higher viewership difference). Panel B plots the simulated trajectories of deaths (dashed
line) and the trajectories of deaths implied by our 2SLS estimates (solid line) for a representative county with a mean Hannity-
Tucker Carlson Tonight viewership difference (gray) and for a representative county with a one standard deviation higher
viewership difference (red). Panel C plots the simulated treatment effect, i.e. the difference between the two dashed lines, and
the 2SLS treatment effects, i.e. the difference between the solid lines.
                                                              76
A.8      Extended Results

Figure A19: OLS estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths (extended)




Notes: Figure A19 displays effects of differential viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight on log one plus cases
and log one plus deaths. We report day-by-day results for the correlation between log deaths and log cases with the
standardized viewership difference between Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. All regressions are conditional on state
fixed effects and a large set of controls: the November 2018 and January 2020 market share of Fox News, the November
2018 market share of MSNBC, log total population, population density, the share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during
Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent
in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share
of men and women lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the
population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the
percent under the federal poverty line, log median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote
share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016. We cluster standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent
confidence intervals.




                                                               77
                      Figure A20: 2SLS estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths (extended)
78




     Notes: Figure A20 shows day-by-day 2SLS estimates on log one plus cases and log one plus deaths. We report day-by-day effects of the standardized difference in
     viewership of Hannity vs. Tucker Carlson Tonight, instrumented by s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT and controlling for state fixed effects and a large set of controls: Fox News’ and
     MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the county’s total population,
     the predicted share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and
     longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women
     lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure
     of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016
     Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016. We cluster standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.
                                   Figure A21: Implied COVID-19 curves
                                           Panel A: Estimates on cases




                                          Panel B: Estimates on deaths




Notes: Panel A of Figure A21 plots, in black, the logarithm of (one plus the) mean number of cases in each day across all
counties. In gray, the figure plots the the implied counterfactual values (based on our 2SLS estimates) for a county with a
one standard deviation higher viewership difference between Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. Panel B replicates Panel
A, taking log one plus deaths as the outcome rather than log one plus cases. We report 95 percent confidence intervals on the
counterfactual estimates. Standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.




                                                             79
A.9     Generalized Misinformation Exposure

                             Figure A22: Show content: CNN and MSNBC




 Notes: Figure displays counts of coronavirus-related terms (coronavirus, COVID, virus, influenza, and flu) separately for
 all shows aired on CNN and MSNBC between 5pm and 11pm local time across all four major time zones in the continental
 US. We display one-week rolling means.




                                                            80
 Figure A23: 2SLS estimates of effect of the pandemic coverage index on cases and deaths




Notes: Figure A23 shows day-by-day 2SLS estimates from regressions of log one plus cases and log one plus deaths on the
inverse of the pandemic coverage index described in Section 9, instrumented by s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT . All specifications control
for state fixed effects, Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020,
the population density of the county, the log of the county’s total population, the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox
channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude,
the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five,
the share of men and women lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of
the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the
percent under the federal poverty line, log median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share,
and the log total number of votes cast in 2016. We cluster standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence
intervals.




                                                              81
B      Robustness: Predicted Viewership

                     Figure B1: Viewership and program start relative to sunset
                                              Panel A: Across the country




                                                 Panel B: By time zone




Notes: Panel A of Figure B1 plots a third-degree polynomial fitting the relationship between time since sunset in a DMA and
the fraction of households in that DMA with TVs turned on (solid line) and the relationship between time since sunset and
the fraction of households with TVs turned on and tuned to non-Fox channels (dashed line). 95% confidence intervals are
reported. Panel A also shows a histogram depicting, at each fifteen-minute interval relative to sunset, the number of DMAs in
which Tucker Carlson Tonight begins in that interval (blue) and in which Hannity begins in that interval (purple). Episodes
of Tucker Carlson Tonight and Hannity are generally re-run three hours after they first air, and because our data spans 5pm
to 11pm, we observe repeats in more western time zones but not in Eastern Time. Panel B is similar, but plots the relationship
and histogram separately for each of the four major time zones in the continental United States.




                                                             82
                 Figure B2: Instrument correlation with county-level demographics




Notes: Figure B2 shows the coefficients from a series of regressions of each demographic characteristic on our instrument,
smc,H × f˜mc,−HT , conditional on the two interactants, b
b                                                       smc,H and FoxShared , and a small set of other controls accounting for
local viewership patterns (the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight,
and The Ingraham Angle, the local viewership share of MSNBC, log population and population density, and population-
weighted latitude and longitude). All dependent variables are scaled to a standard normal distribution. We cluster standard
errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                               83
                                Table B1: Effect of differential viewership on COVID-19 outcomes

                                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                                                     COVID-19 outcomes
                                                      Feb 29      Mar 07       Mar 14       Mar 21        Mar 28       Apr 04      Apr 11
                                                        (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)          (6)         (7)
     Panel A: Estimates on cases
     Subpanel A.1: Reduced form
     Predicted non-Fox TVs on × Fox share 0.040∗∗∗                0.156∗∗∗     0.362∗∗∗     0.325∗∗        0.242        0.130       0.135
                                           (0.011)                 (0.039)      (0.088)     (0.138)       (0.173)      (0.187)     (0.186)

     Subpanel A.2: Two-stage least squares
     H-C viewership difference (predicted)           0.039∗∗∗     0.153∗∗∗     0.354∗∗∗     0.318∗∗        0.236        0.128       0.132
                                                     (0.013)       (0.039)      (0.095)     (0.137)       (0.177)      (0.189)     (0.189)

     Panel B: Estimates on deaths
     Subpanel B.1: Reduced form
84




     Predicted non-Fox TVs on × Fox share 0.004∗                   0.018        0.012       0.075∗∗      0.273∗∗∗     0.408∗∗∗     0.370∗∗
                                          (0.002)                 (0.011)      (0.016)      (0.029)       (0.064)      (0.125)     (0.156)

     Subpanel B.2: Two-stage least squares
     H-C viewership difference (predicted)           0.004∗∗      0.018∗        0.011       0.074∗∗∗     0.267∗∗∗     0.399∗∗∗     0.362∗∗
                                                     (0.002)      (0.010)      (0.015)       (0.026)      (0.079)      (0.154)     (0.176)

     Full controls                                     Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     State FEs                                         Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     Observations                                     3,100        3,100         3,100        3,100        3,100        3,100       3,100
       Notes: The dependent variable is the log of one plus the cumulative number of COVID-19 cases in the county as of the date referenced
       in the column. Panel A.1 reports reduced-form estimates of the log of one plus cases upon the instrument, s̃\               ˜
                                                                                                                           mc,H × fmc,−HT —
       that is, the predicted number of TVs on during Hannity’s timeslot, excluding TVs watching Hannity, multiplied by Fox News’
       viewership share, excluding Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight.; Panel A.2 replicates for deaths. Panel B.1 reports two-stage
       least squares estimates of the log of one plus cases upon the standardized difference in Hannity-Carlson viewership, instrumented by
                 ˜
         mc,H × fmc,−HT ; Panel B.2 replicates for deaths. All specifications include controls for the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox
       s̃\
       channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January
       2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the county’s total population,
       MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent of the population living in a rural
       area, the population over the age of 65, the percent male with no high school degree, the percent female with no high school degree,
       the percent male with no college degree, the percent female with no college degree, an age-adjusted measure of the average physical
       health in the county, the percent uninsured, the percent below the federal poverty line, the log of the median household income, the
       unemployment rate, the Republican vote share in 2016, and the log of the total number of votes in the county in 2016. Standard
       errors are clustered at the DMA level.
                               Figure B3: 2SLS estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths
85




     Notes: Figure B3 shows day-by-day 2SLS estimates on log one plus cases and log one plus deaths. shows day-by-day 2SLS estimates on log one plus cases and log one
     plus deaths. We report day-by-day effects of the standardized difference in viewership of Hannity vs. Tucker Carlson Tonight, instrumented by b smc,H × f˜mc,−HT and
     controlling for state fixed effects and a large set of controls: Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020,
     the population density of the county, the log of the county’s total population, the predicted share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson
     Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the log of the distance to Seattle,
     the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women
     lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the
     percent under the federal poverty line, log median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast
     in 2016. We cluster standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.
                          Figure B4: 2SLS: robustness to combinations of controls
                                  Panel A: Estimates on cases (March 14, 2020)




                                 Panel B: Estimates on deaths (March 28, 2020)




Notes: Figure B4 shows robustness of our two-stage least squares estimates for the specifications for log one plus cases on March
14 (Panel A) and log one plus deaths on March 28 (Panel B) under every possible combination of our eight sets of county-level
controls (population density and rurality, race, age, economic, education, health status, health capacity, and politics) and our
three levels of fixed effects (no fixed effects, census division fixed effects, and state fixed effects). All specifications control for a
base set of controls: Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the log of the county’s total population, the predicted share
of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted
latitude and longitude, and Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018. We cluster standard errors at the DMA
level and report 90 percent and 95 percent confidence intervals for each model. Blue points are significant at the 5 percent level;
red points are significant at the 10 percent level; black points are not significant at the 10 percent level.




                                                                   86
     Figure B5: Carlson-Hannity pandemic coverage gap and effects on cases and deaths




Notes: Figure B5 shows, in brown squares corresponding to the left y-axis, the difference in portrayed seriousness of the
coronavirus threat on Tucker Carlson Tonight vs. Hannity, as rated by Amazon Mechanical Turk coders. The difference peaks
in mid-February, a period during which there was no discussion of the coronavirus on Hannity and during which Tucker Carlson
Tonight discussed the coronavirus virtually every show. The figure also shows, in gray circles and red triangles corresponding
to the right y-axis, 2SLS estimates of the Hannity-Carlson viewership gap (instrumented by b       smc,H × f˜mc,−HT ) on log one
plus cases and log one plus deaths. All specifications control for state fixed effects, Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in
January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the county’s total
population, the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham
Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the log of the distance to
Seattle, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high
school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an
age-adjusted measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log
median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in
2016.




                                                               87
C      Robustness: Division-Level Viewership Prediction

                 Figure C1: Instrument correlation with county-level demographics




Notes: Figure C1 shows the coefficients from a series of regressions of each demographic characteristic on our instrument,
smc,H × f˜mc,−HT , conditional on the two interactants and a small set of other controls accounting for local viewership
b
patterns (the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham
Angle, the local viewership share of MSNBC, and population size and density). All dependent variables are scaled to a
standard normal distribution. We cluster standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.




                                                             88
                                Table C1: Effect of differential viewership on COVID-19 outcomes

                                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                                                    COVID-19 outcomes
                                                     Feb 29       Mar 07       Mar 14       Mar 21       Mar 28       Apr 04      Apr 11
                                                       (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)
     Panel A: Estimates on cases
     Subpanel A.1: Reduced form
     Predicted non-Fox TVs on × Fox share 0.039∗∗∗               0.151∗∗∗     0.389∗∗∗      0.344∗∗       0.213        0.134       0.158
                                           (0.010)                (0.039)      (0.096)      (0.152)      (0.185)      (0.183)     (0.183)

     Subpanel A.2: Two-stage least squares
     H-C viewership difference (predicted)           0.073∗       0.286∗∗      0.736∗∗      0.651∗        0.402        0.253       0.298
                                                     (0.038)      (0.117)      (0.303)      (0.338)      (0.370)      (0.362)     (0.373)

     Panel B: Estimates on deaths
     Subpanel B.1: Reduced form
89




     Predicted non-Fox TVs on × Fox share 0.004∗∗                 0.017∗        0.015      0.079∗∗∗     0.274∗∗∗     0.399∗∗∗     0.360∗∗
                                          (0.002)                 (0.010)      (0.015)      (0.026)      (0.064)      (0.129)     (0.157)

     Subpanel B.2: Two-stage least squares
     H-C viewership difference (predicted)            0.007        0.033        0.029       0.149∗∗      0.517∗∗      0.754∗∗     0.680∗
                                                     (0.004)      (0.023)      (0.030)      (0.070)      (0.230)      (0.370)     (0.393)

     Full controls                                     Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     State FEs                                         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     Observations                                     3,100        3,100        3,100        3,100        3,100        3,100       3,100
       Notes: The dependent variable is the log of one plus the cumulative number of COVID-19 cases in the county as of the date referenced
       in the column. Panel A.1 reports reduced-form estimates of the log of one plus cases upon the instrument, s̃\        ˜
                                                                                                                    mc,H × fmc,−HT — that
       is, the predicted number of TVs on during Hannity’s timeslot based on all DMAs in the Census division, excluding TVs watching
       Hannity, multiplied by Fox News’ viewership share, excluding Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight.; Panel A.2 replicates for deaths.
       Panel B.1 reports two-stage least squares estimates of the log of one plus cases upon the standardized difference in Hannity-Carlson
       viewership, instrumented by s̃\         ˜
                                      mc,H × fmc,−HT ; Panel B.2 replicates for deaths. All specifications include controls for the predicted
       share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, Fox News’ and MSNBC’s
       share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the
       county’s total population, MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent of the
       population living in a rural area, the population over the age of 65, the percent male with no high school degree, the percent female
       with no high school degree, the percent male with no college degree, the percent female with no college degree, an age-adjusted
       measure of the average physical health in the county, the percent uninsured, the percent below the federal poverty line, the log of
       the median household income, the unemployment rate, the Republican vote share in 2016, and the log of the total number of votes
       in the county in 2016. Standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.
                                Figure C2: 2SLS estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths
90




     Notes: Figure C2 shows day-by-day 2SLS estimates on log one plus cases and log one plus deaths. We report day-by-day effects of the standardized difference in
     viewership of Hannity vs. Tucker Carlson Tonight, instrumented by b        smc,H × f˜mc,−HT (where b
                                                                                                        smc,H is fit based on other DMAs in the same Census division) and
     controlling for state fixed effects and a large set of controls: Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the
     population density of the county, the log of the county’s total population, the number of predicted TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson
     Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and
     black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction
     of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line,
     log median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016. We cluster standard errors at
     the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.
                         Figure C3: 2SLS: robustness to combinations of controls
                                 Panel A: Estimates on cases (March 14, 2020)




                                Panel B: Estimates on deaths (March 28, 2020)




Notes: Figure C3 shows robustness of our two-stage least squares estimates for the specifications for log one plus cases on March
14 (Panel A) and log one plus deaths on March 28 (Panel B) under every possible combination of our eight sets of county-level
controls (population density and rurality, race, geography, age, economic, education, health status, health capacity, politics)
and our three levels of fixed effects (no fixed effects, census division fixed effects, and state fixed effects). All specifications
control for a base set of controls: Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the log of the county’s total population,
the number of predicted TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle,
the population-weighted latitude and longitude, and Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018. We cluster
standard errors at the DMA level and report 90 percent and 95 percent confidence intervals for each model. Black points are
not significant at the p < 0.1 level; blue points are significant at the p < 0.1 level; green points are significant at the p < 0.05
level, and red points are significant at the p < 0.01 level.




                                                                91
     Figure C4: Carlson-Hannity pandemic coverage gap and effects on cases and deaths




Notes: Figure C4 shows, in brown squares corresponding to the left y-axis, the difference in portrayed seriousness of the
coronavirus threat on Tucker Carlson Tonight vs. Hannity, as rated by Amazon Mechanical Turk coders. The difference peaks
in mid-February, a period during which there was no discussion of the coronavirus on Hannity and during which Tucker Carlson
Tonight discussed the coronavirus virtually every show. The figure also shows, in gray circles and red triangles corresponding
to the right y-axis, 2SLS estimates of the Hannity-Carlson viewership gap (instrumented by b     smc,H × f˜mc,−HT ) on log one
plus cases and log one plus deaths. All specifications control for state fixed effects, Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable
in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the county’s
total population, the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The
Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent
white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high school degrees,
the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted
measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median household
income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016.




                                                              92
                                    Figure C5: Implied COVID-19 curves
                                           Panel A: Estimates on cases




                                          Panel B: Estimates on deaths




Notes: Panel A of Figure C5 plots, in black, the logarithm of (one plus the) mean number of cases in each day across all
counties. In gray, the figure plots the the implied counterfactual values (based on our 2SLS estimates) for a county with a
one standard deviation higher viewership difference between Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. Panel B replicates Panel
A, taking log one plus deaths as the outcome rather than log one plus cases. We report 95 percent confidence intervals on the
counterfactual estimates. Standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.




                                                             93
D      Robustness: Inverse Hyperbolic Sine Transformation

       Figure D1: OLS estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths




Notes: Figure D1 displays effects of differential viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight on the inverse hyperbolic
sine of cases and deaths. We report day-by-day results for the correlation between log deaths and log cases with the
standardized viewership difference between Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. All regressions are conditional on state
fixed effects and a large set of controls: the November 2018 and January 2020 market share of Fox News, the November
2018 market share of MSNBC, log total population, population density, the share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during
Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent
in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share
of men and women lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the
population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the
percent under the federal poverty line, log median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote
share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016. We cluster standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent
confidence intervals.




                                                               94
                        Figure D2: OLS: robustness to combinations of controls
                                Panel A: Estimates on cases (March 14, 2020)




                               Panel B: Estimates on deaths (March 28, 2020)




Notes: Figure D2 shows robustness of our OLS estimates for the specifications for log one plus cases on March 14 (Panel A)
and log one plus deaths on March 28 (Panel B) under every possible combination of our eight sets of county-level controls
(population density and ruraltiy, race, age, economic, education, health status, health capacity, and politics) and our three
levels of fixed effects (no fixed effects, census division fixed effects, and state fixed effects). All specifications control for a
base set of controls: Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the log of the county’s total population, the share of TVs
turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted
latitude and longitude, and Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018. We cluster standard errors at the
DMA level and report 90 percent and 95 percent confidence intervals for each model. Black points are not significant at
the p < 0.1 level; blue points are significant at the p < 0.1 level; green points are significant at the p < 0.05 level, and red
points are significant at the p < 0.01 level.




                                                                95
                                         Table D1: Effect of differential viewership on cases

                                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                                                    COVID-19 outcomes
                                                     Feb 29       Mar 07       Mar 14       Mar 21       Mar 28       Apr 04      Apr 11
                                                       (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)         (7)
     Panel A: Estimates on cases
     Subpanel A.1: Reduced form
     Predicted non-Fox TVs on × Fox share 0.051∗∗∗               0.193∗∗∗     0.430∗∗∗      0.314∗        0.193        0.056       0.063
                                           (0.014)                (0.048)      (0.106)      (0.164)      (0.201)      (0.209)     (0.202)

     Subpanel A.2: Two-stage least squares
     H-C viewership difference (predicted)          0.050∗∗∗     0.188∗∗∗     0.421∗∗∗      0.307∗        0.189        0.055       0.062
                                                    (0.017)       (0.049)      (0.115)      (0.159)      (0.202)      (0.207)     (0.201)

     Panel B: Estimates on deaths
     Subpanel B.1: Reduced form
96




     Predicted non-Fox TVs on × Fox share 0.005∗                   0.022        0.013      0.099∗∗∗     0.345∗∗∗     0.488∗∗∗     0.399∗∗
                                          (0.003)                 (0.014)      (0.020)      (0.036)      (0.080)      (0.155)     (0.187)

     Subpanel B.2: Two-stage least squares
     H-C viewership difference (predicted)           0.005∗∗      0.022∗        0.013      0.096∗∗∗     0.338∗∗∗      0.478∗∗     0.391∗
                                                     (0.002)      (0.012)      (0.018)      (0.033)      (0.101)      (0.188)     (0.206)

     Full controls                                     Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     State FEs                                         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
     Observations                                     3,100        3,100        3,100        3,100        3,100        3,100       3,100
       Notes: The dependent variable is the log of one plus the cumulative number of COVID-19 cases in the county as of the date referenced
                                                                                                                                      ˜
                                                                                                                              mc,H × fmc,−HT
       in the column. Panel A.1 reports reduced-form estimates of the inverse hyperbolic sine of cases upon the instrument, s̃\
       — that is, the predicted number of TVs on during Hannity’s timeslot, excluding TVs watching Hannity, multiplied by Fox News’
       viewership share, excluding Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight.; Panel A.2 replicates for deaths. Panel B.1 reports two-stage least
       squares estimates of the inverse hyperbolic sine of cases upon the standardized difference in Hannity-Carlson viewership, instrumented
                     ˜
            mc,H × fmc,−HT ; Panel B.2 replicates for deaths. All specifications include controls for the predicted share of TVs tuned to
       by s̃\
       non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in
       January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the county’s total
       population, MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent of the population
       living in a rural area, the population over the age of 65, the percent male with no high school degree, the percent female with no
       high school degree, the percent male with no college degree, the percent female with no college degree, an age-adjusted measure of
       the average physical health in the county, the percent uninsured, the percent below the federal poverty line, the log of the median
       household income, the unemployment rate, the Republican vote share in 2016, and the log of the total number of votes in the county
       in 2016. Standard errors are clustered at the DMA level.
                               Figure D3: 2SLS estimates of effect of differential viewership on cases and deaths
97




     Notes: Figure D3 shows day-by-day 2SLS estimates on the inverse hyperbolic sine of cases and deaths. We report day-by-day effects of the standardized difference in
     viewership of Hannity vs. Tucker Carlson Tonight, instrumented by smc,H × f˜mc,−HT and controlling for state fixed effects and a large set of controls: Fox News’ and
     MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the county’s total population,
     the number of predicted TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and
     longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women
     lacking high school degrees, the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted measure
     of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median household income, the unemployment rate, the 2016
     Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016. We cluster standard errors at the DMA level and report 95 percent confidence intervals.
                         Figure D4: 2SLS: robustness to combinations of controls
                                 Panel A: Estimates on cases (March 14, 2020)




                                Panel B: Estimates on deaths (March 28, 2020)




Notes: Figure D4 shows robustness of our two-stage least squares estimates for the specifications for log one plus cases on March
14 (Panel A) and log one plus deaths on March 28 (Panel B) under every possible combination of our eight sets of county-level
controls (population density and rurality, race, geography, age, economic, education, health status, health capacity, politics)
and our three levels of fixed effects (no fixed effects, census division fixed effects, and state fixed effects). All specifications
control for a base set of controls: Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the log of the county’s total population,
the predicted share of TVs turned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle,
the population-weighted latitude and longitude, and Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January 2018. We cluster
standard errors at the DMA level and report 90 percent and 95 percent confidence intervals for each model. Black points are
not significant at the p < 0.1 level; blue points are significant at the p < 0.1 level; green points are significant at the p < 0.05
level, and red points are significant at the p < 0.01 level.




                                                                98
     Figure D5: Carlson-Hannity pandemic coverage gap and effects on cases and deaths




Notes: Figure D5 shows, in brown squares corresponding to the left y-axis, the difference in portrayed seriousness of the
coronavirus threat on Tucker Carlson Tonight vs. Hannity, as rated by Amazon Mechanical Turk coders. The difference peaks
in mid-February, a period during which there was no discussion of the coronavirus on Hannity and during which Tucker Carlson
Tonight discussed the coronavirus virtually every show. The figure also shows, in gray circles and red triangles corresponding
to the right y-axis, 2SLS estimates of the Hannity-Carlson viewership gap (instrumented by smc,H × f˜mc,−HT ) on the inverse
hyperbolic sine of cases and deaths. All specifications control for state fixed effects, Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable
in January 2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, the log of the county’s
total population, the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The
Ingraham Angle, the population-weighted latitude and longitude, the percent in the county living in rural areas, the percent
white, Hispanic, and black, the percent over the age of sixty-five, the share of men and women lacking high school degrees,
the share of men and women lacking college degrees, the fraction of the population lacking health insurance, an age-adjusted
measure of the average physical health in the county from 2018, the percent under the federal poverty line, log median household
income, the unemployment rate, the 2016 Republican vote share, and the log total number of votes cast in 2016.




                                                              99
      Table D2: Differential coverage and COVID-19 outcomes across all Fox News evening shows

                                                                    Dependent variable:
                                                                                             Cases      Deaths
                                                Inverse pandemic coverage index              Mar 14     Mar 28
                                               (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
      Panel A: OLS: inverse pandemic coverage index on relative viewership
      H-C viewership difference             0.548∗∗∗     0.545∗∗∗
                                            (0.053)       (0.052)

      Panel B: RF: inverse pandemic coverage index on instrument
      Non-Fox TVs on × Fox share                                     0.502∗∗     0.490∗∗
                                                                     (0.230)     (0.227)

      Panel C: 2SLS: cases and deaths on inverse predicted pandemic coverage index
      −1× coverage index (predicted)                                                         0.922∗∗     0.678∗
100




                                                                                             (0.438)     (0.355)

      Controls                               Base          Full       Base         Full        Full        Full
      State FEs                               Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
      Observations                           3,102        3,102       3,102       3,102       3,102       3,102
        Notes: Panel A reports OLS estimates of the (inverse of the) pandemic coverage index on the standardized
        difference between viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight. Panel B reports reduced-form
        estimates of the inverse pandemic coverage index on our instrument, s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT — that is, the
        number of TVs on during Hannity’s timeslot based on other DMAs in the same time zone, excluding
        TVs watching Hannity, multiplied by Fox News’ viewership share, excluding Hannity and Tucker Carlson
        Tonight.. Columns (5) and (6) in Panel C report 2SLS estimates of the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number
        of cases on March 14 and the inverse hyperbolic sine of the number of deaths on March 28, respectively, on
        the standardized difference between viewership of Hannity and Tucker Carlson Tonight, instrumented by
        s̃mc,H × f˜mc,−HT . Base OLS controls include the share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity,
        Tucker Carlson Tonight, and The Ingraham Angle, Fox News’ and MSNBC’s share of cable in January
        2018, Fox News’ share of television in January 2020, the population density of the county, and the log
        of the county’s total population. Base controls for the reduced form and the two-stage least squares are
        identical, except the share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during Hannity, Tucker Carlson Tonight, and
        The Ingraham Angle are replaced with the predicted share of TVs tuned to non-Fox channels during these
        timeslots. ‘Full controls” additionally include all controls described in Section 5.2. Standard errors are
        clustered at the DMA level.
E     Survey Instrument
E.1   Consent and demographics questions




                                    101
102
103
104
105
E.2   Media consumption questions




                                    106
E.2.1   Fox News




                   107
E.2.2   CNN News




                   108
E.2.3   MSNBC News




                     109
E.3   Behavior change questions




                                  110
111
E.4   Post-outcome questions




                               112
