                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     PORTFOLIO DELEGATION AND 401(K) PLAN PARTICIPANT RESPONSES TO
                               COVID-19

                                         David Blanchett
                                         Michael S. Finke
                                         Jonathan Reuter

                                       Working Paper 27438
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w27438


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     June 2020




Reuter (reuterj@bc.edu) is the corresponding author. Neither Finke nor Reuter have any potential
conflicts of interest to disclose. Blanchett works for Morningstar Investment Management, which
offers services to 401(k) plan sponsors, including target date funds and managed account
products. The account-level snapshots come from one of the recordkeepers who utilize these
services. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the authors, who are responsible
for the content, and do not necessarily represent the views of our employers, nor those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. Any remaining errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by David Blanchett, Michael S. Finke, and Jonathan Reuter. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Portfolio Delegation and 401(k) Plan Participant Responses to COVID-19
David Blanchett, Michael S. Finke, and Jonathan Reuter
NBER Working Paper No. 27438
June 2020
JEL No. G11,G23,G41,G51,G53

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze the behavior of 401(k) plan participants during the first quarter of 2020, when
COVID-19 generated historic volatility, large negative returns, and significant unemployment.
Only 2.1% of participants invested in TDFs made any changes to their portfolios, with even lower
rates of change among those defaulted into robo-advised managed accounts, suggesting that
delegation can decrease the likelihood of portfolio mistakes by less sophisticated participants.
While 16.6% of non-delegated participants made portfolio changes, these changes were more
likely among more sophisticated participants and appear not to have reduced participants’
quarterly returns. Consistent with liquidity constraints, however, withdrawals spike following job
loss.

David Blanchett                                 Jonathan Reuter
Morningstar Investment Management               Carroll School of Management
David.Blanchett@morningstar.com                 Boston College
                                                224B Fulton Hall
Michael S. Finke                                140 Commonwealth Avenue
The American College                            Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
michael.finke@theamericancollege.edu            and NBER
                                                reuterj@bc.edu
1. Introduction

         A common investment mistake is the behavioral tendency to shift wealth from risky to safe assets

in volatile and declining markets (Ben-Rephael, Kandel, and Wohl, 2012; Friesen and Sapp, 2007). For

example, Bucher-Koenen and Ziegelmeyer (2014) document that German households with lower levels of

financial literacy were the most likely to sell equity at a loss during the global financial crisis of 2008 and

2009. The COVID-19 pandemic produced more extreme changes in U.S. stock prices over 22 trading days

in late February and March 2020 than any other historical period (Baker, Bloom, Davis, Kost, Sammon,

and Viratyosin, 2020). The 34% drop in the S&P 500 index between February 19 and March 23, 2020 is

the most dramatic opportunity yet for researchers to study investor behavior following a spike in volatility

and a sharp decline in asset markets.

         In this paper, we analyze the behavior of 401(k) plan participants between December 31, 2019 and

March 31, 2020. Our main research question is whether professionally managed retirement accounts

insulate participants from the negative effects of sentiment-driven trading in retirement accounts. Although

retirement savers may be less experienced and more prone to making investment mistakes than investment

professionals, the majority of workers (59%) now delegate the management of their retirement portfolios

through target date funds (TDFs) or robo-advised managed accounts (Vanguard, 2019). 1 These automated

investment vehicles grew in popularity as default investment options in the years following the Pension

Protection Act of 2006 (Balduzzi and Reuter, 2019; ICI, 2019). Prior research has demonstrated that TDFs

are preferred by less financially sophisticated plan participants (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Mitchell and

Utkus, 2012; Goda et al., 2019; Chalmers and Reuter, 2020). This self-selection arises the possibility that

delegated portfolio management prevents those participants who are most likely to exhibit a behavioral



1
  A given TDF provides the same asset allocation to all participants of a similar age without regard for employee
characteristics or risk preferences. When the target retirement date is distant, the allocation to equity is typically near
100%; as the target retirement date approaches, equity is replaced with debt, resulting in less market risk. The slope
is known as the “glide path.” Balduzzi and Reuter (2019) document significant heterogeneity in the glide paths of
TDFs. Robo-advised “managed accounts” incorporate individual characteristics such as current wealth, salary, savings
rate, employer contribution, gender, and existing pensions. The percent of employers offering a managed account
option rose from 29% in 2011 to 66% in 2019 and assets increased from $108 billion in 2012 to $348 billion in 2019
(Cerulli, 2020).


                                                            1
trading response from trading during a financial crisis. Simultaneously providing the option for participants

to self-manage a retirement portfolio preserves choice for more sophisticated investors who can select

investments from a core menu that match their own preference, and who may be less likely to exhibit

behavioral biases of their own (Campbell, 2016).

        Prior studies of defined contribution trades find that participant investment changes are rare. For

example, over a 52 month period, Agnew, Balduzzi, and Sunden (2003) find that 87.5% of the 401(k) plan

participants in their sample make zero trades and 93.2% make no more than one trade. In another early

study of self-directed plan participants, Mitchell, Mottola, Utkus, and Yamaguchi (2006) find that fewer

than 20% make changes to their accounts in a 2-year period and that half of these participants make only a

single trade. In more recent data, Vanguard (2019) finds that only 8% of participants initiate any trades

within their accounts.

        Despite low trading frequency, retirement plan participants control an increasingly large share of

the market for financial assets. Defined contribution plan investors hold $8.2 trillion of the $21.1 trillion

invested in U.S. mutual funds (and 53% of equity, hybrid and bond mutual fund assets), which represents

12% of total equity ownership and 60% of all retirement wealth (ICI, 2019). Furthermore, a significant

negative economic event may motivate account changes by participants. Tamborini, Purcell, and Iams

(2013) document that employees in industries negatively impacted by the 2007-2009 financial crises were

more likely to decrease in contribution rates and increase plan withdrawals. Sialm, Starks and Zhang

(2015a) document that outflows from equity mutual funds within DC plans are more sensitive to

macroeconomic conditions than funds owned outside of retirement plans.

        Investment mistakes made inside of retirement plans are likely to impact both when participants

can afford to retire and the standard of living during retirement. Because TDFs played a much smaller role

in 401(k) plans during the global financial crisis, the vast majority of TDF participants have only experience

a bull market. A central policy question is whether the market turmoil induced by COVID-19 lead less

sophisticated investor to abandon TDFs and even-newer robo-advised accounts for safer funds, thereby

locking in market losses.


                                                      2
        Analyzing 617,376 participants across 531 retirement plans, we ask which types of participants

were the most likely to make changes to their retirement accounts, with a focus on the extent of portfolio

delegation. We have four main findings. First, delegated participants are significantly less likely to make

any changes to their retirement portfolios than non-delegated participants. This is true in the raw data, when

we find that only 2.0% of delegated participants make any changes versus 16.6% of non-delegated

participants. It remains true when we estimate probit regressions that control for a large set of participant

characteristics and include either industry or plan fixed effects. The fact that participants who opt into or

are defaulted into robo-advised managed accounts are both less likely to make portfolio changes than

participants who invest in a single TDF suggests that increased levels of trust in customized portfolios is

not driven by self-selection. The fact that delegated participants have average characteristics that would

point to lower levels of financial sophistication suggests that increased delegation through the use of TDFs

and managed accounts as default investment options, may limit the extent to which less sophisticated

participants make mistakes. The fact that participants stuck with TDFs during the first bear market since

2009 suggests that TDFs will prove to be effective long-term investment vehicles.

        Second, among the non-delegated participants, the likelihood of portfolio changes appears to be

increasing in proxies for investor sophistication, such as salary, deferral rate, and account balance. In other

words, the set of participants making changes to their retirement portfolios appear to be a relatively

sophisticated subsample of a relatively sophisticated population.

        Third, because our sample of retirement plans span 20 industries, we are able to document

significant heterogeneity in job loss, changes in deferral rates, and withdrawal activity across industries, as

well as in reliance upon delegation. While we generally find that participant decisions about loan activity

and withdrawals are driven by the economic shock of job loss rather than the level of portfolio delegation,

we find some evidence that reductions in deferral rates are least likely among participants invested solely

in TDFs and participants defaulted into managed accounts, the two groups of participants that we estimate

are the most likely to rely upon default deferral rates.

        Finally, consistent with the idea that portfolio changes were disproportionately made by the most


                                                       3
sophisticated participants, we do not find any evidence that portfolio changes are associated with lower

quarterly returns. While our need to estimate quarterly returns adds noise to this analysis, it appears unlikely

that the participants making portfolio changes in response to COVID-19 (but who did not experience job

loss) managed to liquidate plan assets at the bottom of the market.

        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our empirical setting, the

characteristics of delegated and non-delegated participants, and univariate evidence on portfolio changes.

Section 3 provides industry-level statistics on the use of delegation and on the frequency of job loss, plan

withdrawals, and portfolio changes. Section 4 relates portfolio changes and other participant choices to

delegation and a large set of participant characteristics. Section 5 contains our analysis of quarterly portfolio

returns. Section 6 concludes.

2. Characteristics of delegated and non-delegated 401(k) plan participants

        Our 401(k) plan sample includes 617,376 participants across 531 plans, offered by firms within 20

broad industries. 2 The data come from a single recordkeeper with a market share outside of the top ten. We

observe participant portfolio allocations and balances on both December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020,

along with characteristics such as age, salary, plan tenure, gender (when reported), traditional and Roth

employee deferral rates, and plan participation status. Collectively, these participants managed $75.0 billion

on December 31, 2019 and $65.3 billion on March 31, 2020. As we describe below, we infer participant-

directed portfolio changes from changes in allocations and (return-adjusted) changes in balances. So that

we do not mistakenly attribute changes due to menu changes to plan participants, our sample excludes any

plans that are flagged as having made menu changes during the first quarter of 2020. In addition, our

measures of portfolio change exclude a small number of fund re-mappings that we identified within 35

plans. These re-mappings, often across different shares classes of the same fund, collectively impact 12,990



2
  We include all plan participants for whom plan tenure is nonnegative (i.e., excluding participants who were not yet
eligible to join the plan on December 31, 2019), for whom age is between 20 and 75, and for whom the employee
deferral rate is no higher than 30.0%. Collectively, these filters cause our sample size to decrease by 2.8% (from
635,116 to 617,375). In addition, we possess limited data on 9,446 participants who had positive account balances on
December 31, 2019 but zero account balances on March 31, 2020.


                                                         4
(2.1%) participants. 3 Because we cannot observe investment choices within self-directed brokerage

accounts (SDBA), our sample excludes any participants with a positive SDBA allocation or balance on

December 31, 2019. However, because we are interested in measuring portfolio changes, we retain those

participants with a positive SDBA allocation or SDBA balance on March 31, 2020.

         We classify participants into five groups based on their allocations and balances on December 31,

2019. Three of these groups involve delegated portfolio management. The largest of the delegated groups

consists of participants who allocate all of their contributions to a single target date fund (TDF) and who

do not have a positive balance in any other fund. TDFs vary their asset allocation based on the number of

years to a pre-specified target retirement year (e.g., Fidelity Freedom 2040 Fund). TDFs became the most

popular default investment option within 401(k) plans in the years immediately following the passage of

the Pension Protection Act of 2006 (ICI (2019), Balduzzi and Reuter (2020)). 4 “Pure TDF” participants

account for 43.1% of our participant sample and 16.3% of plan assets. While it is likely that the majority

of Pure TDF participants were defaulted into TDFs, this is not something that the recordkeeper tracks. The

other two groups of delegated participants invest through robo-advised managed accounts (MA), either by

choice or by default. Robo-advised managed account products are a natural extension of TDFs. They

provide participants with portfolios that are customized with respect to the expected number of years to

retirement, but also with respect to other sources of investor heterogeneity, such as the level and

composition of other retirement assets (including expected Social Security benefits), and the level of risk

aversion. Collectively, managed accounts account for 10.5% of plan participants and 7.7% of plan assets.

We observe two participants who are defaulted into a MA for every one participant who opts into a MA.

Across the three groups, delegated participants account for 53.6% of participants and 23.0% of plan assets.

         The other two groups of participants manage their own retirement portfolios, at least in part. Self-

directed (SD) participants, who allocate their contributions to one or more non-TDF option, account for


3
  Sialm, Starks, and Zhang (2015b) highlight the extent to which defined contribution flows are driven by plan sponsor
decisions to add and remove funds from their menus.
4
  For example, Figure 8.14 of the 2019 Investment Company Institute Factbook report that the market share of TDFs
rose from 19% in 2006 to 52% in 2016.


                                                          5
39.5% of participants and 68.0% of plan assets. The remaining 6.9% of participants and 9.0% of plan assets

are classified as “Mixed TDF” (Pagliaro and Utkus (2017)). While Mixed TDF participants allocate 100%

of their contributions to a single TDF, they maintain positive balances in one or more additional funds,

suggesting either that there were not defaulted into TDFs or that they have subsequently chosen to transfer

some of their plan assets from TDFs into other funds.

        We describe our sample in Table 1. On December 31, 2019, the average participant is 44.3 years

old, with 7.1 years of plan tenure, an annual salary of $97,600, and an account balance of $113,600. Our

sample is broadly consistent the sample described in Vanguard’s How America Saves 2019. 5 Consistent

with the aggregate statistics that we just cited and earlier research on the demand for TDFs (e.g., Utkus and

Mitchell (2012), Chalmers and Reuter (2020)), delegated participants tend to be younger, with shorter plan

tenures, lower salaries, and lower balances. For example, Pure TDF participants are significantly younger

than SD participants (42.0 years old on December 31, 2019 versus 46.8), and their average account balance

is considerably lower ($43,100 versus $195,500). The other groups fall between these two extremes, with

Mixed TDF being the second oldest (45.4), with the second highest account balance ($147,500).

        The average employee deferral rate is 5.4%; this rate is highest among SD participants (6.5%) and

lowest among participants defaulted into a managed account (3.9%). We infer the default employee deferral

rate within each plan from the median deferral rate of plan participants with a tenure of less than two years.

The fraction of all participants whose individual saving rate matches the inferred default rate is 10.3%. It is

highest for Pure TDF participants, many of whom appear to be accepting the default savings rate and the

default investment option, and lowest for Mixed TDF participants. The fraction of participants with a

positive Roth account balance is 17.7%; this fraction is much higher for SD participants and for those opting

into the MA. The fraction of participants who rolled assets into their 401(k) account is 11.4%; it is also

much higher for SD participants and for those opting into the MA. Overall, the differences in participant


5
 Vanguard reports a median age of 44, median plan tenure of 7 years, median participant income of $70,000, median
participant account balance of $22,217, and average participant account balance of $92,148. Within our sample,
median age is 43.7, median tenure is 5 years, median active participant income is $68,000, median active participant
account balance is $31,399, and average active participant account balance is $119,097.


                                                         6
characteristics suggest that through some combination of self-selection and differential reliance upon

defaults, the typical delegated participant is likely to be less financially sophisticated than the typical non-

delegated participant (Chalmers and Reuter (2020)). Whether less sophisticated investors were willing to

stick with delegated portfolios during the turbulent market of 2020Q1, and whether there were any

differences in the behavior of TDF versus MA participants, are two of our research questions.

        The fraction of plan participants classified as “active” at the end of 2019 is 81.9%. The fraction of

participants classified as “active” on December 31, 2019 but “terminated” on March 31, 2020 is 3.3%.

Changes in employee deferral rates are relatively common. The fact that increases are more common than

decreases (11.8% versus 6.7%) may reflect plans automatically escalating participant deferral rates

effective January 1, 2020. While we do not observe an auto-escalation flag from the recordkeeper, the vast

majority of these increases (8.1% of the 11.8%) are exactly 1 percentage point. During the same period,

6.7% of participants reduced their deferral rate, with the largest decreases among those who opted into the

managed account.

        The fraction of participants with a positive loan balance on December 31, 2019 is 16.4% and,

conditional on having a positive loan balance, the average ratio of loan balance to account balance is 17.6%.

Less than 1% of participants take out a new loan between December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020. Because

we cannot directly observe partial withdrawals, we assume that they occur whenever the balance on March

31, 2020 is less than 50% of the balance on December 31, 2019. By this measure, the fraction of participants

with a partial withdrawal is also less than 1%. The fraction of participants who withdraw their entire account

balance is 1.4%. (Because we observe limited data on the 9,446 participants with positive account balances

on December 31, 2019 and zero account balances on March 31, 2020, we exclude them from the five

subsamples.) The gender variable is “Male” for 47.6% of participants, “Female” for 31.6%, and “Unknown”

for the remaining 20.8%. It is much less likely to be unknown among MA participants.

        The number of funds held varies significant across participant type. On December 31, 2019, the

average SD participant has positive allocations to 6.2 funds and positive balances in 6.8 funds. For

participants investing through a MA, both numbers are approximately twice as high, reflecting the fact that


                                                       7
the managed account product works by allocating dollars across funds on the plan menu. Based on our

classifications, Pure TDF and Mixed TDF participants have a 100% allocation to a single TDF. However,

for Mixed TDF participants the average number of funds with a positive balance is 2.9. Across all

participant types, the numbers of funds with positive allocations and balances are quite similar when we

hold participant type constant and follow participants forward from December 31, 2019 to March 31, 2020,

suggesting a high level of inertia by participants.

         The final set of rows calculate the fraction of each participant’s portfolio that is allocated to equity.

We assign a representative fraction of equity to each of the 84 Morningstar categories represented in the

portfolio holdings data (summarized in Table OA1). We use these statistics to calculate allocation-weighted

and balance-weighted measures of equity exposure on both December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020. Of

course, declines in the fraction of equity are to be expected given the poor relative performance of equity

funds during the first quarter of 2020. To minimize the impact of fund returns on equity exposure, we also

report balance-weighted fraction of equity after “deflating” each March 31 2020 balance by either the fund’s

quarterly return or the Morningstar category’s quarterly return (when then fund’s quarterly return is

missing). 6 When focusing on allocation-weighted statistics, we find that average equity exposure decline

0.6% (from 74.5% to 73.9%). When comparing balance-weighted statistics in December 2019 to deflated

balance-weighted statistics in March 2020, we also find that average equity exposure declines 0.6% (from

75.1% to 74.5%). These comparisons are consistent with the vast majority of participants making no

changes to their portfolios during the first quarter of 2020.

2.1. Frequency of changes in participant type?

         To begin to shed light on the extent of portfolio changes by 401(k) plan participants, in Table 2,

we use the fund allocation and balance data available on December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020 to identify

transitions between participant types. We find that participant type is highly persistent over this quarter.



6
  We do not observe quarterly returns for the subset of investment options that are not mutual funds (e.g., collective
investment trusts). We also do not observe the level or timing of any employee or employer contributions between
December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020.


                                                          8
Fewer than 2.0% of the delegated participants begin managing their own portfolios. This finding suggests

that the vast majority of the younger, less sophisticated participants being defaulted into TDFs chose to

stick with delegated management throughout the turbulent quarter. In contrast, approximately 5.8% of

Mixed TDF participants change type, with 3.8% moving towards increased delegation and the other 2.0%

moving to decreased delegation. Self-directed participants are the least likely to change type. Fewer than

0.5% of SD participants change type by enrolling in a managed account or allocating their contributions to

a TDF.

2.2. Frequency of changes in fund allocations and fund balances?

         In Table 3, we summarize the extent to which participants make changes to their fund allocations

or fund balances. We consider four types of changes: changes in fund allocations that are accompanied by

fund additions and/or removals; changes in fund allocations that are not accompanied by fund additions

and/or removals; fund additions and removals that are not accompanied by changes in fund allocations; and

(imputed) fund exchanges between the existing set of funds. We report the sum of these four changes for

different subsamples of participants in column 2 (and we report the disaggregated statistics in Table OA2).

Overall, we find that 8.7% of participants made changes to their portfolios during the first quarter of 2020.

         Importantly, this average masks significantly heterogeneity across participant types. For delegated

participants, the likelihood of any portfolio change ranges from 1.3% for participants defaulted into MA to

2.1% for participants investing entirely in a single TDF. Given the plausibly lower sophistication levels of

the typical delegated participant, this inertia is likely to reflect high levels of trust in delegation, low levels

of attention, or both. The fact that likelihood of any portfolio change is lower for the managed account

products may suggest slightly higher levels of trust in a customized portfolio than a TDF. Nevertheless, the

fact that the vast majority of TDF participants “stayed the course” during a quarter of unprecedented market

volatility is encouraging evidence that TDFs may provide value during both up and down markets. In

contrast, for non-delegated participants, the likelihood of portfolio changes jumps to 15.1% for SD

participants and 22.7% for Mixed TDF participants.

         The remaining columns of Table 3 shed light on the extent to which changes in fund allocations


                                                        9
and exchanges across funds changed the equity exposure of participants’ portfolios. For example, column

6 reports the fraction of participants whose change in fund allocations or fund exchanges reduce the equity

exposure of their portfolio 10 percentage points or more. To determine if fund allocations reduce the equity

exposure by 10 percentage points or more, we compare the allocation-weighted fractions of equity using

fund allocations on December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020 and the assumed equity exposures in Table

OA1. Because we use the same assumed fractions of equity on both dates, this measure will be zero if the

participant does not make any allocation changes or if allocation changes are limited to funds with the same

assumed fraction of equity. To determine if fund exchanges reduce the equity exposure by 10 percentage

points or more, we compare the balance-weighted fraction of equity using actual fund balances on

December 31, 2019 and quarterly-return-adjusted fund balances on March 31, 2020, and again using the

assumed equity exposures in Table OA1. Based on these measures, we see that many of the portfolio

changes are modest in size. While 16.6% of non-delegated participants make a change to their portfolios,

only about half (8.7% equals 5.0% in column 4 plus 3.7% in column 5) result in equity exposure increasing

or decreasing by more than five percentage point. Nevertheless, non-delegated participants remain

significantly more likely than delegated participants to make large changes. For example, 5.2% of self-

directed participants make a change of at least 20 percentage points (3.7% in column 8 plus 1.5% in column

9) versus 0.9% for Pure TDF (0.7% plus 0.2%).

3. Variation in participant choices and likelihood of economic shocks across industries?

        To the extent that some industries experienced COVID-19-related economic downturns before

others, we might expect to see differences in participant behavior across industries. In Table 4, we report

selected summary statistics by industry. We assign each plan to an industry based on the first two digits of

the firm’s 6-digit NAICS. The two largest industries, in terms of number of firms and number of active

participants, are Professional/Scientific and Manufacturing. However, we observe plans across a wide range

of industries, including Construction, Food Services, and Retail Trade. As a simple way of capturing

differences in participant sophistication across industries, we report the fraction of active participants within

each industry that invest through TDFs or managed accounts. The fraction is relatively high for Food


                                                       10
Services, Health Care, and Retail Trade; it is lowest for Education (represented by one small plan), Public

Administration, and Management.

        Overall, 4.0% of participants transition from being “active” on December 31, 2019 to “terminated”

on March 31, 2020. We cannot distinguish participants who quit their jobs from those who are fired.

However, these separation rates vary across industries in ways that are likely to reflect variation in the

extent of layoffs, from a low of 2.0% for Utilities to a high of 16.5% for Food Services. They also seem

more likely to be impacting industries with less sophisticated participants; the correlation between the

fraction of delegated participants and the average separation rate is positive (0.2657).

        When we scale the number of new plan participants during the first quarter of 2020 by the number

of active participants on December 31, 2019, the replacement rate averages 0.3%. Consistent with the

unprecedented surge in COVID19-related unemployment claims during March 2020, the replacement rate

is significantly lower than the separation rate within each industry. Consequently, there are fewer active

plan participants within each industry on March 31, 2020 than on December 31, 2019.

        While 401(k) plan participants may begin withdrawing cash to make up for reduced or lost wages,

we observe relatively little such behavior during the first quarter of 2020. We estimate that only 0.7% of

participants who are active on December 31, 2019 take a significant withdrawal from their account by

March. The lowest withdrawal rates are 0.0% for Education and 0.3% for Public Administration; the highest

is 3.7% for Construction. Another 0.8% of participants withdrawal all of their plan assets during 2020Q1.

Because we are focusing on participants who were active on December 31, 2019 and because full

withdrawals are only possible following job lose, this statistic implies that about one in five participants

(0.8% scaled by 4.0%) who are terminated during the quarter withdrawal all of their plan assets. The fraction

of participants taking partial or full withdrawals are also positive correlated with reliance on delegation

(0.2903 and 0.3432, respectively).

        As we saw in Table 1, employee deferral rates are more likely to increase during the first quarter

of 2020 than to decrease, although this likely reflects increases due to automatic escalation. The fraction of

participants decreasing their deferral rate by any amount is 8.0%, the fraction increasing by exactly one


                                                     11
percentage point is 9.7%, and the fraction increasing by more than one percentage point is 4.3%. The

frequency of rate decreases is positive correlated with reliance on delegation (0.2550), but so is the

frequency of rate increases of more than one percentage point (0.1700).

        Finally, the fraction of active participants who make any change to their portfolios is 9.1%, which

is slightly higher than the 8.7% for the full sample of active and inactive participants. While the likelihood

of making any changes to portfolios varies significantly across industries, from a low of 2.8% for

Construction to a high of 18.1% for Professional/Scientific, this can largely be explained by the differences

in reliance upon delegation. The correlation between reliance on delegation within an industry and the

likelihood of making any portfolio changes is strongly negative (-0.7741).

4. Predicting changes in plan participant behavior

        We begin by asking how the likelihood of making portfolio changes varies with the extent of

delegation and other participant characteristics and then consider choices related to loans, deferral rates,

and withdrawals that may have been triggered by economic shocks.

4.1. Is delegation associated with fewer portfolio changes?

        The univariate comparisons above reveal delegated participants are significantly less likely to make

portfolio changes (or large changes in equity exposure) than non-delegated participants. At the same time,

differences in the characteristics of delegated and non-delegated participants suggest significant sorting into

delegation. To shed additional light on which participants were the most likely to make changes to their

401(k) portfolios during the first quarter of 2020, in Table 5, we use measures of delegation to predict the

likelihood of portfolio changes while controlling for various participant characteristics.

        We estimate a series of Probit regressions. The dependent variable in columns 1 through 3 equals

one if participant i made any changes to her 401(k) account between December 31, 2019 and March 31,

2020, and zero otherwise. Each specification includes participant type fixed effects (“Pure TDF” is the

omitted category), the full set of participant characteristics described in Table 1, and a full set of equity

exposure category fixed effects based on fund balances on December 31, 2019 (“0-9%” is the omitted

category). We also control for the predicted volatility of daily portfolio returns using initial fund balances


                                                      12
and daily returns throughout the quarter. Column 1 controls for the average level of the dependent variable

in other plans within the same industry, excluding the participant i’s plan. Column 2 adds industry fixed

effects to control for any average industry-level shocks that drive portfolio changes and also controls for

the average level of the dependent variable within participant i’s plan, excluding participant i. Column 3

adds plan fixed effects to control for any average industry-level shocks that drive portfolio changes.

Standard errors are clustered on plan. Across these columns, the unconditional likelihood of making any

portfolio changes is 8.6%.

        We find that the likelihood of making any changes tends to increase in account balance, salary,

deferral rate, positive Roth account balances, and positive rollover balances, all of which are likely to be

positively correlated with the level of participant sophistication. It also tends to increase by approximately

1.3 percentage points following job loss, highlighting the link between portfolio changes and individual

economic shocks. With respect to portfolio composition on December 31, 2019, higher levels of equity

exposure tend to be associated with lower likelihoods of making portfolio changes, while higher standard

deviations of daily returns (measured within these categories) tend to be associated with slightly higher

likelihoods of making portfolio changes. The predictive power of other participant changes (in column 2)

may reflect peer effects within the plan, fund re-mappings that we failed to identify when analyzing changes

within plans, or both.

        The fact that pseudo-R2 nearly doubles when we include the industry fixed effects (from 0.1476 to

0.2841) reflects the systematic differences in the likelihood of portfolio changes across industries that we

observe in Table 4. The magnitudes of the marginal effects associated with Mixed TDF and Self-directed

participants both decrease when we include the industry fixed effects, but do not change much more when

we include the plan fixed effects. Importantly, after including all of these controls, we continue to find

statistically and economically significant differences in the likelihood of portfolio changes across

participant types.

        Focusing on the participant type dummy variables in column 3, which focuses on variation across

participant types within plans, we find that managed account participants are 2.3-2.4 percentages points


                                                     13
less likely to make any portfolio changes than Pure TDF participants (both differences statistically

significant at the 1-percent level). These estimates suggest that managed accounts may be even more

effective than TDFs in allowing participants to weather volatile markets. The fact that the estimates are

quite similar for those who are defaulted into managed accounts and those who opt into these products helps

to allay concerns about these differences are driven by self-selection into managed accounts. (In none of

the specifications can we reject the hypothesis that participants defaulted into managed accounts are more

or less likely to make portfolio changes than participants opting into managed accounts.) Everything else

equal, we also find that Self-directed and Mixed TDF participants are 9.8 and 15.1 percentage points more

likely than Pure TDF participants to make portfolio changes.

        The remaining columns predict more extreme portfolio changes. Column 4 focus on participants

who increase or decrease their equity exposure by 10 percentage points or more, while column 5 uses the

threshold of 20 percentage points or more. The means of the dependent variables fall from 8.3 percentage

points to 3.6 percentage points and 2.7 percentage points, respectively. The marginal effects on the various

participant characteristics are qualitatively similar to those in column 3. Two notable exceptions are the

change in the sign of the marginal effect on participant age (from negative and statistically significant to

positive and statistically significant), and the emergence of a slight gender divide. In the spirit of Barber

and Odean (2001), males are 26 to 31 basis points more likely to make a large change and females are 26

to 43 basis points less likely to make a large change. Again, however, we continue to find that managed

account participants are less likely to make portfolio changes than Pure TDF participants, and that non-

delegated participants are more likely to do so.

4.2. The limited role of delegation in explaining other participant choices

        In Table 6, we analyze four additional choices that participants may have made in response to the

COVID-19 shock: increased loan activity, decreased deferral rates, made a partial withdrawal, or made a

full plan withdrawal. To the extent that these choices are triggered by economic shocks rather than by broad

market returns or volatility, we do not expect them to be systematically related to the level of delegation,

except insofar as industries with different levels of reliance on delegation are differentially impacted by


                                                     14
COVID-19 during the first quarter of 2020. The probit specifications are similar to those estimated in Table

6. By including industry fixed effects, we control for average differences in participant choices across

industries. All plan-level measures exclude the choices of participant i.

        The dependent variable in column 1 equals one if participant i increases her plan loan balance,

either by increasing the balance on an outstanding loan or by opening a new loan, and zero otherwise.

Because loans are generally only available to active participants, we limit the sample to participants who

are active on both December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020. We also exclude a small number of plans for

which there are no positive loan balances on December 31, 2019, to eliminate plans that do not offer access

to 401(k) plan loans. Within this sample, only 2.3% of participants increased their loan activity. The single

best predictor of increased loan balances during the first quarter of 2020 is a pre-existing loan balance,

which may capture pre-existing liquidity constraints. The marginal effect is 3.7 percentage points and

statistically significantly different from zero at the 1-percent level. Increased loan activity within the plan

by other participants has a positive and statistically significant marginal effect, suggesting correlated loan-

seeking behavior within plans, perhaps because of common economic shocks with firm, but the effect is

economically modest because the standard deviation of this measure is only 1.5 percentage points.

Differences in choices across participant types are even smaller. For example, everything else equal, Self-

directed participants are 11 basis points less likely to increase their loan balances (statistically significant

at the 5-percent level but economically insignificant).

        In column 2, we switch our focus to reductions in participant deferral rates. To eliminate the

mechanical relationship between job turnover and deferral rates going to zero, we limit the sample to

participants who are active throughout the first quarter of 2020 and have a positive deferral rate on

December 31, 2019. Here, we find evidence that delegation matters. Pure TDF participants (omitted

category) and those defaulted into managed accounts are the least likely to reduce their deferral rates, as

are those participants who appear to have accepted the defaulted deferral rate within their plan. Other

predictors include pre-existing loan balances, which point to pre-existing liquidity constraints, but also

higher salaries, rollover balances, and Roth balances, which point to higher levels of sophistication.


                                                      15
        We predict partial plan withdrawals in column 3 and full plan withdrawals in column 4. In column

3, the sample includes all active and inactive participants during the quarter except for those who

withdrawal all of their account assets. In column 4, we expand the sample to includes these additional

participants, but are forced to reduce our set of independent variables because we lack data on how these

participants were invested on December 31, 2019 and several other variables. As we document in Table 1,

both outcomes are rare. We infer a significant plan withdrawal when the account balance on March 31,

2020 is less than 50% of the balance on December 31, 2019. The dependent variable equals one for 0.8%

of the participants in column 3 and for 1.4% of the participants in column 4. In both specifications, the

single best predictor of a withdrawal is separation from the firm. The marginal effect is 5.1 percentage

points with respect to partial withdrawals and 19.5% with respect to full withdrawals. In other words,

approximately 20% of newly terminated participants remove all plan assets and another 5% remove some

plan assets. (Participants terminated before December 31, 2019 are the omitted category.) To the extent that

terminated participants were liquidating plan assets at deflated equity prices to finance these withdrawals,

the economic shocks driving withdrawals also served to lock in the (temporary) market losses.

5. Are portfolio changes associated with higher or lower quarterly returns?

        In Table 7, we compare the quarterly returns of participants who do and do not make changes to

their portfolios. We consider three definitions of portfolio changes. The first definition includes any changes

to fund allocations, fund additions and removals, and other imputed fund exchanges, the second definition

captures increases or decreases in equity exposure of 10 percentage points or more, and the third definition

captures situations where Mixed TDF and SD participants become managed account or Pure TDF

participants.

        We do not directly observe quarterly returns. Our dependent variable is the percentage change in

participant i’s account balance between December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020. To account for the impact

of equity exposure on realized returns, we include balanced-weighted equity exposure decile fixed effects.

To account for average differences in the (unobserved-to-us) level of employer contributions across plans,

we include two fixed effects for each plan, one for active participants and the other for inactive participants.


                                                      16
To account for the impact of ongoing employee contributions, we control for the predicted contribution

amount over the quarter (monthly salary times employee deferral rate times three) scaled by the account

balance on December 31, 2019. We include one set of predicted contributions for participants who are

active through March 31, 2020 (because they are likely to make contributions all three months) and another

set for participants who are terminated between December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020 (because they are

unlikely to make contributions all three months). We also directly control for job loss during the quarter.

Finally, in the specifications that pool Mixed TDF and SD participants, we include a dummy variable to

test whether Mixed TDF participant earn systematically different quarterly returns than SD participants.

With the goal of minimizing noise, we limit the sample to those participants for whom we do not infer any

plan withdrawal (by eliminating participant observations with a quarterly return below -50%), with a

December 31, 2019 balance of more than $1,000, with a contribution-implied return of less than 25%, and

an estimated quarterly return that is below 100%. 7 To allow for correlated quarterly returns within plan, we

cluster standard errors on plan.

         Within the pooled sample of managed account participants, we estimate that participants making

portfolio changes earn quarterly returns that are 84 basis points lower than participants not making changes,

but we cannot reject the null hypothesis of no difference in performance at conventional levels. Similarly,

while we estimate that job loss is also associated with lower returns, this estimate also is not statistically

distinguishable from zero.

         For the third group of delegated participants, Pure TDF, we estimate that portfolio changers earn

quarterly portfolio returns 2.2 percentage points higher than among non-changers with similar equity

exposure (statistically significant at the 1-percent level), while those suffering job loss earn quarterly returns

that are 1.5 percentage points lower. It is conceivable that the lower returns in the accounts of those losing

jobs reflect employee and employer contribution reductions that are not fully captured by our predicted

contribution measure and fixed effects. When we focus only on large portfolio changes we estimate that


7
  These filters reduce our sample by 2,583 participants, 7,211 participants, 7,958 participants, and 717 participants,
respectively.


                                                         17
changes in either direction are associated with higher quarterly returns. Because we do not observe the dates

on which portfolio changes are made, we do not know if changes in different directions occurred at different

points in time and we do not know if intermediate changes were made during the quarter. We also are

unable to adjust portfolio returns for changes in risk. Regardless, with the possible exception of managed

accounts, we are not finding any evidence that portfolio changes are associated with lower returns.

        Our findings for non-delegated participants, in columns 4 and 5, are broadly similar to our findings

for Pure TDF participants. Namely, portfolio changes are associated with higher quarterly returns and job

loss is associated with lower quarterly returns. However, within this sample, the higher returns appear to be

driven by reductions in equity exposure. Finally, we estimate that increased delegation increases quarterly

returns by 48 basis points relative to other portfolio changes, but the standard error is large. The fact that

participants making portfolio changes appear not to have been harmed during the first quarter of 2020 is

consistent with earlier finding that less sophisticated participants were less likely to make portfolio changes,

especially those with delegated portfolio management.

6. Conclusion

        We analyze 401(k) plan participant behavior during the first quarter of 2020, a quarter that was

marked by historical levels of volatility and large negative returns as the COVID-19 pandemic impacted

product markets and labor markets alike. Analyzing 617,376 participants across 531 plans in 20 industries,

we ask which types of participants were the most likely to make changes to their retirement portfolios, with

a focus on both the extent of portfolio delegation and individual economic shocks.

        Consistent with several earlier studies, we find that the typical participant delegates all of her

portfolio management to a TDFs or robo-advised managed account, and that these participants tend to be

younger, with lower salaries, lower deferral rates, and lower account balances. Within this sample of

plausibly less sophisticated participants, only 2.0% made any changes to their retirement portfolios and less

than 1.0% made large changes to their equity exposure. Following the passage of the Pension Protection

Act of 2006, which increased the use of TDFs as default investment options, U.S. equity markets

experienced their longest bull market in history, increasing over 300% between March 2009 and December


                                                      18
2019. The low rate at which participants abandoned TDFs and managed accounts during the first quarter of

2020 suggests that participants are willing to stick with delegated investment options like TDFs even during

volatile, down markets. The finding that both types of managed account participants were less likely to

make portfolio changes than Pure TDF investors suggests that managed account participants may have

higher levels of trust in portfolios because of the increased customization.

        Among non-delegated participants, the likelihood of making portfolio changes is significantly

higher, but tends to be positively correlated with proxies for investor sophistication. In other words,

portfolio change was most likely among a relatively sophisticated subsample of a relatively sophistication

group of participants. The notable exception is the increased likelihood of large portfolio changes by

participants who experienced job loss during the quarter.

        After documenting significant differences in the likelihood of delegation and job loss across

industries during the first quarter of 2020, we analyze a broader set of participant choices. We find that

partial and full withdrawals are primarily driven by job loss, but that Pure TDF participants and participants

defaulted into managed accounts are the least likely to reduce their deferral rates. These are the two groups

of participants who are the most likely to accept the plan’s default deferral rate. We also find that within

our sample of plans, there are 15 active participants who are terminated during the quarter for every one

participant who becomes an active participant. To the extent that this pattern generalizes, it suggests that

most of the withdrawals around job loss are unlikely to reflect rollovers into the 401(k) plans of new

employers. Whether they reflect rollovers into checking accounts or IRAs, however, we cannot say. To the

extent that participants were liquidating equity at deflated prices to finance liquid savings or consumption,

these participants were locking in market losses.

        When we estimate quarterly returns for participants without a partial or full withdrawal, we find

that they tend to higher, rather than lower, following portfolio changes. The exception is a negative but

statistically insignificant estimate for managed account participants, suggesting that robo-advised managed

account participants are the least likely to benefit from managing their own portfolios.




                                                     19
References

Agnew, J., Balduzzi, P., Sunden, A., 2003. Portfolio choice and trading in a large 401(k) plan, American

        Economic Review 93(1), 193-215.

Baker, S.R., Bloom, N., Davis, S.J., Kost, K.J., Sammon, M.C., Viratyosin, T., 2020. The unprecedented

        stock market impact of COVID-19, NBER Working Paper No. 26945.

Balduzzi, P., Reuter, J., 2019. Heterogeneity in target date funds: Strategic risk-taking or risk matching?

        Review of Financial Studies 32(1), 300-337.

Barber, B., Odean, T., 2001. Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common stock investment.

        Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(1), 261-292.

Ben-Rephael, A., Kandel, S., Wohl, A., 2012. Measuring investor sentiment with mutual funds flows,

        Journal of Financial Economics 104, 363-382.

Bucher-Koenen, T., Ziegelmeyer, M., 2014. Once burned, twice shy? Financial literacy and wealth losses

        during the financial crisis, Review of Finance 18, 2215-2246.

Campbell, J.Y., 2016. Restoring rational choice: The challenge of consumer financial regulation,

        American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings, 106(5), 1-30.

Cerulli Associates. 2020. U.S. Managed Accounts 2019: The Challenge of New Platforms, accessed on

        June 6, 2020 at www.cerulli.com

Chalmers, J., Reuter, J., 2020. Is conflicted investment advice better than no advice? Journal of Financial

        Economics (forthcoming).

Friesen, G., Sapp, T.R.A. 2007. Mutual funds flows and investor returns: An empirical examination of fund

        investor timing ability, Journal of Banking and Finance 31(9), 2796-2816.

Goda, S.G., Levy, M., Manchester, C.F., Sojourner, A., Tasoff, J., 2019. Who is a passive saver under opt-

        in and auto-enrollment?, Working paper.

Madrian, B., Shea, D., 2001. The power of suggestion: inertia in 401(k) participation and savings behavior.

        Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 1149–1187.

Pagliaro, C.A., Utkus, S.P., 2017. A different kind of target-date investor, Vanguard Center for Investor


                                                    20
        Research. Institutional.vanguard.com

ICI, 2020. Investment Company Institute 2019 fact book: A review of trends and activities in the investment

        company industry, http://www.icifactbook.org.

Mitchell, O., Mottola, G.R., Utkus, S.P., Yamaguchi, T., 2006. The inattentive participant: Portfolio trading

        behavior in 401(k) plans, University of Michigan Retirement Research Center working paper.

Mitchell, O, Utkus, S., 2012, Target-date funds in 401(k) retirement plans, NBER Working paper 17911.

Sialm, C., Starks, L., Zhang, H., 2015a. Defined contribution pension plans: Mutual fund asset allocation

        changes, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 105(5), 432-436.

Sialm, C., Starks, L., Zhang, H., 2015b. Defined contribution pension plans: Sticky or discerning money?

        Journal of Finance 70(2), 805-838.

Tamborini, C.R., Purcell, P., Iams, H.M. 2013. The relationship between job characteristics and

        retirement savings in defined contribution plans during the 2007-2009 recession, Monthly Labor

        Review, 136(5), 3-16.

Vanguard, 2019. How America saves 2019. Vanguard Center for Investor Research.

        Institutional.vanguard.com.




                                                     21
                                            Online Appendix for

               Portfolio delegation and 401(k) plan participant responses to COVID-19


                                                June 6, 2020


Table OA1

        In Table OA1, we list each of the narrow investment Morningstar categories that are represented

by participant holdings across the 531 plans, as well as company stock and self-directed brokerage accounts

(SDBA). “Assumed % Equity” is the fund’s assumed allocation to equity. These are based on historical

averages for each category of mutual fund, through December 31, 2019, rounded to the nearest 5 percentage

points. When calculating our measures of equity exposure, we use the same fraction for all funds with the

same narrow investment category and for both December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020. Calculating

portfolio-level measures of equity exposure provides us with a coarse measure of portfolio risk that can

easily be compared within and across participants, summarized in Table 1. The limitation is that assumed

equity exposure ignores the fact that 100% invested in small-cap equity is riskier than 100% in large-cap

equity, and it ignores variation in the riskiness of long-term corporate debt versus short-term government

debt. Despite these limitations, the correlation between our assumed equity exposures, which and average

fund-level returns during the first quarter of 2020 is -0.7495.

        We report total assets under management and the fraction of assets under management within each

narrow category, on both December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020. Changes in AUM reflect the combined

effect of new contributions, withdrawals, exchanges, and fund returns. The correlation between these

category-level percentage changes in AUM and the average fund-level return within the category is 0.6929.

The AUM in Personal Choice Retirement Accounts on December 31, 2019 is $0 because we exclude

participants with positive account balances from our sample.

        We also report the number of mutual funds and the total number of investment options within each

category. The total number includes separate accounts and collective investment trusts, for which we lack



                                                      1
return data. Approximately 70% of the 2,391 distinct investment options across the 531 plans are mutual

funds. (According to Figure 3.16 in the 2019 Investment Company Institute Factbook, 22% of assets in

“large 401(k) plans” were held in collective investment trusts in 2017, up from 6% in 2000.) For the subset

of mutual funds, we report the average return over the first quarter of 2020 and the cross-sectional standard

deviation of quarterly returns. We also report the average after-fee return for mutual funds within the

category. The correlation between our average fund-level returns and the category-level returns from

Morningstar is 0.9811.

Table OA2

        In Table OA2, we assign potential portfolio changes into four categories, which are mutually

exclusive and sum to the probability of “any change.” Column (4) reports the fraction of participants who

made any changes to fund allocations and added balances to at least one new fund and/or removed balances

from at least one prior fund. Column (5) reports the fraction of participants who made any changes to fund

allocations without adding or removing any funds. Column (6) reports the fraction of participants who

added balances to at least one new fund and/or removed balances from at least one prior fund without

making any changes to fund allocations. After correcting for the small number of fund re-mappings,

changes in fund allocations and fund additions and removals are unambiguous signals of participant-

directed changes. Finally, column (7) reports the fraction of participants who are estimated to have made

fund exchanges without adding or completely removing any funds. Because we do not directly observe any

variable that flags partial exchanges, we infer these exchanges by comparing the actual balances of each

fund on March 31, 2020 to predicted balances based on fund (or category) returns. To appear in column

(7), the maximum difference between predicted and actual balances across all of the participant’s funds

must exceed 10%.




                                                     2
Table 1.
401(k) Participant characteristics by investor type.
    This table reports summary statistics for the full sample and separately for five types of participants: opted into managed account, defaulted into managed account, 100% allocation to a single TDF and no other fund balances, 100%
allocated to a single TDF but additional fund balances, and self-directed participants (who are enrolled in neither a managed account nor allocate 100% to a single TDF). Unless otherwise stated, all variables are measured on December
31, 2019. The full sample is limited to plan participants between the ages of 20 and 75 with a non-negative plan tenure on December 31, 2019 and a deferral rate that is no more than 30%. We lack a gender variable for 20.8% of
participants. Because participant allocations across funds need not align with their balances, we report the numbers of funds with positive allocations and positive balances. The "% Equity" variables report equity exposures (reported in
Table OA1) weighted by allocations to the fund or the fund's balance scaled by the account balance. In one case, we deflate the balances on March 31, 2020 using the fund (or category) return during 2020Q1, to minimize the impact of
2020Q1 returns on ending balances.


                                                                      Full sample                Opted into MA               Defaulted into MA                 Pure TDF                    Mixed TDF                    Self-directed
                                                                      N = 617,376                3.5% participants            7.0% participants            43.1% participants            6.9% participants            39.5% participants
                                                                                                    2.2% assets                  4.5% assets                 16.3% assets                   9.0% assets                 68.0% assets
                                                                               Standard                    Standard                     Standard                     Standard                      Standard                     Standard
   Participant characteristic                                       Mean       deviation         Mean      deviation          Mean      deviation          Mean      deviation           Mean      deviation          Mean      deviation
   Age                                                                  44.3        12.3             42.5        12.0             43.7         12.0            42.0         12.4             45.4        12.2             46.8         11.7
   Salary ($000)                                                        97.5       311.2            102.7       126.4             93.7        134.3            73.8        156.2             96.4       143.5            124.1        460.1
   Balance ($000)                                                      113.1       245.2             70.6       162.5             72.9        154.8            43.1         99.7            147.5       260.8            195.5        332.0
   Plan tenure                                                           7.1         7.3              4.6          6.3             6.6          6.8             4.9          5.6              9.2         7.3              9.5          8.2
   Employee deferral rate                                              5.4%        5.6%             6.2%        5.5%             3.9%         4.4%            4.5%         4.4%             6.1%        6.2%             6.5%         6.5%
   Deferral rate of 0%?                                               28.8%       45.3%            23.5%       21,909           34.4%        47.5%           26.0%        43.9%            29.9%       45.8%            30.0%        45.8%
   Deferral rate match imputed default?                               10.2%       30.3%             6.7%       25.0%            13.2%        33.8%           17.4%        37.9%             2.6%       15.9%             3.7%        18.8%
   Roth balance?                                                      17.7%       38.2%            29.0%       45.4%            13.8%        34.5%           10.0%        30.0%            15.5%       36.2%            26.2%        44.0%
   Rollover into account?                                             11.4%       31.8%            15.0%       35.7%             8.1%        27.2%            7.4%        26.2%            12.1%       32.6%            16.0%        36.6%
   Male?                                                              47.6%       49.9%            42.7%       49.5%            46.1%        49.8%           45.4%        49.8%            55.2%       49.7%            49.4%        50.0%
   Female?                                                            31.6%       46.5%            53.0%       49.9%            52.7%        49.9%           31.1%        46.3%            28.9%       45.4%            27.0%        44.4%
   Active on 12/31/19?                                                81.9%       38.5%            88.3%        32.2%           74.3%        43.7%           82.7%        37.8%            82.6%       37.9%            83.0%        37.6%
   Active on 12/31/19 but terminated on 03/31/20?                      3.3%       17.9%             3.0%        17.1%            2.8%        16.4%            3.5%        18.3%             2.2%       14.6%             2.3%        15.1%
   Decrease deferral rate during 2020Q1?                               6.7%       25.0%            10.8%        31.0%            6.1%        23.9%            6.1%        24.0%             5.9%       23.6%             7.2%        25.8%
   Increase deferral rate during 2020Q1?                              11.8%       32.3%             9.5%        29.4%           10.1%        30.2%           11.9%        32.3%            14.3%       35.0%            11.8%        32.2%
   Increase deferral rate by 1% during 2020Q1?                         8.1%       27.2%             6.0%        23.7%            7.9%        27.0%            8.9%        28.4%             9.8%       29.8%             7.1%        25.7%
   Loan balance on 12/31/19?                                          16.4%       37.0%            11.9%        32.3%           14.4%        35.1%           14.8%        35.5%            20.7%       40.5%            18.2%        38.6%
   Loan ratio (when positive on 12/31/19)                             17.6%       14.7%            19.8%        16.0%           20.0%        15.4%           20.0%        14.9%            15.4%       13.3%            15.5%        14.2%
   New loan during 2020Q1?                                             0.9%        9.2%             0.9%         9.7%            0.8%         8.9%            1.0%         9.8%             0.8%        8.6%             0.8%         8.6%
   Partial withdrawal during 2020Q1?                                   0.8%        9.0%             1.0%         9.9%            0.8%         9.0%            0.7%         8.3%             0.8%        8.7%             0.9%         9.6%
   Full withdrawal during 2020Q1?                                      1.4%       11.7%             0.0%         0.0%            0.0%         0.0%               0            0                0           0                0            0
   Funds with a positive allocation on 12/31/19                          4.4         5.1             12.7          3.6            14.2          3.6             1.0          0.0              1.0         0.0              6.2          4.5
   Funds with a positive allocation on 03/31/20                          4.4         5.0             12.6          3.8            13.9          4.1             1.0          0.4              1.0         0.6              6.2          4.5
   Funds with a positive balance on 12/31/19                             4.8         5.2             13.0          3.7            14.4          3.8             1.0          0.0              2.9         1.9              6.8          4.5
   Funds with a positive balance on 03/31/20                             4.8         5.1             12.8          3.8            14.1          4.2             1.0          0.5              3.0         2.0              6.8          4.5
   % Equity using allocations on 12/31/19                             74.5%       21.4%            76.0%        20.7%           70.4%        19.0%           75.9%        15.2%            72.5%       16.1%            74.0%        27.4%
   % Equity using allocations on 03/31/20                             73.9%       22.3%            74.7%        21.8%           69.0%        20.4%           75.7%        15.9%            72.0%       17.4%            73.1%        28.4%
   % Equity using balances on 12/31/19                                75.1%       21.0%            76.2%        20.2%           70.9%        18.5%           75.9%        15.4%            73.6%       18.2%            75.2%        26.5%
   % Equity using return-adjusted balances on 03/31/20                74.5%       22.3%            75.9%        21.5%           70.3%        20.2%           75.6%        16.3%            73.5%       19.7%            74.1%        27.9%
   % Equity using balances on 03/31/20                                73.0%       22.7%            71.7%        22.6%           65.3%        21.3%           75.6%        16.3%            72.9%       20.0%            71.8%        28.3%
Table 2.
Transitions between participant types.
    This table describes participant type transitions between December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020. In addition, we report the fraction of participants who change type,
change type in a manner that increases the level of portfolio delegation (e.g., transitioning from self directed to a managed account), and the fraction that have a positive self-
directed brokerage account balance (SDBA) on March 31, 2020.


                                                             Participant type on March 31, 2020                                             % of participant type who...
     Participant type on       Defaulted             Opted                                                                              Change         Increase            Add
    December 31, 2019           into MA           into MA        Pure TDF       Mixed TDF                 SD                All           type       delegation          SDBA

     Defaulted into MA            42,727                0                0                 0             555            43,282           1.28%             0.00%            0.05%
        Opted into MA                  0           21,529                0                10             370            21,909           1.73%             0.00%            0.05%
             Pure TDF                  0               90          260,921             2,284           2,546           265,841           1.85%             0.03%            0.06%
           Mixed TDF                   0               22            1,582            40,202             849            42,655           5.75%             3.76%            0.12%
          Self-directed                0              623              107               294         242,665           243,689           0.42%             0.42%            0.20%
                     All          42,727           22,264          262,610            42,790         246,985           617,376           1.51%             0.44%            0.12%
Table 3.
Likelihood of participant-directed portfolio changes.
    This table reports the likelihood of participant-directed portfolio changes by participant type. In addition to reporting the fracton of
participants for whom we detect participant-directed changes in fund allocations and/or fund balances, we report the fraction of participants for
whom the net change in equity exposure due to either changes in allocations or changes in fund balances is at least 5 percentage points, at least
10 percentage points, and at least 20 percentage points.


                                                                Decrease     Increase         Decrease    Increase        Decrease    Increase
                                                 Any             equity        equity          equity      equity          equity      equity
                               Sample          portfolio        exposure     exposure         exposure    exposure        exposure    exposure
         Participant type       size            change          >= 5 pp       >= 5 pp         >= 10 pp    >= 10 pp        >= 20 pp    >= 20 pp
                                 (1)              (2)             (4)           (5)             (6)          (7)            (6)          (7)
     Defaulted into MA           43,282            1.28%           0.72%          0.34%           0.67%       0.28%           0.63%       0.19%
        Opted into MA            21,909            1.73%           0.95%          0.45%           0.88%       0.36%           0.82%       0.23%
             Pure TDF           265,841            2.10%           0.86%          0.60%           0.78%       0.41%           0.71%       0.16%
           Mixed TDF             42,655           22.72%           3.01%          5.00%           2.46%       2.18%           1.97%       0.89%
          Self-directed         243,689           15.51%           5.40%          3.45%           4.50%       2.52%           3.69%       1.50%
            Delegated           331,032            1.97%           0.85%          0.56%           0.77%       0.39%           0.70%       0.17%
    Mixed TDF and SD            286,344           16.58%           5.05%          3.68%           4.20%       2.47%           3.43%       1.41%
                     All        617,376            8.74%           2.79%          2.01%           2.36%       1.35%           1.97%       0.74%
Table 4.
Industry-level statistics on separations, withdrawals, deferral rates, and likelihood of portfolio changes.
   This table reports selected summary statistics from Table 1 and Table 3 by industry. It focuses on participants who are active on December 31, 2019, but also reports the number of participants
who become active by March 31, 2020 scaled by the number of active participants on December 31, 2019. Partial withdrawals, changes in deferral rates, and changes in portfolios are calculated
for the subsample of participants without a complete withdrawal.

                                             Participants                       Active 12/31/19      Becomes                                             Deferral rate                        Any
                                               active on                         but terminated      active by        Withdrawal                            Increase      Increase        portfolio
   Industry                       Plans        12/31/19        Delegated?         by 03/31/20?      03/31/20?       Partial?     Full?         Decrease?     by 1%?         > 1%?          change?
   Agriculture                        3              923           73.3%                   3.5%          0.0%          0.7%        0.3%            6.1%         3.5%         3.9%            3.5%
   Arts/Entertainment                 7            5,083           53.6%                   4.0%          0.1%          0.6%        0.6%            7.5%         4.1%         3.7%            5.9%
   Business Support                   6            9,787           60.2%                   3.2%          0.5%          0.8%        0.9%           18.0%         2.9%         2.7%            4.3%
   Construction                      12            6,614           55.0%                   7.1%          0.2%          3.7%        0.6%            8.7%        14.1%         3.2%            2.8%
   Education                          1               30            0.0%                   3.3%          0.0%          0.0%        0.0%            3.3%         3.3%         0.0%           16.7%
   Finance and Insurance             63           81,107           49.8%                   3.5%          0.1%          0.5%        0.6%            8.5%         9.0%         5.2%            7.8%
   Food Services                      4            1,361           65.4%                  16.5%          0.4%          1.0%        3.2%           16.8%         2.1%         2.9%            3.3%
   Health Care                       75           52,494           75.7%                   4.6%          0.4%          0.6%        0.7%            7.2%         6.9%         2.7%            3.7%
   Information                        8            6,455           61.9%                   8.7%          0.1%          0.5%        1.8%            9.8%         1.9%         3.1%            4.3%
   Management                         7            5,478           36.5%                   3.2%          0.1%          0.4%        0.6%            9.3%        12.9%         4.5%            4.5%
   Manufacturing                    110          108,460           47.7%                   4.3%          0.3%          0.7%        0.8%            7.4%        14.5%         4.9%           10.2%
   Mining/Oil/Gas                    10           18,577           63.1%                   2.3%          0.8%          0.6%        0.4%            5.6%         7.6%         4.2%            5.5%
   Other Services                    12           19,619           77.0%                   4.4%          0.3%          1.4%        0.7%            5.4%         2.4%         1.9%            4.9%
   Professional/Scientific          138           91,686           41.3%                   4.1%          0.2%          0.8%        1.1%            8.3%        12.7%         4.9%           18.1%
   Public Administration              2            3,564           28.4%                   2.2%          0.0%          0.3%        0.2%            4.7%         2.9%         1.7%           11.6%
   Real Estate                       11            3,919           50.6%                   3.3%          0.3%          0.4%        0.5%            7.7%         7.2%         5.0%            6.9%
   Retail Trade                      17           35,076           64.8%                   5.3%          0.3%          0.8%        1.0%            7.0%         8.1%         2.9%            3.7%
   Transportation/Storage            22           28,854           37.0%                   2.5%          0.3%          0.5%        0.5%           10.4%         5.6%         6.0%           11.6%
   Utilities                          4            3,370           61.0%                   2.0%          0.2%          0.4%        0.5%            9.3%         4.6%         6.2%            6.4%
   Wholesale Trade                   19           30,268           61.7%                   3.3%          0.1%          0.5%        0.5%            7.4%         6.8%         3.1%            5.4%
   All                              531          512,725           53.3%                   4.0%          0.3%          0.7%        0.8%            8.0%         9.7%         4.3%            9.1%
Table 5.
Predicting portfolio changes during 2020Q1.
   This table reports marginal effects estimated via Probit. The dependent variable in columns (1), (2), and (3) equals one if participant i made any changes to her portfolio during 2020Q1,
and zero otherwise. The dependent variable in column (4) equals one if participant i increased or decreased her exposure to equity by 10 or more percentage points (as indicated in columns
(6) and (7) of Table 3), and zero otherwise. The dependent variable in column (5) is defined similarly, using a threshold of 20 percentage points. The "% Changes in industry" variable
measures the average value of the dependent variable in all other plans within the same industry. The "% Changes in plan" variable measures the average value of the dependent variable
within the plan, excluding participant i. Equity exposure fixed effects are based on fund balances on December 31, 2019. Columns (2), (4), and (5) include industry fixed effects. Column
(3) replaces industry fixed effects with plan fixed effects. Coefficients and standard errors are multipled by 100, so that a marginal effect of 1.00 corresponds to an increase of one percentage
point. Standard errors are clustered on plan and reported inside parentheses to the right of coefficients.


   Dependent variable                                      Any changes in allocations and/or fund exchanges?                            Abs(Change) >= 10 pp            Abs(Change) >= 20 pp
                                                     (1)                           (2)                             (3)                          (4)                             (5)
   Defaulted into MA?                    -1.41 **          (0.68)        -0.33            (0.44)         -2.38    ***     (0.53)          -0.79   ***     (0.17)          -0.39 ***       (0.13)
   Opted into MA?                        -1.36             (0.89)        -1.50 *          (0.71)         -2.28    ***     (0.58)          -0.59   **      (0.23)          -0.21           (0.20)
   Mixed TDF?                            28.20 ***         (7.74)        14.43 ***        (3.45)         15.07    ***     (3.71)           1.80   ***     (0.51)           0.91 ***       (0.25)
   Self-directed?                        13.56 ***         (2.65)         9.43 ***        (0.70)          9.79    ***     (0.72)           3.10   ***     (0.21)           2.10 ***       (0.12)
   % Changes in industry                  0.13             (0.13)
   % Changes in plan                                                      0.31   ***      (0.01)                                           0.26   ***     (0.02)           0.21   ***     (0.02)
   Active?                                1.15   *         (0.56)         2.31   ***      (0.52)           2.14   ***     (0.52)           0.64   ***     (0.09)           0.34   ***     (0.08)
   Terminated during 2020Q1?              1.46   **        (0.63)         1.37   **       (0.64)           1.19   **      (0.54)           1.18   ***     (0.52)           1.31   ***     (0.50)
   Male?                                  2.10   *         (1.35)        -0.11            (0.35)           0.32           (0.55)           0.31   ***     (0.10)           0.26   ***     (0.07)
   Female?                                0.34             (1.15)        -1.16   ***      (0.30)          -0.83   *       (0.49)          -0.43   ***     (0.09)          -0.26   ***     (0.07)
   Ln Plan tenure                        -1.58   ***       (0.35)        -1.02   ***      (0.21)          -1.03   ***     (0.20)          -0.50   ***     (0.08)          -0.35   ***     (0.04)
   Ln Balance                             0.56   ***       (0.18)         0.45   ***      (0.12)           0.47   ***     (0.12)           0.43   ***     (0.04)           0.38   ***     (0.03)
   Ln Salary                             -0.23             (0.35)         0.38   ***      (0.13)           0.39   ***     (0.13)           0.18   ***     (0.05)           0.12   ***     (0.04)
   Ln Age                                -1.72   **        (0.71)        -0.94   *        (0.49)          -1.08   **      (0.46)           0.78   ***     (0.24)           0.78   ***     (0.14)
   Employee deferral rate                 0.12   ***       (0.04)         0.10   ***      (0.02)           0.11   ***     (0.02)           0.06   ***     (0.01)           0.04   ***     (0.01)
   Deferral rate 0%?                      0.08             (0.61)         0.59   **       (0.27)           0.68   ***     (0.23)           0.47   ***     (0.10)           0.36   ***     (0.07)
   Default deferral rate?                 0.22             (0.69)         0.09            (0.48)           0.18           (0.52)          -0.04           (0.15)          -0.17   *       (0.10)
   Roth?                                  1.12   **        (0.53)         1.43   ***      (0.23)           1.47   ***     (0.21)           0.73   ***     (0.07)           0.45   ***     (0.05)
   Rollover into account?                 0.57   *         (0.33)         0.33            (0.31)           0.35           (0.28)           0.19   **      (0.08)           0.15   ***     (0.05)
   Loan?                                  0.24             (0.38)         0.32   **       (0.14)           0.41   ***     (0.12)           0.35   ***     (0.09)           0.37   ***     (0.07)
   Daily std. dev. during 2020Q1          3.05   *         (1.89)        -0.46            (1.22)          -0.17           (1.07)           0.44   **      (0.21)           0.68   ***     (0.14)
   Equity exposure = 10-19%               3.37   ***       (1.54)         5.86 ***        (1.57)           5.60 ***       (1.56)           2.89   ***     (0.63)           0.42   *       (0.26)
   Equity exposure = 20-29%               1.19             (1.75)         4.61 ***        (1.66)           4.14 ***       (1.53)           2.30   ***     (0.47)           0.41   *       (0.23)
   Equity exposure = 30-39%              -0.84             (2.02)         3.04 *          (1.96)           2.92 **        (1.80)           0.71   **      (0.34)          -0.26           (0.16)
   Equity exposure = 40-49%              -2.81             (1.78)         1.31            (1.83)           1.07           (1.65)          -0.32           (0.28)          -0.79   ***     (0.12)
   Equity exposure = 50-59%              -3.36             (1.92)         0.97            (2.10)           0.64           (1.83)          -0.70   **      (0.26)          -1.07   ***     (0.11)
   Equity exposure = 60-69%              -4.78   **        (1.67)        -0.34            (2.20)          -0.51           (1.89)          -1.27   ***     (0.26)          -1.42   ***     (0.11)
   Equity exposure = 70-79%              -5.23   *         (1.90)         0.11            (2.75)          -0.47           (2.24)          -1.40   ***     (0.30)          -1.57   ***     (0.11)
   Equity exposure = 80-89%              -7.16   *         (3.80)         0.04            (3.15)          -0.62           (2.69)          -2.23   ***     (0.46)          -2.77   ***     (0.29)
Equity exposure = 90-100%   -7.54 **        (3.11)   -0.31             (3.52)   -1.10             (2.89)   -2.46 ***      (0.41)   -2.50 ***      (0.25)
Industry fixed effects?                --                     Yes                         --                      Yes                     Yes
Plan fixed effects?                    --                      --                        Yes                       --                      --
Observed probability               8.62                       8.62                       8.63                     3.62                    2.67
Predicted probability              5.46                       4.46                       4.12                     2.12                    1.51
Sample size                      616,412                     616,501                    615,874                 616,501                 616,501
Pseudo-R2                        0.1476                       0.2841                     0.2979                  0.1321                  0.1222
Table 6.
Predicting plan withdrawals and increased loan activity during 2020Q1.
   This table relates participant type to other portfolio choices during 2020Q1. We report marginal effects estimated via Probit. The dependent variable in column (1)
equals one if participant i increased her loan balance or initiated a new loan during 2020Q1, and zero otherwise. The sample is limited to participants who are active at
the beginning and end of 2020Q1, and to plans in which at least one participant had a positive loan balance on December 31, 2020. The dependent variable in column
(2) equals one if participant i reduced her deferral rate by at least one percentage point during 2020Q1. The sample is limited to participants who are active at the
beginning and end of 2020Q1, and who have a positive deferral rate on December 31, 2020. The dependent variable in columns (3) equals one if participant i made
an (imputed) partial withdrawal from her account during 2020Q1, and zero otherwise. The dependent variable in column (4) equals one if participant i withdraws all
plan assets during 2020Q1, and zero otherwise. The limited set of independent variables reflects the limited data that we possess on participants who have an account
balance of $0 at the end of 2020Q1. In particular, we can control for neither participant type nor equity exposure categories. Equity exposure fixed effects in the other
columns are based on fund balances on December 31, 2019. All specifications include industry fixed effects. Coefficients and standard errors are multipled by 100, so
that a marginal effect of 1.00 corresponds to an increase of one percentage point. Standard errors are clustered on plan and reported inside parentheses to the right of
coefficients.


   Dependent variable                          Increase loan balance
                                                     or new loan?               Decrease deferral rate?           Partial withdrawal?              Full withdrawal?
                                                          (1)                            (2)                               (3)                            (4)
   Defaulted into MA?                              0.08           (0.09)          0.35            (0.27)          0.04            (0.09)
   Opted into MA?                                  0.11           (0.10)          2.21 ***        (0.28)          0.27 ***        (0.13)
   Mixed TDF?                                     -0.06           (0.10)          0.79 ***        (0.30)          0.08            (0.09)
   Self-directed?                                 -0.11 **        (0.05)          1.47 ***        (0.14)          0.14 ***        (0.03)
   % Outcome within plan                           0.39 ***       (0.02)          0.58 ***        (0.04)          0.10   ***      (0.01)          0.02 ***        (0.01)
   Active?                                                                                                       -0.71   ***      (0.13)         -2.80 ***        (0.19)
   Terminated during 2020Q1?                                                                                      5.09   ***      (0.95)         19.50 ***        (1.04)
   Male?                                          -0.01           (0.07)         -0.10            (0.24)          0.02            (0.04)
   Female?                                        -0.10           (0.08)          0.32            (0.25)         -0.05            (0.04)
   Ln Plan tenure                                 -0.11   ***     (0.04)         -0.54   ***      (0.12)          0.12   ***      (0.02)         -0.05   ***      (0.02)
   Ln Balance                                      0.01           (0.03)         -0.37   ***      (0.08)         -0.14   ***      (0.02)         -0.04   ***      (0.01)
   Ln Salary                                      -0.26   ***     (0.05)          1.13   ***      (0.18)          0.01            (0.02)          0.01   *        (0.00)
   Ln Age                                          0.11           (0.14)         -2.88   ***      (0.22)          0.85   ***      (0.07)          0.16   ***      (0.05)
   Employee deferral rate                         -0.06   ***     (0.01)          0.37   ***      (0.03)          0.01   ***      (0.00)          0.00            (0.00)
   Deferral rate 0%?                              -0.75   ***     (0.05)                                          0.04            (0.05)          0.09   ***      (0.03)
   Default deferral rate?                         -0.73   ***     (0.13)         -1.94   ***      (0.15)         -0.22   ***      (0.03)         -0.13   ***      (0.04)
   Roth?                                           0.31   ***     (0.06)          4.71   ***      (0.20)          0.07   **       (0.03)
   Rollover into account?                         -0.08           (0.07)          0.53   ***      (0.14)          0.09   **       (0.04)
   Loan?                                           3.74   ***     (0.30)          3.87   ***      (0.17)          0.75   ***      (0.09)
Equity exposure = 10-19%    -0.17          (0.24)   0.34             (0.51)    0.25          (0.21)
Equity exposure = 20-29%     0.16          (0.26)   0.49             (0.49)    0.04          (0.09)
Equity exposure = 30-39%    -0.42 **       (0.18)   0.55             (0.39)    0.00          (0.07)
Equity exposure = 40-49%    -0.65 ***      (0.11)   0.26             (0.32)    0.08          (0.06)
Equity exposure = 50-59%    -0.32 **       (0.13)   0.78   ***       (0.32)   -0.04          (0.05)
Equity exposure = 60-69%    -0.04          (0.14)   0.78   ***       (0.30)   -0.20 ***      (0.04)
Equity exposure = 70-79%     0.07          (0.13)   0.87   ***       (0.28)   -0.14 ***      (0.04)
Equity exposure = 80-89%     0.13          (0.13)   1.27   ***       (0.29)   -0.10 **       (0.05)
Equity exposure = 90-100%   -0.22          (0.13)   1.06   ***       (0.29)   -0.03          (0.05)
Industry fixed effects?            Yes                      Yes                      Yes               Yes
Observed probability               2.32                     6.02                     0.81              1.38
Predicted probability              1.70                     4.46                     0.40              0.13
Sample size                      474,844                   422,406                 616,513            625,959
Pseudo-R2                        0.0838                     0.1585                  0.1624            0.3735
Table 7.
Are portfolio changes associated with lower realized quarterly returns?
     This table relates estimated participant quarterly returns during 2020Q1 to measures of portfolio change, job loss, and equity exposure (based on fund balances on December
31, 2019). The measures of portfolio changes are a dummy variable that equals one when the participant makes "any change" (column (3) in Table 3); a dummy variable that equals
one when the exposure to equity decreases by 10 percentage points or more (based on either allocations or return-adjusted changes in account balances); a dummy variable that
equals one when the exposure to equity increases by 10 percentage points or more (based on either allocations or return-adjusted changes in account balances); and a dummy
variable that equals one when the participant transitions from Mixed TDF or SD to Pure TDF or MA. Our measure of job loss is whether a participant is classified as terminated
during 2020Q1.We estimate separate specifications for three subsamples of participants (as classified on December 31, 2020): those invested through managed accounts; Pure TDF;
and Mixed TDF plus Self-directed. Quarterly returns are inferred from changes in balances between December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020. We control for the level of predicted
retirement contributions during the quarter using annual salary and deferral rate data from December 31, 2019, scaled by the balance on December 31, 2019. We include one
measure for participants who are still active on March 31, 2020 and another measure for participants who are terminated before March 31, 2020, to capture average differences in
the level of participant contributions. We include plan fixed effects interacted with whether the participant is active on December 19, 2019 to control for variation in the level of
employer contributions across active and inactive participants (which we do not directly observe). We include equity exposure category fixed effects based on fund balances on
December 31, 2019. We exclude participants with full or (imputed) partial withdrawals (i.e., those with imputed returns below -50.0%). We also excluded participants for whom the
estimated quarterly returns were likely to be particularly noise due to the timing and level of retirement contributions. Namely, we exclude participants with estimated quarterly
returns in excess of 100.0%, participants for whom predicted portfolio contributions were likely to increase the estimated quarterly return by 25% or more, and participants with
December 31, 2019 balances of $1,000 or less. Coefficients and standard errors are multipled by 100, so that a marginal effect of 1.00 corresponds to an increase of one percentage
point. Standard errors are clustered on plan and reported inside parentheses to the right of coefficients.

                                                                                                        Imputed quarterly return
                                                                MA                                 Pure TDF                                         Mixed TDF and SD
                                                                (1)                       (2)                     (3)                         (4)                        (5)
   Any portfolio change?                                -0.84         (0.53)       2.18 ***     (0.75)                                 1.51 ***      (0.21)
   Decrease exposure to equity by 10 pp?                                                                     1.16 ** (0.58)                                       2.71 ***     (0.61)
   Increase exposure to equity by 10 pp?                                                                     2.30 *** (0.69)                                      0.02         (1.00)
   Increase delegation?                                                                                                                 0.48         (1.67)
   Mixed TDF?                                                                                                                          -0.20         (0.51)      -0.13         (0.60)
   Terminated 2020Q1?                                   -1.03         (0.77)      -1.49 ***     (0.29)      -1.49 *** (0.28)           -0.95 ***     (0.28)      -0.98 ***     (0.28)
   Predicted contributions * Active 2020Q1?              1.33 ***     (0.09)       1.49 ***     (0.06)       1.49 *** (0.06)            1.43 ***     (0.07)       1.44 ***     (0.07)
   Predicted contributions * Terminated 2020Q1?          0.72 ***     (0.14)       0.80 ***     (0.07)       0.80 *** (0.07)            0.77 ***     (0.06)       0.78 ***     (0.06)
   Equity allocation = 10-19%                           0.80    **    (0.39)                                                          -3.79   ***    (0.29)      -3.79   ***   (0.33)
   Equity allocation = 20-29%                          -4.31    ***   (0.46)                                                          -5.72   ***    (0.24)      -5.79   ***   (0.28)
   Equity allocation = 30-39%                          -6.02    ***   (0.68)     -10.68   ***   (3.49)     -10.93   ***   (3.44)      -8.21   ***    (0.25)      -8.31   ***   (0.27)
   Equity allocation = 40-49%                          -8.78    ***   (0.56)     -12.76   ***   (3.44)     -13.00   ***   (3.38)     -10.23   ***    (0.43)     -10.35   ***   (0.43)
   Equity allocation = 50-59%                         -11.00    ***   (0.64)     -14.73   ***   (3.46)     -14.97   ***   (3.41)     -12.91   ***    (0.43)     -13.02   ***   (0.43)
   Equity allocation = 60-69%                         -13.41    ***   (0.66)     -16.57   ***   (3.44)     -16.82   ***   (3.38)     -14.20   ***    (0.38)     -14.31   ***   (0.37)
   Equity allocation = 70-79%                         -15.17    ***   (0.65)     -17.75   ***   (3.43)     -18.00   ***   (3.37)     -16.51   ***    (0.24)     -16.63   ***   (0.22)
   Equity allocation = 80-89%                         -16.35    ***   (0.60)     -20.37   ***   (3.40)     -20.61   ***   (3.35)     -18.15   ***    (0.31)     -18.24   ***   (0.29)
   Equity allocation = 90-100%                        -18.59    ***   (0.83)     -19.25   ***   (3.44)     -19.49   ***   (3.38)     -19.02   ***    (0.52)     -19.16   ***   (0.57)
   Constant                                             1.67 **       (0.77)       4.10         (3.41)       4.36         (3.36)       2.49 ***      (0.28)       2.70 ***     (0.32)
Plan fixed effects * Active?    Yes      Yes       Yes       Yes       Yes
Sample size                    54,627   213,382   213,382   267,277   267,277
R2                              0.398    0.516     0.516     0.535     0.535
Table OA1.
Investment option summary statistics by narrow Morningtar category.
    This table reports summary statistics for each of the 83 narrow Morningstar categories reflected in the menus of the 532 401(k) plans that we study, including our assumed allocation to equity (based on historical
allocations rounded to the nearest 5 percentage points), AUM on December 31, 2019 and March 31, 2020, the number of options for which we observe fund-level returns, and the number of options for which we
observe narrow category level returns. Only 1,661 of the 2,391 unique investment options are mutual funds. The assumed % equity for All options is the equal-weighted average across the 2,391 options.

                                                                                                                                                         Options                   Standard      Options
                                                                                    AUM           AUM           AUM           AUM        Percentage         with      Average      deviation          with     Average
                                            Broad               Assumed           12/31/19       3/31/20      12/31/19       3/31/20         change        fund          fund       of fund      category      category
   Narrow Morningstar category              category            % equity        ($ million)   ($ million)          (%)           (%)       in AUM         return        return        return        return        return

   Target date 2000-2010                    TDF                        35            204.3        185.8         0.27%         0.28%         -9.07%            16       -8.52%         2.29%            38       -7.94%
   Target date 2015                         TDF                        40            356.4        322.7         0.48%         0.49%         -9.48%            13       -9.29%         1.84%            33       -9.48%
   Target date 2020                         TDF                        45           2131.4       1888.4         2.84%         2.89%        -11.40%            22      -10.66%         1.73%            48      -10.04%
   Target date 2025                         TDF                        50           2635.2       2296.8         3.51%         3.52%        -12.84%            26      -12.33%         2.15%            57      -12.19%
   Target date 2030                         TDF                        60           4309.2       3697.5         5.75%         5.66%        -14.19%            25      -14.81%         1.58%            57      -14.26%
   Target date 2035                         TDF                        70           2779.4       2359.0         3.71%         3.61%        -15.13%            26      -16.66%         1.77%            58      -16.56%
   Target date 2040                         TDF                        80           3654.0       3040.3         4.87%         4.65%        -16.80%            26      -18.66%         1.70%            58      -18.27%
   Target date 2045                         TDF                        85           1793.0       1498.2         2.39%         2.29%        -16.44%            25      -19.57%         1.82%            57      -19.60%
   Target date 2050                         TDF                        85           2150.8       1798.3         2.87%         2.75%        -16.39%            26      -20.14%         1.60%            57      -20.04%
   Target date 2055                         TDF                        90            676.3        586.8         0.90%         0.90%        -13.23%            24      -20.04%         1.45%            56      -20.37%
   Target date 2060+                        TDF                        90            216.4        201.0         0.29%         0.31%         -7.11%            24      -20.03%         1.40%            56      -20.71%
   Target date retirement                   TDF                        30            439.0        412.3         0.59%         0.63%         -6.09%            16       -8.26%         2.43%            44       -7.27%
   Allocation 15% to 30% equity             Allocation                 15             55.2         51.4         0.07%         0.08%         -7.00%             5       -8.52%         5.61%             9       -8.58%
   Allocation 30% to 50% equity             Allocation                 35            117.2        114.6         0.16%         0.18%         -2.23%            16       -9.05%         1.98%            59      -12.21%
   Allocation 50% to 70% equity             Allocation                 60           1297.7       1105.8         1.73%         1.69%        -14.79%            38      -14.37%         3.31%            76      -14.74%
   Allocation 70% to 85% equity             Allocation                 75            320.4        255.9         0.43%         0.39%        -20.11%            11      -17.45%         1.08%            32      -19.68%
   Allocation 85%+ equity                   Allocation                 95             13.2         10.6         0.02%         0.02%        -19.75%             3      -19.55%         3.32%            34      -22.79%
   Tactical allocation                      Allocation                 50             33.0         28.4         0.04%         0.04%        -13.73%             1      -16.05%                           3      -13.87%
   World allocation                         Allocation                 50             89.6         74.9         0.12%         0.11%        -16.33%            14      -17.03%         5.13%            16      -17.47%
   Large blend                              US equity                 100          10896.3       8809.0        14.53%       13.48%         -19.16%            71      -21.28%         4.56%            90      -20.92%
   Large growth                             US equity                 100           5608.6       4730.1         7.48%        7.24%         -15.66%            97      -14.50%         5.41%           110      -15.48%
   Large value                              US equity                 100           4223.5       3083.4         5.63%        4.72%         -26.99%            88      -26.57%         4.33%           103      -26.77%
   Mid-cap blend                            US equity                 100           2106.1       1508.9         2.81%        2.31%         -28.36%            36      -27.85%         3.36%            43      -28.28%
   Mid-cap growth                           US equity                 100           1428.6       1113.3         1.91%        1.70%         -22.07%            83      -19.92%         4.08%            92      -20.64%
   Mid-cap value                            US equity                 100            960.1        666.1         1.28%        1.02%         -30.62%            56      -31.98%         4.63%            58      -32.53%
   Small blend                              US equity                 100           3505.4       3363.9         4.67%        5.15%          -4.04%            65      -32.13%         3.18%            78      -32.37%
   Small growth                             US equity                 100           1500.5       1150.8         2.00%        1.76%         -23.31%            92      -23.81%         4.03%            95      -24.59%
   Small value                              US equity                 100           1063.4        659.2         1.42%        1.01%         -38.01%            59      -36.83%         4.39%            62      -36.89%
   Diversified emerging markets             Intl equity               100            728.3        537.5         0.97%         0.82%        -26.20%            52      -24.83%         2.83%            53      -25.26%
   Diversified Pacific/Asia                 Intl equity               100              6.9          5.8         0.01%         0.01%        -16.42%             2      -19.99%         1.25%             2      -20.77%
   Europe stock                             Intl equity               100              0.1          0.0         0.00%         0.00%        -28.94%             1      -25.69%                           1      -24.77%
   Foreign large blend                      Intl equity               100           2580.2       1957.5         3.44%         3.00%        -24.13%            52      -23.97%         3.94%            63      -23.39%
   Foreign large growth                     Intl equity               100           2039.9       1578.1         2.72%         2.42%        -22.64%            40      -18.87%         3.06%            44      -19.08%
   Foreign large value                      Intl equity               100            325.6        226.0         0.43%         0.35%        -30.60%            21      -28.72%         2.70%            22      -27.33%
   Foreign small/mid blend                  Intl equity               100            121.5         86.8         0.16%         0.13%        -28.56%            13      -30.19%         3.72%            13      -28.31%
   Foreign small/mid growth                 Intl equity               100            132.0         98.3         0.18%         0.15%        -25.52%            18      -24.14%         3.00%            19      -24.39%
   Foreign small/mid value                  Intl equity               100             21.2         14.0         0.03%         0.02%        -33.98%             3      -33.38%         1.32%             3      -30.40%
   World large stock                        Intl equity               100            454.8        352.9         0.61%         0.54%        -22.39%            30      -21.63%         5.11%            32      -21.05%
   World small/mid stock                    Intl equity               100             22.1         15.4         0.03%         0.02%        -30.46%             5      -23.00%         1.53%             5      -26.22%
Communications                         Sector         100        0.1        0.0     0.00%     0.00%    -34.35%      1    -18.62%               1    -17.59%
Consumer cyclical                      Sector         100        0.2        0.1     0.00%     0.00%    -32.59%      1    -23.07%               1    -26.33%
Consumer defensive                     Sector         100        0.3        0.0     0.00%     0.00%    -90.53%      1    -14.11%               1    -17.30%
Energy limited partnership             Sector         100        1.1        0.7     0.00%     0.00%    -38.24%      1    -49.32%               1    -50.29%
Equity energy                          Sector         100        2.2        1.3     0.00%     0.00%    -41.87%      5    -45.00%   9.07%       5    -53.36%
Equity precious metals                 Sector         100        0.9        0.6     0.00%     0.00%    -37.25%      2    -14.80%   6.04%       2    -25.96%
Financial                              Sector         100       82.1       84.6     0.11%     0.13%      3.08%      1    -34.99%               2    -34.67%
Global real estate                     Sector         100      129.9       88.5     0.17%     0.14%    -31.89%     18    -27.12%   2.98%      18    -26.19%
Health                                 Sector         100       39.8       34.2     0.05%     0.05%    -13.94%      5    -12.01%   1.18%       5    -13.94%
Industrials                            Sector         100        0.6        0.4     0.00%     0.00%    -30.45%      2    -28.26%   0.54%       2    -28.47%
Infrastructure                         Sector         100        0.0        0.0     0.00%     0.00%    -18.00%      1    -22.77%               1    -21.41%
Natural resources                      Sector         100        0.8        0.3     0.00%     0.00%    -58.57%      4    -35.79%   6.31%       4    -33.28%
Real estate                            Sector         100      423.6      322.1     0.56%     0.49%    -23.97%     29    -24.12%   1.75%      32    -26.35%
Technology                             Sector         100       92.8       82.3     0.12%     0.13%    -11.27%     13    -12.45%   4.17%      13    -14.39%
Utilities                              Sector         100        1.8        1.4     0.00%     0.00%    -22.04%      3    -15.52%   1.93%       3    -15.51%
Long-short equity                      Alternative     60       12.5        9.7     0.02%     0.01%    -21.78%      6    -17.87%   3.88%       6    -12.40%
Managed futures                        Alternative     50        1.3        1.6     0.00%     0.00%     20.36%      3     -1.31%   9.18%       3      0.03%
Market neutral                         Alternative     50        0.7        0.7     0.00%     0.00%     -1.00%      1     -2.39%               1     -4.07%
Multialternative                       Alternative     50        3.5        3.3     0.00%     0.00%     -7.26%      5     -5.43%    5.15%      5     -9.71%
Options-based                          Alternative     90       12.3       10.3     0.02%     0.02%    -16.26%      2     -7.46%    3.61%      2    -12.93%
Commodities broad basket               Commodities     20       47.9       34.0     0.06%     0.05%    -29.01%      9    -28.05%    6.20%     10    -24.72%
Commodities precious metals            Commodities      0        7.4        8.3     0.01%     0.01%     11.65%      3     -3.93%   16.45%      3     -3.93%
Bank loan                              Taxable bond     0       17.5       14.5     0.02%     0.02%    -17.35%      4    -13.51%   2.02%       4    -12.45%
Corporate bond                         Taxable bond     0       25.0       22.6     0.03%     0.03%     -9.82%      2     -3.26%   3.92%       2     -4.74%
Emerging markets bond                  Taxable bond     0       13.4       10.7     0.02%     0.02%    -20.39%      9    -14.70%   2.40%       9    -14.59%
Emerging markets local-currency bond   Taxable bond     0        8.8        6.2     0.01%     0.01%    -30.35%      2    -17.39%   3.59%       2    -13.98%
High yield bond                        Taxable bond     0      185.0      157.7     0.25%     0.24%    -14.77%     41    -13.62%   2.43%      41    -12.70%
Inflation-protected bond               Taxable bond     0      536.0      563.6     0.71%     0.86%      5.15%     24      0.55%   1.69%      28     -0.16%
Intermediate core bond                 Taxable bond     0     2987.5     3252.6     3.98%     4.98%      8.88%     29      2.36%   1.46%      44      1.57%
Intermediate core-plus bond            Taxable bond     0     2406.5     2521.4     3.21%     3.86%      4.77%     49     -0.12%   2.26%      53     -1.10%
Intermediate government                Taxable bond     0      172.0      182.3     0.23%     0.28%      5.98%     28      5.41%   2.12%      28      4.23%
Long government                        Taxable bond     0        1.0        2.7     0.00%     0.00%    171.43%      2     21.54%   0.99%       2     20.48%
Long-term bond                         Taxable bond     0        7.1        8.4     0.01%     0.01%     17.67%      2      4.19%   3.01%       2     -0.63%
Multisector bond                       Taxable bond     0      166.5      153.3     0.22%     0.23%     -7.93%     17     -9.74%   2.99%      17     -8.95%
Nontraditional bond                    Taxable bond     0       46.5       41.6     0.06%     0.06%    -10.54%     14     -5.94%   1.84%      14     -7.55%
Preferred stock                        Taxable bond     0        2.7        2.4     0.00%     0.00%    -10.63%      1    -13.51%               1    -17.90%
Short government                       Taxable bond     0      159.0      176.9     0.21%     0.27%     11.22%     10      2.63%   1.10%      10      2.15%
Short-term bond                        Taxable bond     0      366.3      406.4     0.49%     0.62%     10.96%     34     -2.10%   2.62%      34     -2.14%
Stable value                           Taxable bond     0     3792.6     4580.9     5.06%     7.01%     20.78%      0                         87      0.56%
Ultrashort bond                        Taxable bond     0       11.9       11.6     0.02%     0.02%     -1.99%      3     -0.72%   1.25%       3     -1.76%
World bond                             Taxable bond     0       60.9       62.0     0.08%     0.09%      1.83%     12     -7.75%   5.37%      13     -5.02%
World bond-USD hedged                  Taxable bond     0       87.4       86.4     0.12%     0.13%     -1.22%     10     -1.89%   2.85%      10     -1.86%
Money market - taxable                 Money market     0      845.4     1134.0     1.13%     1.74%     34.13%      7      0.31%   0.03%      25      0.25%
Prime money market                     Money market     0      161.0      208.0     0.21%     0.32%     29.14%      4      0.37%   0.03%       5      0.28%
Company stock                                         100        3.0        2.4     0.00%     0.00%
Loan fund                                               0     1063.7     1074.7     1.42%     1.64%
Personal choice retirement account                      0        0.0       84.4     0.00%     0.13%
All Options                                           68.2   74,985.1   65,337.3   100.00%   100.00%             1,661   -18.47%   10.82%   2,391   -17.30%
Table OA2.
Likelihood of participant-directed portfolio changes.
   This table reports the likelihood of participant-directed portfolio changes by participant type. Column (3) reports the likelihood of any
change. For participants investing through a managed account, column (3) reports the fraction who stop using the managed account
product during 2020Q1. For all other participants, column (3) reports the sum of the likelihoods in columns (4) through (7). Column (4)
contains the fraction of participants who changed fund allocations and also added or removed funds. Column (5) contains the fraction of
participants who changed fund allocations without adding or removing any funds. Column (6) contains the fraction of participants who
added or removed funds without changing fund allocations. Column (7) contains the fraction of participants that neither added nor
removed funds nor made any changes to their fund allocations, but for whom we infer a fund exchange.


                                                                                                                   Fund
                                                                              Change in        Change in         add/drop          Other
                                                                Any           allocations      allocations        without         imputed
                              Sample                          portfolio        and fund       without fund      changes in          fund
       Participant type        size         No change          change          add/drop         add/drop        allocations      exchanges
                                (1)            (2)               (3)              (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)
   Defaulted into MA            43,282         98.72%             1.28%
      Opted into MA             21,909         98.27%             1.73%
           Pure TDF            265,841         97.90%             2.10%           1.01%             0.08%           1.00%            0.00%
         Mixed TDF              42,655         77.28%            22.72%           1.87%             0.33%          13.41%            7.12%
        Self-directed          243,689         84.49%            15.51%           5.11%             2.96%           5.00%            2.44%
          Delegated            331,032         98.03%             1.97%           1.09%             0.07%            0.80%           0.00%
  Mixed TDF and SD             286,344         83.42%            16.58%           4.63%             2.57%            6.25%           3.13%
                   All         617,376         91.26%             8.74%           2.73%             1.23%            3.33%           1.46%
