NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SCARRING BODY AND MIND:
THE LONG-TERM BELIEF-SCARRING EFFECTS OF COVID-19
Julian Kozlowski
Laura Veldkamp
Venky Venkateswaran
Working Paper 27439
http://www.nber.org/papers/w27439

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2020

The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect official positions of
the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, the Federal Reserve System, the Board of Governors, or
the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Kenneth Rogoff for a generous and
insightful discussion, as well as Dean Corbae and Pablo D'Erasmo for sharing data on corporate
defaults and Marco Del Negro and Andrea Tambalotti for liquidity and interest rate data.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w27439.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
Â© 2020 by Julian Kozlowski, Laura Veldkamp, and Venky Venkateswaran. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including Â© notice, is given to the source.

Scarring Body and Mind: The Long-Term Belief-Scarring Effects of COVID-19
Julian Kozlowski, Laura Veldkamp, and Venky Venkateswaran
NBER Working Paper No. 27439
June 2020, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. E0,G12
ABSTRACT
The largest economic cost of the COVID-19 pandemic could arise from changes in behavior long
after the immediate health crisis is resolved. A potential source of such a long-lived change is
scarring of beliefs, a persistent change in the perceived probability of an extreme, negative shock
in the future. We show how to quantify the extent of such belief changes and determine their
impact on future economic outcomes. We find that the long-run costs for the U.S. economy from
this channel is many times higher than the estimates of the short-run losses in output. This
suggests that, even if a vaccine cures everyone in a year, the COVID-19 crisis will leave its mark
on the US economy for many years to come.
Julian Kozlowski
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
1421 Dr Martin Luther King Dr
St Louis, MO 63106
kozjuli@gmail.com
Laura Veldkamp
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris 421
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
lv2405@columbia.edu

Venky Venkateswaran
Stern School of Business
New York University
7-81 44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
and also NBER
vvenkate@stern.nyu.edu

One of the most pressing questions of the day is the economic costs of the COVID-19
pandemic. While the virus will eventually pass, vaccines will be developed, and workers will
return to work, an event of this magnitude could leave lasting eects on the nature of economic
activity. Economists are actively debating whether the recovery will be V-shaped, U-shaped or
L-shaped.

1

Much of this discussion revolves around condence, fear and the ability of rms and

consumers to rebound to their old investment and spending patterns. Our goal is to formalize
this discussion and quantify these eects, both in the short- and long-run. To explore these
conjectures about the extent to which the economy will rebound from this COVID-induced
downturn, we use a standard economic and epidemiology framework, with one novel channel: a
scarring eect. Scarring is a persistent change in beliefs about the probability of an extreme,
negative shock to the economy. We use a version of Kozlowski et al. (2020), to formalize this
scarring eect and quantify its long-run economic consequences, under dierent scenarios for
the dynamics of the crisis.
We start from a simple premise: No one knows the true distribution of shocks in the economy.
Consciously or not, we all estimate the distribution using past events, like an econometrician
would. Tail events are those for which we have little data. Scarce data makes new tail event
observations particularly informative. Therefore, tail events trigger larger belief revisions. Furthermore, because it will take many more observations of non-tail events to convince someone
that the tail event really is unlikely, changes in tail risk beliefs are particularly persistent.
We have seen the scarring eect in action before. Before 2008, few people entertained the
possibility of a nancial crisis in the US. Today, more than a decade after the Global Financial
Crisis, the possibility of another run on the nancial sector is raised frequently, even though the
system today is probably much safer (Baker et al., 2019). Likewise, businesses will make future
decisions with the risk of another pandemic in mind. Observing the pandemic has taught us
that the risks were greater than we thought. It is this new-found knowledge that has long-lived
eects on economic choices.
To explore tail risk in a meaningful way, we need to use an estimation procedure that does
not constrain the shape of the distribution's tail. Therefore, we allow our agents to learn about
the distribution of aggregate shocks non-parametrically. Each period, agents observe one more
piece of data and update their estimates of the distribution. Section I shows how this process
leads to long-lived responses of beliefs to transitory events, especially extreme, unlikely ones.
The mathematical foundation for such persistence is the martingale property of beliefs. The
logic is that once observed, the event remains in agents' data set. Long after the direct eect
of the shock has passed, the knowledge of that tail event aects beliefs and therefore, continues
to restrain economic activity.

1 See e.g., Summers (FT, 2020), Krugman (2020), Reinhart and Rogo (2020) and Cochrane (2020).

2

To illustrate the economic importance of these belief dynamics, Section II embeds our belief
updating tool in a macroeconomic model with an epidemiology event that erodes the value of
capital. This framework is designed to link tail events like the current crisis to macro outcomes
in a quantitatively plausible way and has been used  e.g. by Gourio (2012) and Kozlowski et al.
(2020)  to study the 2008-09 Great Recession. It features, among other elements, bankruptcy
risk and elevated capital depreciation from social distancing, which separates labor from capital.
Section III describes the data we feed into the model to discipline our belief estimates. Section
IV combines model and data and uses the resulting predictions to show how belief updating
can generate large, persistent losses. We compare our results to those from the same economic
model, but with agents who have full knowledge of the distribution, to pinpoint belief updating
as the source of the persistence.
We model the economic eects of the COVID-19 crisis as a combination of a productivity
decline and accelerated capital obsolescence. We use the well-known SEIR (susceptible-exposedinfected-recovered) framework from the epidemiology literature to model the disease spread.
But, it is the response to the disease that is the source of the adverse economic shock in
our model. Our structure is capable of generating large asset price uctuations, of the order
observed at the onset of the pandemic, and provides a simple mapping from social distancing
policies and other mitigation behavior to economic costs. It also allows us to connect to existing
studies on tail risk in macroeconomics and nance. We present results for dierent scenarios,
reecting the considerable uncertainty about outcomes even in the short-run. Our point is not
to make a forecast of the coming year's events but that that whatever you think will happen
over the next year, the ultimate costs of this pandemic are much larger than your short-run
calculations suggest.
In the rst scenario, GDP drops by about 9% in 2020, recovers gradually but does not go
back to its previous trajectory. It persistently remains about 4% below the previous pre-COVID
steady state.

The discounted value of the lost output is almost 10 times the 2020 drop and

belief revisions account for bulk of the losses (almost 6 times the short-run eect). Greater tail
risk makes investing less attractive, reducing the stock of productive capital and (and therefore,
labor input demand) persistently. In the second scenario, which captures a milder mitigation
response to the spread of the disease, both short- and long-run economic costs are longer, but
the relative importance of belief revisions remains the same.
The model also makes a number of predictions about asset prices. Interestingly, after an
initial shock, credit spreads and equity valuations are predicted to roughly return to their
original level.

This is because rms respond to this increase in riskiness by cutting back on

debt. The eects of scarring are more clearly noticeable in options prices. In scenario 1, for
example, the option-implied third moment in the risk-neutral distribution of equity returns

3

becomes signicantly more negative.
For monetary policy makers, one of the most pressing questions is how belief scarring will
aect the long-run natural rate of interest, often referred to as r-star." Following the onset
of COVID in the U.S., interest rates declined rapidly. A signicant portion of that decline is
related to demand for liquidity. In order to understand how much of that decline was temporary
and how much permanent  and more broadly about the interaction of liquidity and scarring 
we introduce a role for liquid assets in an extension of our baseline model in Section V. When
most capital is only partially pledgeable, but riskless assets are fully pledgeable, riskless assets,
of course have more value. But what we learn is that value is sensitive to tail risk. A persistent
increase in perceived risk from COVID-19 depresses the long-run natural rate of interest by 67
basis points.
Our results also imply that a policy that prevents capital depreciation or obsolescence, even
if it has only modest immediate eects on output, can have substantial long-run benets, several
times larger than the short-run considerations that often dominate policy discussion. Obviously,
no policy can prevent people from believing that future pandemics are more likely than they
originally thought, but policy can change how the ongoing crisis aects capital returns.

By

changing that mapping, the costs of belief scarring can be mitigated. For example, bankruptcies
can lead to destruction of specic investments and a permanent erosion in the value of capital.
Interventions which prevent widespread bankruptcies can thus limit the adverse eects of the
crisis on returns and yield substantial long-run benets. While the short-run gains from limiting
bankruptcies is well-understood, our analysis shows that neglecting the eect on beliefs leads
one to drastically underestimate the benets of such policies.
Of course, future governments could also invest in public health to mitigate the cost of
future pandemics. The ability of such an investment to heal beliefs depends on the nature of
belief changes induced by this episode. If we onlu updated our beliefs about the ability of a
particular type of communicable diseases to disrupt economic activity, then health investments
will be highly eective. However, traumatic events often leave survivors with a more general
sense that unexpected, disastrous events can arise without warning. This more amorphous fear
will be much harder for policy to combat.

Comparison to the literature

There are many new studies of the impact of the COVID-

19 pandemic on the U.S. economy, both model-based and empirical.

Alvarez et al. (2020),

Eichenbaum et al. (2020) and Farboodi et al. (2020) use simple economic frameworks to analyze
the costs of the disease and the associated mitigation strategies. Leibovici et al. (2020) use an
input-output structure to investigate the extent to which a shock to contact-intensive industries
can propagate to the rest of the economy.

Koren and PetÂ® (2020) build a detailed theory-

4

based measures of the reliance of U.S. businesses on human interaction.

On the empirical

side, Ludvigson et al. (2020) use VARs to estimate the cost of the pandemic over the next few
months, while Carvalho et al. (2020) use high-frequency transaction data to track expenditure
and behavior changes in real-time.

We add to this discussion by focusing on the long-term

eects from changes in behavior that persist long after the disease is gone.
Other papers share our focus on long-run eects. Jorda et al. (2020) study rates of return
on assets using a data-set stretching back to the 14th century, focusing on 15 major pandemics
(with more than 100,000 deaths). Their evidence suggests a sustained downward pressure on
interest rates, decades after the pandemic, consistent with long-lasting macroeconomic aftereects. Reinhart and Rogo (2009) examine long-lived eects of nancial crises. Correia et al.
(2020) nd evidence of persistent declines in economic activity following the 1918 inuenza
pandemic.

A few papers also use beliefs but rely on other mechanisms, such as nancial

frictions, for propagation. Elenev et al. (2020) and Krishnamurthy and Li (2020) propagate the
shock primarily through nancial balance sheet eects. In a more informal discussion, Cochrane
(2020) explores whether the recovery from the COVID-shock will be V, U or L shaped. This
work formalizes many of the ideas in that discussion.
Outside of economics, biologists and socio-biologists have noted long ago that epidemics
change the behavior of both humans and animals. Loehle (1995) explore the social barriers to
transmission in animals as a mode of defense against pathogen attack. Past disease events have
eects on mating strategies, social avoidance, group size, group isolation, and other behaviors
for generations. Gangestad and Buss (1993) nd evidence of similar behavior among human
communities.
In the economics realm, a small number of uncertainty-based theories of business cycles also
deliver persistent eects from other sorts of transitory shocks. In Straub and Ulbricht (2013)
and Van Nieuwerburgh and Veldkamp (2006), a negative shock to output raises uncertainty,
which feeds back to lower output, which in turn creates more uncertainty. To get even more persistence, Fajgelbaum et al. (2017) combine this mechanism with an irreversible investment cost,
a combination which can generate multiple steady-state investment levels. These uncertaintybased explanations are dicult to embed in quantitative DSGE models and to discipline with
macro and nancial data.
Our belief formation process is similar to the parameter learning models by Johannes et al.
(2016), Cogley and Sargent (2005) and Kozeniauskas et al. (2014) and is similar to what is
advocated by Hansen (2007). However, these papers focus on endowment economies and do not
analyze the potential for persistent eects in a setting with production.

2

The most important

2 Other learning papers in this vein include papers on news shocks, such as, Beaudry and Portier (2004),
Lorenzoni (2009), Veldkamp and Wolfers (2007), uncertainty shocks, such as Jaimovich and Rebelo (2006),

5

dierence is that our non-parametric approach allows us to incorporate beliefs about tail risk.

I

Belief Formation

Before laying out the underlying economic environment, we begin by explaining how we formalize the notion of belief scarring, the non-standard, but most crucial part of our analysis.
We then embed it in an economic environment and quantify the eect of belief changes from
the COVID-19 pandemic on the US economy.
No one knows the true distribution of shocks to the economy.

All of us  whether in

our capacity as economic agents or modelers or econometricians  estimate such distributions,
updating our beliefs as new data arrives. Our goal is to model this process in a reasonable and
tractable fashion.

The rst step is to choose a particular estimation procedure.

A common

approach is to assume a normal or other parametric distribution and estimate its parameters.
The normal distribution, with its thin tails, is unsuited to thinking about changes in tail
risk. Other distributions raise obvious concerns about the sensitivity of results to the specic
distributional assumption used. To minimize such concerns, we take a non-parametric approach
and let the data inform the shape of the distribution.
Specically, we employ a kernel density estimation procedure, one of most common approaches in non-parametric estimation. Essentially, it approximates the true distribution function with a smoothed version of a histogram constructed from the observed data. By using the
widely-used normal kernel, we impose a lot of discipline on our learning problem but also allow
for considerable exibility. We also experimented with a handful of other kernels.
Consider a shock

Ï†Ìƒt

whose true density

do know that the shock
history of all shocks
an estimate

gÌ‚t

Ï†Ìƒt

Ï†Ìƒt

g

is unknown to agents in the economy. The agents

is i.i.d. Their information set at time

t,

denoted

It ,

includes the

observed up to and including t. They use this available data to construct

of the true density

g.

Formally, at every date, agents construct the following

normal kernel density estimator of the pdf

 
gÌ‚t Ï†Ìƒ =

g

nt âˆ’1
1 X
â„¦
nt Îºt s=0

Ï†Ìƒ âˆ’ Ï†Ìƒtâˆ’s
Îºt

!
(1)

â„¦ (Â·) is the standard normal density function, Îºt is the smoothing or bandwidth parameter
and nt is the number of available observations of at date t. As new data arrives, agents add the

where

new observation to their data set and update their estimates, generating a sequence of beliefs

{gÌ‚t }.
Bloom et al. (2018), Nimark (2014) and higher-order belief shocks, such as Angeletos and La'O (2013) or Huo
and Takayama (2015).

6

The key mechanism in the paper is the persistence of belief changes induced by transitory

Ï†Ìƒt shocks. This stems
t information (It ), the

from the martingale property of beliefs  i.e.
estimated distribution is a martingale.

conditional on time-

Thus, on average, the agent

expects her future belief to be the same as her current beliefs. This property holds exactly if the
bandwidth parameter

Îºt

is set to zero and holds with tiny numerical error in our application.

In line with the literature on non-parametric assumption, we use the optimal bandwidth.

4

3

As

a result, any changes in beliefs induced by new information are expected to be approximately
permanent. This property plays a central role in generating long-lived eects from transitory
shocks.

II

Economic and Epidemiological Model

To gauge the magnitude of the scarring eect of the COVID-19 pandemic on long-run economic
outcomes, we need to embed it in an economic model in which tail risk and belief changes can
have meaningful eects. For this, a model needs two key features. First, it should have the
potential for `large' shocks, that have both transitory and lasting eects.

The former would

include lost productivity from stay-at-home orders preventing services from reaching consumers.
But for this shock to look like the extreme event it is to investors, the model must also allow for
the possibility of a more persistent loss of productive capital. This loss represents the interior
of the restaurant that went bankrupt, or the unused capacity of the hotel that will not ll again
for many years to come.

When stay-at-home orders forced consumers to work and consume

dierently, it persistently altered tastes and habits, rendering some capital obsolete. One might
think this is hard-wiring persistence in the model. Yet, as we will show, this loss of capital by
itself has a short lived eect and typically triggers an investment boom, as the economy rebuilds
capital better suited to the new consumption normal. We explore two possible scenarios that
highlight the enormous importance of preventing capital obsolescence, because of the scarring
of beliefs.
The second key feature is sucient curvature in policy functions, which serves to make

3 As
any

Îºt â†’ 0,
jâ‰¥1

h
Et

GÌ‚0t+j

the CDF of the kernel converges to

  i
Ï†Ìƒ It = Et

"

1
nt + j

ntX
+jâˆ’1

 
GÌ‚0t Ï†Ìƒ =

n
o
1 Ï†Ìƒt+jâˆ’s â‰¤ Ï†Ìƒ It

s=0

#
=

1
nt

o
Pnt âˆ’1 n
s=0 1 Ï†Ìƒtâˆ’s â‰¤ Ï†Ìƒ .

Then, for any

Ï†Ìƒ,

and

 
h n
o i
nt
j
GÌ‚0t Ï†Ìƒ +
Et 1 Ï†Ìƒt+1 â‰¤ Ï†Ìƒ It
nt + j
nt + j

Thus, future beliefs are, in expectation, a weighted average of two terms - the current belief and the distribution
from which the new draws are made. Since our best estimate for the latter is the current belief, the two terms
are exactly equal, implying

4 See Hansen (2015).

h
  i
 
Et GÌ‚0t+j Ï†Ìƒ It = GÌ‚0t Ï†Ìƒ .

7

economic activity sensitive to the probability of extreme large shocks. Two ingredients  namely,
Epstein-Zin preferences and costly bankruptcy  combine to generate signicant non-linearity
in policy functions.
It is important to note that none of these ingredients guarantee persistent eects. Absent
belief revisions, shocks, no matter how large, do not change the long-run trajectory of the
economy. Similarly, the non-linear responses induced by preferences and debt inuence the size
of the economic response, but by themselves do not generate any internal propagation. They
simply govern the magnitude of the impact, both in the short and long run.
To this setting, we add belief scarring. We model beliefs using the non-parametric estimation
described in the previous section and show how to discipline this procedure with observable
macro data, avoiding free parameters. This belief updating piece is not there to generate the
right size reaction to the initial shock.

Instead, belief updating adds the persistence, which

considerably inates the cost.

II.A

The Disease Environment

This block of the model serves to generate a time path for disruption to economic activity, which
will then be mapped into transitory productivity shock and capital obsolescence . Of course,
we could have directly created scenarios for the shocks and arrived at the same predictions.
The explicit modeling of the spread of disease allows us to see how dierent social distancing
policies map into shocks and ultimately into long-term economic costs from belief scarring.
Given this motivation, we build on a very simple SEIR model, which is a discrete-time version
of Atkeson (2020) or Stock (2020), who build on work in the spirit of Kermack and McKendrick
(1927).

To this model, we add two ingredients:

1) a behavioral/policy rule that imposes

capital idling when the infection rate increase (for example, this rule could represent optimal
behavior or government policy); and 2) a higher depreciation rate of unused capital.

While

we normally think of capital utilization depreciating capital, this is a dierent circumstance
where habits, technologies and norms are changing more rapidly than normal. Unused capital
may be restaurants whose customers nd new favorites, old conferencing technologies replaced
with new online technology or oce space that will be replaced with home oces. This higher
depreciation rate represents a speeding up of capital obsolescence.

Disease and shutdowns

On January 20 2020, the rst case of COVID was documented in

the U.S. Therefore, we start our model on that day, with one infected person. Because we are
examining persistence mechanisms, we want to impose a clear end date to the COVID shock.
Therefore, we assume that COVID-19 will be over by the end of 2020. The SEIR model predicts
the evolution of the pandemic. Our policy shutdown rule, maps the infection rate series into a

8

value for the aggregate shock to the US economy in 2020. From 2021 onwards, we assume that
COVID-19 will be over. However, we explore scenarios where the economy may suer other
pandemics in the future.
Time is discrete and innite. For the disease part of the model, we will count time in days,
indexed by tÌƒ. Later, to describe long-run eects, we will change the measure of time to t, which
represents years. There are

S

Let

N

agents in the economy. At date 1, the rst person gets infected.

represent the number of people susceptible to the disease, but not currently exposed,

S(1) = N âˆ’ 1. Let E be
the number of exposed persons and I be the number infected. We start with E(1) = 0 and
I(1) = 1. Finally, D represents the number who are either recovered or dead, where D(1) = 0.

infected, dead or recovered. At date 1, that susceptible number is

The following four equations describe the dynamics of the disease.

The parameter

Î³I

S(tÌƒ + 1) = S(tÌƒ) âˆ’ Î²ÌƒtÌƒ S(tÌƒ)I(tÌƒ)/N

(2)

E(tÌƒ + 1) = E(tÌƒ) + Î²ÌƒtÌƒ S(tÌƒ)I(tÌƒ)/N âˆ’ ÏƒE E(tÌƒ)

(3)

I(tÌƒ + 1) = I(tÌƒ) + ÏƒE E(tÌƒ) âˆ’ Î³I I(tÌƒ)

(4)

D(tÌƒ + 1) = D(tÌƒ) + Î³I I(tÌƒ)

(5)

is the rate at which people exit infection and become deceased or recovered.

Thus, the expected duration of infection is approximately
infected person has with a susceptible person is
susceptible
We put

Î²Ìƒ

1/Î³I ,

and the number of contacts an

times the fraction of the population that is

S(tÌƒ)/N . The initial reproduction rate, often referred to as R0 is therefore Î²Ìƒ/Î³I .
a t subscript on Î²ÌƒtÌƒ because behavior and policy can change it. When the infection

rate rises, people reduce infection risk by staying home.
contacts, reducing
by assuming that

This reduces the number of social

Î²Ìƒ . Lockdown policies also work by reducing Î²Ìƒ . We capture this relationship
Î²Ìƒ can vary between a maximum of Î³I R0 and a minimum of Î³I Rmin . Rmin is

the estimated U.S. reproduction rate for regions under lockdown. Where on the spectrum the
contact rate lies depends on the last 30-day change in infection rates, measured with a 15-day
lag.

5

Let

âˆ†It

be the dierence between the average 15-29 day past infections and the average of

30-44 day infections:

âˆ†It = (1/15)

P29

Ï„ =15

I(t âˆ’ Ï„ ) âˆ’

P44

Ï„ =30

I(t âˆ’ Ï„ )



. This captures the fact

that most policy makers are basing policy on two-week changes in hospitalization rates, which
are themselves observed with a 14-day lag.

Then policy and individual behavior achieves a

5 This is consistent with the U.S. ocial policy on re-opening (CDC, 2020). Note that individual optimal
choice to social distance are also included in this policy. These optimal choices look similar. See Kaplan et al.
(2020).

9

frequency of social contact:

Î²ÌƒtÌƒ = Î³I Ã— min(R0 , max(Rmin , R0 âˆ’ Î¶ âˆ— âˆ†It ))

(6)

The key part of the epidemic from a belief-scarring perspective is that reducing the contact
rate requires separating labor from capital. In other words, capital is idle. No capital is idled
(full capacity) when no mitigation eorts are underway, i.e. when
capital idling (K

âˆ’

Î²ÌƒtÌƒ = Î³I R0 .

But as

Î²ÌƒtÌƒ

falls,

) rises. We formalize that relationship as

KtÌƒâˆ’ = Î¸Ìƒ âˆ— (R0 âˆ’ Î²ÌƒtÌƒ /Î³I ).
Î´Ìƒ .

Idle capital depreciates as a rate

(7)

As mentioned before, this is not physical deterioration

of the capital stock. Instead, it represent a loss of value from accelerated obsolescence due to
changes in tastes, habits and technologies. It could also represent a loss in value because of
persistent upstream or downstream supply chain constraints.

II.B

The Economy

Preferences and technology:
the daily time index

tÌƒ

To describe long-term economic consequences, we switch from

t.

to an annual time index

An innite horizon, discrete time economy

has a representative household, with preferences over consumption (Ct ) and labor supply (Lt ):


Ut = (1 âˆ’ Î²)
where

Ïˆ

cÎ³t (1


1âˆ’Î³ 1âˆ’Ïˆ

âˆ’ lt )

+

1âˆ’Î·
Î²Et Ut+1

 1âˆ’Ïˆ
1âˆ’Î·

is the inverse of the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution,

indexes the share of consumption in the period utility function, and
The economy is also populated by a unit measure of rms,
the representative household.

1
 1âˆ’Ïˆ

(8)

Î·

indexes risk-aversion,

Î² represents time preference.
indexed by i and owned by

Firms produce output with capital and labor, according to a

standard Cobb-Douglas production function

zt kitÎ± lit1âˆ’Î± .

Aggregate uncertainty is captured by a single random variable,

g(Â·).

time and drawn from a distribution

depends on the realized default rate

Def t

Ï†Ìƒt ,

6

over

The eect of this shock on economic activity

t, characterized
Ï†t â‰¡ Î¦(Ï†Ìƒt , Def t ). The

(the fraction of rms who default in

later in this section). Formally, it induces a capital obsolescence `shock'

Î¦(Â·) will made explicit later.

which is i.i.d.

The i.i.d. assumption is made in order to avoid an

additional, exogenous, source of persistence.

function

Î³

This composite shock has both permanent and transitory

6 The i.i.d. assumption also has empirical support. In the next section, we use macro data to construct a
time series for

Ï†Ìƒt .

We estimate a (statistically insignicant) autocorrelation of

10

0.15.

eects. The permanent component works as follows: a rm that enters the period

kÌ‚it

has eective capital

kit = Ï†t kÌ‚it .

In addition to this permanent component, the shock
the TFP term

zt = Ï†Î½t .

t with capital

The parameter

Î½

Ï†t

also has a temporary eect, through

governs the relative strength of the transitory compo-

nent. This specication allows us to capture both permanent and transitory disruptions with
only one source of uncertainty.

By varying

Î½,

we can capture a range of scenarios without

having to introduce additional shocks.
Firms are also subject to an idiosyncratic shock

vit .

These shocks scale up and down the

total resources available to each rm (after paying labor, but before paying debtholders' claims)



Î it = vit zt kitÎ± lit1âˆ’Î± âˆ’ Wt lit + (1 âˆ’ Î´)kit
where

Î´

is the ordinary rate of capital depreciation.

capital is already removed from

kit ,

via the shock

rms and are drawn from a known distribution,
normalized to be one:

R

vit di = 1.

Ï†t .
F .7

(9)

The additional obsolescence from idle
The shocks

vit

are i.i.d. across time and

The mean of the idiosyncratic shock is

The primary role of these shocks is to induce an interior

default rate in equilibrium, allowing a more realistic calibration, particularly of credit spreads.

What is capital obsolescence?

Capital obsolescence shock reects a long-lasting change

in the economic value of the average unit of capital. A realization of

Ï†<1

captures the loss of

specic investments or other forms of lasting damage from a prolonged shutdown. This could
come from the lost value of cruise ships that will never sail again, businesses that do not reopen, loss of customer capital or just less intensive use of commercial space due to a persistent
preference for more distance between other diners, travelers, spectators or shoppers. It could
also represent permanent changes in health and safety regulations that make transactions safer,
but less ecient from an economic standpoint.
An important question is whether future investment could be made in ways or in sectors
that avoid these costs. Of course, such substitution is likely to happen to some extent. But, the
fact that the patterns of investment were not chosen previously suggests that these adjustments
are costly or less protable. More importantly, we learned that the world is riskier and more
unpredictable than we thought. The shocks that hit one sector (or type of capital) today may
hit another tomorrow, in ways that are impossible to foresee.

Credit markets and default:

Firms have access to a competitive non-contingent debt mar-

ket, where lenders oer bond price (or equivalently, interest rate) schedules as a function of

7 This is a natural assumption: with a continuum of rms and a stationary shock process, rms can learn
the complete distribution of any idiosyncratic shocks after one period.

11

aggregate and idiosyncratic states, in the spirit of Eaton and Gersovitz (1981). A rm enters

t+1

period

with an obligation,

bit+1

to bondholders The shocks are then realized and the

rm's shareholders decide whether to repay their obligations or default. Default is optimal for
shareholders if and only if

Î it+1 âˆ’ bit+1 + Î“t+1 < 0
where

Î“t+1

is the present value of continued operations. Thus, the default decision is a function

of the resources available to the rm

bit+1 .

the obligations to bondholders

Î it+1 (output plus undepreciated capital less wages) and
Let rit+1 âˆˆ {0, 1} denote the default policy of the rm.

In the event of default, equity holders get nothing. The productive resources of a defaulting
rm are sold to an identical new rm at a discounted price, equal to a fraction
value of the defaulting rm. The proceeds are distributed

of the

among the bondholders.

8

i in period t, i.e. the rm receives qit in
exchange for a promise to pay one unit of output at date t + 1. Debt is assumed to carry a tax
advantage, which creates incentives for rms to borrow. A rm which issues debt at price qit
and promises to repay bit+1 in the following period, receives a date-t payment of Ï‡qit bit+1 , where
Ï‡ > 1. This subsidy to debt issuance, along with the cost of default, introduces a trade-o in
Let

qit

pro-rata

Î¸ <1

denote the bond price schedule faced by rm

the rm's capital structure decision, breaking the Modigliani-Miller theorem.

9

For a rm that does not default, the dividend payout is its total available resources, minus
its payments to debt and labor, minus the cost of building next period's capital stock (the
undepreciated current capital stock is included in

Î it ),

plus the proceeds from issuing new

debt, including its tax subsidy

dit = Î it âˆ’ bit âˆ’ kÌ‚it+1 + Ï‡qit bit+1 .

(10)

Importantly, we do not restrict dividends to be positive, with negative dividends interpreted
as (costless) equity issuance.

Thus, rms are not nancially constrained, ruling out another

potential source of persistence.

Bankruptcy and obsolescence:
capital obsolescence,

Next, we spell out the relationship between default and

Ï†t = Î¦(Ï†Ìƒt , Def t )

where

Def t â‰¡

R

rit di.

This is meant to capture the

idea that widespread bankruptcies can amplify the erosion in the economic value of capital
arising from the primitive shock

Ï†Ìƒt .

This might come from lost supply chain linkages, inter-

8 In our baseline specication, default does not destroy resources - the penalty is purely private. This is not
crucial - it is straightforward to relax this assumption by assuming that all or part of the cost of the default
represents physical destruction of resources.

9 The subsidy is assumed to be paid by a government that nances it through a lump-sum tax on the

representative household.

12

rm relationships or other ways in which economic activity is inter-connected. For example,
a retailer might ascribe a lower value to space in a mall if a number of other stores go out of
business. Similarly, a manufacturer might need to undertake costly search or make adjustments
to his factory in order to accommodate new suppliers. We capture these eects with a exible
functional form:

,
ln Ï†t = ln Î¦(Ï†Ìƒt , Def t ) = ln Ï†Ìƒt âˆ’ Âµ Def 1âˆ’$
t
where

Âµ

$

and

(11)

are parameters that govern the relationship between default and the loss of

capital value.

Timing and value functions:
1. Firms enter the period with a capital stock

kÌ‚it

and outstanding debt

2. The aggregate capital obsolescence shocks are realized.

10

bit .

Labor choice is made and pro-

duction takes place.
3. Firm-specic shocks

{0, 1})

vit

are realized. The rm decides whether to default or repay (rit

âˆˆ

its debt claims and distribute any remaining dividends.

kÌ‚it+1

4. The rm makes capital

and debt

bit+1

choices for the following period.

In recursive form, the problem of the rm is







V kÌ‚it , bit , vit , St = max 0,

max
dit ,lit ,kÌ‚it+1 ,bit+1

where

Mt+1

 
dit + Et Mt+1 V kÌ‚it+1 , bit+1 , vit+1 , St+1 ,


(12)

is the representative households's stochastic discount factor, subject to

Dividends:
Resources:

Bond price:

dit â‰¤ Î it âˆ’ bit âˆ’ kÌ‚it+1 + Ï‡qit bit+1


Î it = vit zt kitÎ± lit1âˆ’Î± âˆ’ Wt lit + (1 âˆ’ Î´)kit
"
#
Î¸VÌƒit+1
qit = Et Mt+1 rit+1 + (1 âˆ’ rit+1 )
bit+1

Finally, rms hire labor in a competitive market at a wage

Wt .

(13)
(14)

(15)

We assume that this decision

is made after observing the aggregate shock but before the idiosyncratic shocks are observed,

10 To simulate the COVID-19 pandemic, we run the epidemiology model from Section II.A for one year and
use the predicted capital obsolescence as the realized shock for 2020. For more details, see Section III.

13

i.e. labor choice is solves the following static problem:

max zt (Ï†t kÌ‚it )Î± lit1âˆ’Î± âˆ’ Wt lit
lit

The rst max operator in

(12)

captures the rm's option to default. The expectation

Et

is taken over the idiosyncratic and aggregate shocks, given beliefs about the aggregate shock
distribution.

The value of a defaulting rm is simply the value of a rm with no external

obligations, i.e.



VÌƒit = V kÌ‚it , 0, vit , St

The aggregate state

St



.

consists of

(KÌ‚t , Ï†Ìƒt , It )

It

where

is the economy-wide information

set. Equation (15) reveals that bond prices are a function of the rm's capital

kÌ‚it+1

and debt

bit+1 , as well as the aggregate
state St . The rm takes the aggregate state and the function

qit = q kÌ‚it+1 , bit+1 , St as given, while recognizing that its choices aect its bond price.

Information, beliefs and equilibrium

The set

It

includes the history of all shocks

observed up to and including time-t. The expectation operator
this information set.
density is

gÌ‚(Ï†Ìƒ).

Et

Ï†Ìƒt

is dened with respect to

Expectations are probability-weighted integrals, where the probability

The function

gÌ‚

arises from using the kernel density estimation procedure in

equation (1).
For a given belief

gÌ‚ , a recursive equilibrium is a set of functions for (i) aggregate consumption

and labor that maximize (8) subject to a budget constraint, (ii) rm value and policies that
solve

(12)

, taking as given the bond price function

(15)

and the stochastic discount factor,

(iii) aggregate consumption and labor are consistent with individual choices and (iv) capital
obsolescence is consistent with default rates according to (11).

II.C

Characterization

The equilibrium of the economic model is a solution to the following set of non-linear equations.
First, the fact that the constraint on dividends (13) will bind at the optimum can be used
to substitute for
variables

dit

in the rm's problem (12).

(kÌ‚it+1 , bit+1 )

This leaves us with 2 inter-temporal choice

and a default decision. The latter is described by a threshold rule in the

idiosyncratic output shock

vit :

(
rit =

which implies that the default rate

0
1

if
if

vit < v t
vit â‰¥ v t

Deft = F (v t ).

redene variables and cast the problem as a choice of

It turns out to be more convenient to

kÌ‚it+1

and leverage,

levit+1 â‰¡

bit+1
. The
kÌ‚it+1

full characterization to the Appendix. Since all rms make symmetric choices for these objects,

14

i

in what follows, we suppress the

subscript. The optimality condition for

kÌ‚t+1

is:

k
k
h(v t+1 )]
] + (Ï‡ âˆ’ 1)levt+1 qt âˆ’ (1 âˆ’ Î¸)E[Mt+1 Rt+1
1 = E[Mt+1 Rt+1
k
Rt+1
=

where

The object

k
Rt+1

is the

ex-post

1âˆ’Î±
Î±
Ï†Î±+Î½
t+1 kÌ‚t+1 lt+1 âˆ’ Wt+1 lt+1 + (1 âˆ’ Î´) Ï†t+1 kÌ‚t+1

kÌ‚t+1

(16)
(17)

per-unit, post-wage return on capital, which is obviously a

levt+1
while
function of the obsolescence shock Ï†t . The default threshold is given by v t+1 =
k
Rt+1
Rv
h (v) â‰¡ âˆ’âˆž vf (v)dv is the default-weighted expected value of the idiosyncratic shock.
The rst term on the right hand side of (16) is the usual expected direct return from
investing, weighted by the stochastic discount factor. The other two terms are related to debt.
The second term reects the indirect benet to investing arising from the tax advantage of debt
- for each unit of capital, the rm raises

Ï‡âˆ’1

bt+1
q from the bond market and earns a subsidy of
kÌ‚t+1 t

on the proceeds. The last term is the cost of this strategy - default-related losses, equal

to a fraction

1âˆ’Î¸

of available resources.

Ï†t , which in turn is aected by default,
t+1
implicitly denes a xed-point
v t+1 = lev
Rk

Note that the default threshold is a function of
through (11). Therefore, the threshold equation

t+1

relationship:

v t+1 =

levt+1
levt+1
= Î±+Î½ Î±âˆ’1 1âˆ’Î±
k
Rt+1
Ï†t+1 kÌ‚t+1 lt+1 âˆ’ Wt+1 kÌ‚lt+1 + (1 âˆ’ Î´) Ï†t+1

(18)

t+1

Next, the rm's optimal choice of leverage,



levt+1
(1 âˆ’ Î¸) Et Mt+1 k f
Rt+1



levt+1
k
Rt+1




=

levt+1

Ï‡âˆ’1
Ï‡



is




levt+1
Et Mt+1 1 âˆ’ F
.
k
Rt+1


(19)

The left hand side is the marginal cost of increasing leverage - it raises the expected losses from
the default penalty (a fraction

1âˆ’Î¸

of the rm's value). The right hand side is the marginal

benet - the tax advantage times the value of debt issued.
Finally, rm and household optimality implies that labor solves the intra-temporal condition:

1 âˆ’ Î³ ct
(1 âˆ’ Î±)yt
= Wt =
lt
Î³ 1 âˆ’ lt
The optimality conditions, (16) -

(20),

(20)

along with those from the household side, form the

system of equations we solve numerically.

15

III

Measurement, Calibration and Solution Method

This section describes how we use macro data to estimate beliefs and parameterize the model,
as well as our computational approach. A strength of our theory is that we can use observable
data to estimate beliefs at each date.

Measuring past shocks

Of course, we have not seen a health event like COVID in the last

95-100 years. However, from an economic point of view, COVID is one of many past shocks to
returns that happens to be larger. When we think about COVID changing our beliefs, or our
perceived probability distribution of outcomes, those outcomes are realized returns on capital.
Therefore, to estimate the pre-COVID and post-COVID probability distributions, we rst set
out to measure past capital returns that map neatly into our model.
A helpful feature of capital obsolescence shocks, like the ones in our model, is that their
mapping to available data is straightforward. A unit of capital installed in period
part of

KÌ‚t )

Ï†t units of consumption
t âˆ’ 1 to t is simply Ï†t .

is, in eective terms, worth

change in its market value from

goods in period

t âˆ’ 1 (i.e. as
t. Thus, the

We apply this measurement strategy to annual data on commercial capital held by US
corporates. Specically, we use two time series Non-residential assets from the Flow of Funds,
one evaluated at market value and the second, at historical cost.

NFAMV
t

NFAHC
t

11

We denote the two series

Ï†t ,
MV
note that, in line with the reasoning above, NFAt
maps directly to eective capital in the
MV
k
k
.
model. Formally, letting Pt the nominal price of capital goods in t, we have Pt Kt = NFAt
HC
HC
k
Investment Xt can be recovered from the historical series, Ptâˆ’1 Xt = NFAt
âˆ’ (1 âˆ’ Î´) NFAtâˆ’1 .
k
Combining, we can construct a series for Ptâˆ’1 KÌ‚t :
by

and

respectively.

To see how these two series yield a time series for

k
k
k
Ptâˆ’1
KÌ‚t = (1 âˆ’ Î´)Ptâˆ’1
Ktâˆ’1 + Ptâˆ’1
Xt
V
HC
= (1 âˆ’ Î´)NFAM
âˆ’ (1 âˆ’ Î´) NFAHC
tâˆ’1 + NFAt
tâˆ’1

Finally, in order to obtain
we proxy changes in

Ptk

Ï†t =

Kt
, we need to control for nominal price changes. To do this,
KÌ‚t

using the price index for non-residential investment from the National

11 These are series FL102010005 and FL102010115 from Flow of Funds.

16

Income and Product Accounts (denoted

Ï†t =

Kt
KÌ‚t


=

=

!

Ptk Kt
k
Ptâˆ’1
KÌ‚t

V
(1 âˆ’ Î´)NFAM
tâˆ’1

PINDX t ).12

PINDX ktâˆ’1
PINDX kt

!

V
NFAM
t
+ NFAHC
âˆ’ (1 âˆ’ Î´) NFAHC
t
tâˆ’1

Using the measurement equation

(21),

insignicant at

1

and

PINDX ktâˆ’1
PINDX kt



!

0.03

The mean and standard deviation of the

respectively.

The autocorrelation is statistically

0.15.

Next, we recover the primitive shock

Ï†Ìƒt

from the time series

Ï†t .

To do this, we use (11),

along with data on historical default rates from Moody's Investors Service (2015)
for the feedback parameters
estimated

(Âµ, $)

13

and values

as described below. The rst panel of Figure 2 shows the

Ï†Ìƒ.

Parameterization
Î² = 0.95,

(21)

we construct an annual time series for capital de-

preciation shocks for the US economy since 1950.
series over the entire sample are

This yields:

A period

t

is interpreted as a year.

We choose the discount factor

Î´ = 0.06, and the share of capital in the production, Î±, is 0.40. The
recovery rate upon default, Î¸ , is set to 0.70, following Gourio (2013). The distribution for the

 2
ÏƒÌ‚
2
2
with ÏƒÌ‚ chosen
idiosyncratic shocks, vit is assumed to be lognormal, i.e. ln vit âˆ¼ N âˆ’ , ÏƒÌ‚
2
14
to target a default rate of 0.02.
The share of consumption in the period utility function, Î³ , is
depreciation

set to 0.4.
For the parameters governing risk aversion and intertemporal elasticity of substitution, we
use standard values from the asset pricing literature and set

Ïˆ = 0.5

(or equivalently, an IES

2) and Î· = 10. The tax advantage parameter Ï‡ is chosen to match a leverage target of
0.50, the ratio of external debt to capital in the US data  from Gourio (2013). Finally, we set
the parameters of the default-obsolescence feedback function, namely Âµ and $ . Ideally, these
of

parameters would be calibrated to match the variability of default and its covariance with
the observed

Ï†t

shock. Unfortunately, our one-shock model fails to generate enough volatility

in default rates and therefore, struggles to match these moments.

Fixing this would almost

certainly require a richer model with multiple shocks and more involved nancial frictions. We

12 Our results are robust to alternative measures of nominal price changes, e.g. computed from the price
index for GDP or Personal Consumption Expenditure.

13 The Moody's data are for rated rms and shows a historical average default rate of 1% (our calibration

implies a default rate of 2%), probably reecting selection. Accordingly, we scaled the Moody's estimates by a
factor of 2 while performing this calculation. We also used estimates of exit and bankruptcy rates from Corbae
and D'Erasmo (2017) and found broadly similar results.

14 This is in line with the target in Khan et al. (2017), though a bit higher than the one in Gourio (2013).

We veried that our quantitative results are not sensitive to this target.

17

take a simpler way out here and target a relatively modest feedback with values of
and

$ = 0.5.

Âµ = 0.2

These values imply roughly an amplication 3% at a baseline default rate of 2%,

rising to 5% for a 6% default.

15

Epidemiology parameters.

A major hurdle to quantifying the long-run eects is the lack of

data and uncertainty surrounding estimates of the short-run impact. While this will surely be
sorted out in the months to come, for now, with the crisis still raging and policy still being set,
the impact is uncertain. More importantly for us, the nature of the economic shock is uncertain.
It may be a temporary closure with furloughs, or it could involve widespread bankruptcies and
changes in habits that permanently separate workers from capital or make the existing stock
of capital ill-suited to the new consumption demands. Since it is too early to know this, we
present two possible scenarios, chosen to illustrate the interaction between learning and the
type of shock we experience. All involve signicant losses in the short term but their long-term
eects on the economy are drastically dierent.
We begin by describing parameter choices that are xed across the scenarios.
Wang et al. (2020)'s study of infection in Hubei, China, we calibrate

Following

ÏƒE = 1/5.2 and Î³I = 1/18

to the average duration of exposure (5.2 days) and infection (18 days).

We use an initial

R0 = 3.5, based on more recent estimates of higher antibody prevalence
and more asymptomatic infection than originally thought and Rmin = 0.8 based on the estimates
reproduction number of

of the spread in New York, at the peak of the lockdown (Center for Disease Control, 2020).
This implies that the initial number of contacts per period must be
The extent to which capital idling reduces contact rates is set

Î²Ìƒ = Î³I R0 .
to Î¸Ìƒ = 1/3.

This implies

that a lockdown which reduces the reproduction number to 0.8 is associated with 50% capital
idling. This is broadly consistent with the 25% drop in output, estimated during the lockdown
period in Hubei province, China. The rate of excess depreciation of idle capital at the rate of
6.5% per month or

Î´Ìƒ = 0.065/30

daily. As we will see, this implies a 10% erosion of the value

of capital in our rst scenario, which lines up with the drop in commercial real estate prices
since the pandemic started  see CPPI (2020).
The two scenarios, which dier in the sensitivity of lockdown policy to observed infection
increases, i.e.

the parameter

Î¶I .

In scenario 1, we set

Î¶I = 300,

which generates an initial

lockdown that lasts for 2 months. This version of the model predicts waves of re-infection and
new lockdowns in the months to come, echoing predictions by the Center for Disease Control.
Scenario 2, which considers a much less aggressive response by setting

Î¶I = 50,

has only one

lockdown episode.

15 Section VI studies a version without default amplication and nds that it generates similar patterns,
albeit with slightly smaller magnitudes, as our benchmark economy.

18

Table 1 summarizes the resulting parameter choices.
Parameter

Value

Description

0.95
10
0.50
0.40

Discount factor

0.40
0.06
0.28

Capital share

1.06
0.70
0.2
0.5

Tax advantage of debt

3.5

Initial disease reproduction rate

0.8

Minimum U.S. disease reproduction rate

1/52

Exposure to infection transition rate

1/18

Recovery / death rate

300 (50)

Lockdown policy sensitive to past infections

0.19

Capital idling required to reduce transmission

0.002

Excess depreciation (daily) of idle capital

Preferences:

Î²
Î·
Ïˆ
Î³

Risk aversion
1/Intertemporal elasticity of substitution
Share of consumption in the period utility function

Technology:

Î±
Î´
ÏƒÌ‚

Depreciation rate
Idiosyncratic volatility

Debt:

Ï‡
Î¸
Âµ
$

Recovery rate
Default-obsolescence feedback
Default-obsolescence elasticity

Disease / Policy:

R0
Rmin
ÏƒE
Î³I
Î¶I
Î¸Ìƒ
Î´Ìƒ
Table 1:

Parameters

Numerical solution method

Number in parentheses is used in scenario 2.

Since curvature in policy functions is an important feature

of the economic environment, our algorithm solves equations
collocation method.

(20) âˆ’ (19)

Appendix A.B describes the iterative procedure.

with a non-linear

In order to keep the

computation tractable, we need one more approximation. The reason is that date-t decisions
(policy functions) depend on the current estimated distribution (gÌ‚t (Ï†Ìƒ)) and the probability
distribution

h

over next-period estimates,

gÌ‚t+1 (Ï†Ìƒ).

Keeping track of

h(gÌ‚t+1 (Ï†Ìƒ)),

(a compound

lottery) makes a function a state variable, which renders the analysis intractable.
the approximate martingale property of

gÌ‚t

However,

discussed in Section I oers an accurate and com-

putationally ecient approximation to this problem. The martingale property implies that the

Et [gÌ‚t+1 (Ï†Ìƒ)] â‰ˆ gÌ‚t (Ï†Ìƒ), âˆ€Ï†Ìƒ. Therefore, when computing policy
compound distribution h(gÌ‚t+1 (Ï†Ìƒ)) with the simple lottery gÌ‚t (Ï†Ìƒ),

average of the compound lottery is
functions, we approximate the

which is today's estimate of the probability distribution.

We use a numerical experiment to

show that this approximation is quite accurate. The reason for the small approximation error

19

is that

h(gÌ‚t+1 )

gÌ‚t (Ï†Ìƒ), with a small standard deviation.
mean gÌ‚t (Ï†Ìƒ). For 1-10 years ahead, where

results in distributions centered around

Even 30 periods out,

gÌ‚t+30 (Ï†Ìƒ)

is still quite close to its

most of the utility weight is, this standard error is tiny.
To compute our benchmark results, we begin by estimating
described above. Given this

gÌ‚2019 ,

gÌ‚2019

using the data on

Ï†Ìƒt

we compute the stochastic steady state by simulating the

model for 5000 periods, discarding the rst 500 observations and time-averaging across the
remaining periods.

This steady state forms the starting point for our results.

Subsequent

results are in log deviations from this steady state level. Then, we subject the model economy
to two possible additional adverse realizations for 2020, one at a time. Using the one additional
data point for each scenario, we re-estimate the distribution, to get

gÌ‚2020 .

To see how persistent

economic responses are, we need a long future time series. We don't know what distribution
future shocks will be drawn from.

Given all the data available to us, our best estimate is

gÌ‚2020 . Therefore, we simulate future paths by drawing many sequences of future Ï†Ìƒ shocks
from the gÌ‚2020 distribution. In the results that follow, we plot the mean future path of various

also

aggregate variables.

IV

Main Results

Our goal in this paper is to quantify the long run eect of the COVID crises, stemming from
the belief scarring eect, i.e. from learning that pandemics are more likely than we thought.
We formalize and quantify the eect on beliefs, using the assumption that people do not know
the true distribution of aggregate economic shocks and learn about it statistically. This is the
source of the long-run economic eects. Comparing the resulting outcomes to ones from the
same model under the assumption of full knowledge of the distribution (no learning) reveals
the extent to which beliefs matter.
But rst, we briey describe the disease spread, the policy reaction and the economic shocks
these policies generate.

Epidemiology and economic shutdown.

Figure 1 illustrates the spread of disease, in both

scenarios, as well as the response, which results in capital idling. Recall that Scenario 2 has

Î¶I = 50, i.e. a policy that is six times less
Î¶I = 300 policy in scenario 1. As a result,

responsive to changes in the infection rate than the
it also has signicantly less idle capital and a faster

spike in infection rates.
For our purposes, the sucient statistic in each scenario is the realization for
scenario 1, the COVID-19 shock implies

Ï†Ìƒt = 0.9,

i.e.

Ï†Ìƒ2020 .

In

the loss of value due to obsolescence

is equal to 10% of the capital stock. In scenario 2, only 5% of capital is lost to obsolescence:

20

Infection Dynamics
Scenario 1

Disease R and Capital
Scenario 1

susceptible
infected
recovered/dead

300

3.5
3
2.5

200

Rate

Millions of US residents

400

2

Capital use
Disease R

1.5

100

1

0
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

0.5
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Scenario 2

Scenario 2 (less social distance)
350

Millions of US residents

3.5
300
250

susceptible
infected
recovered/dead

3

200

2.5

150

2

100

1.5

50

1

0
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Figure 1:

capital use
R

0.5
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Disease spread and capital dynamics.

Parameters listed in Table 1. Scenario 1 uses an aggressive lockdown policy
more relaxed policy of

Ï†Ìƒt = 0.95.

Î¶I = 300,

while scenario 2 uses a

Î¶I = 50.

The target for the initial, transitory impact is line with most forecasts for 2020: a

9% (or 6%) annual decline in GDP. This is likely a conservative estimate for Q2 2020, but more
extreme than some forecasts for the entire year.

How much belief scarring?

We apply our kernel density estimation procedure to the

capital return time series and our two scenarios to construct a sequence of beliefs.
words, for each t, we construct

{gÌ‚t } using the available time series until that point.

In other

The resulting

estimates for 2019 and 2020 are shown in Figure 2. The dierences are subtle. Spotting them
requires close inspection where the dotted and solid lines diverge, around 0.90 and 0.95, in
scenarios 1, and 2 respectively. They show that the COVID-19 pandemic induces an increase
in the perceived likelihood of extreme negative shocks. In scenario 1, the estimated density for
2019 implies near zero (less than

10âˆ’5 %)

chance of a

21

Ï†Ìƒ = 0.90

shock; the 2020 density attaches

a 1-in-70 or 1.4% probability to a similar event recurring.

Capital Quality

Scenario 1

1.15

Scenario 2

15

15
Prior
Posterior

0.5

1.05
1

10
0
0.85

0.9

0.95

5

Prior
Posterior

0.5

Density

Density

1.1

10
0
0.85

0.9

0.95

5

0.95
0

0.9

1960

1980

0.9

2000

1

1.1

1.2

0

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

Beliefs about the probability distribution of outcomes, plotted before and
during the COVID-19 crisis.

Figure 2:

The rst panel shows the realizations of

Ï†Ìƒ.

The second and third panels show the estimated kernel densities for

2019 (solid line) and 2020 (dashed line) for the two scenarios. The subtle changes in the left tail represent the
scarring eect of COVID-19.

As the graph shows, for most of the sample period, the shock realizations are in a relatively
tight range around 1, but we saw a large adverse realizations during the Great Recession of

0.93

in 2009. This reects the large drops in the market value of non-residential capital stock.

The COVID shock is now a second extreme realization of negative capital returns in the last
20 years. It makes such an event appear much more likely.

Scenario 2

Scenario 1

0

Change in GDP (p.p)

Change in GDP (p.p)

0
-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
-0.1
2020
Figure 3:

Learning
No learning (REE)

2040

2060

2080

-0.02
-0.04
-0.06
-0.08
-0.1
2020

2100

Learning
No learning (REE)

2040

2060

2080

2100

Output with scarring of beliefs (solid line) and without (dashed line).

Units are percentage changes, relative to the pre-crisis steady-state, with 0 being equal to steady state and
meaning 10% below steady state.
Scenario 1:

Ï†Ìƒ2020 = 0.90

Eect on GDP

Common parameters listed in Table 1.

Scenario 2:

âˆ’0.1

Scenario-specic parameters are:

Ï†Ìƒ2020 = 0.95.

Observing a tail event like the COVID-19 pandemic changes output in a

persistent way. Figure 3 compares the predictions of our model for total output (GDP) to an

22

identical model without learning. The units are log changes, relative to the pre-crisis steadystate.

In the model without learning, agents are assumed to know the true probability of

pandemics.

As a result, when they see the COVID crisis, they do not update the distribu-

tion. This corresponds to the canonical rational expectations assumption in macroeconomics.
The model with learning, which uses our real-time kernel density estimation to inform beliefs,
generates similar short-term reactions, but worse long-term eects. The post-2020 paths are
simulated as follows:

each economy is assumed to be at its stochastic steady state in 2019

and is subjected to the same 2020

Ï†Ìƒ

shock; subsequently, sequences of shocks drawn from the

estimated 2020 distribution.
The scenarios under learning correspond to what one might call a V-shaped or tilted-V
recession: the recovery after the shock has passed is signicant but not complete. Note that the
drop in GDP on impact is a calibration target  what we are interested in its persistence, which
arguably matters more for welfare.

The graph shows that, in Scenario 1, learning induces a

long-run drop in GDP of about 4%. The right panel shows a similar pattern but the magnitudes
are smaller. Of course, agents also learn from smaller capital obsolescence shocks. These also
scar their beliefs going forward.

But the scarring is much less, producing only a 3% loss in

long-run annual output.
Higher tail risk (i.e.

greater likelihood of obsolescence going forwards) increases the risk

premium required on capital investments, leading to lower capital accumulation. It is important that these shocks make capital obsolete, rather than just reduce productivity, because
obsolescence has a much bigger eect on capital returns than lower productivity does. Labor
also contracts, but that is a reaction to the loss of available capital that can be paired with
labor. When a chunk of capital becomes mal-adapted and worthless, that is an order of magnitude more costly to the investor than the temporary decline in capital productivity. Since
most of the economic eect works through capital risk deterring investment, that lower return
is important to get the economic magnitudes right.

Turning o belief updating

When agents do not learn, both scenarios exhibit quick and

complete recoveries, even with a large initial impact. Without the scarring of beliefs, facilities
are re-tted, workers nd new jobs, and while the transition is painful, the economy returns to
its pre-crisis trajectory relatively quickly. In other words, without belief revisions, the negative
shock leads to an investment boom, as the economy replenishes the lost eective capital. While
the curvature in utility moderates the speed of this transition to an extent, the overall pattern
of a steady recovery back to the original steady state is clear.

This is in sharp contrast to

the version with learning. Note that since the no-learning economy is endowed with the same
end-of-sample beliefs as the learning model, they both ultimately converge to the same

23

levels.

But, they start at dierent steady states (normalized to 0 for each series).

This shows that

learning is what generates long-lived reductions in economic activity.

Decomposing long-run losses.

Next, we perform a simple calculation to put the size of the

long-run loss in perspective. Specically, we use the stochastic discount factor implied by the
model to calculate the expected discounted value of the reduction in GDP. These estimates,
reported in Table 2, imply that the representative agent in this economy values the cumulative
losses between 57% and 90% of the pre-COVID GDP. Most of this comes from the belief scarring
mechanism.
Scenario

2020 GDP drop

NPV(Belief Scarring)

NPV(Obsolete capital)

I. Tough

-9%

-52%

-38%

II. Light

- 6%

-33%

-24%

Table 2: New present value costs in percentages of 2019 GDP.

Note that the 1-year loss during the pandemic is 6-9% of GDP. The cost of belief scarring
is ve to six times as large, in both cases. The cost of obsolete capital is about four times as
large as the damage done during the pandemic. Figure 4 illustrates the losses each year from
the capital obsolescence and belief changes. The area of each of these regions, discounted as
one moves to the right in time, is the NPV calculation in the table above. The one-year cost is
a tiny fraction of this total area.

Scenario 2

Scenario 1

0

0

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.06

-0.06

-0.08
-0.1
2020

-0.08

Capital obsolescence
Belief scarring

2040

2060

2080

-0.1
2020

2100

Capital obsolescence
Belief scarring

2040

2060

2080

2100

Figure 4: Long-term costs of the pandemic.

Of course, that calculation misses an important aspect of what we've learned  that pandemics will recur.

Since our agents have 70 years of data, during which they've seen one

pandemic, they assess the future risk of pandemics to be 1-in-70 initially.

24

That probability

declines slowly as time goes on and other pandemics are not observed. But there is also the risk
there will be more pandemics, like this. This is not really a result of this pandemic. But that
risk of future pandemics is what we should consider if we think about the benets of public
health investments.

1/70th

The pandemic cost going forward, in a world where a pandemic has a

probability of occurring each year, is given in Figure 5.

Note that the risk of future

pandemics costs the economy about 7-12% of GDP. This is similar to the one-year cost during
the COVID crisis.

Scenario 2

Scenario 1

0

0

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.06

-0.06
Capital obsolescence
Future pandemics
Belief scarring

-0.08
-0.1
2020

2040

2060

2080

Capital obsolescence
Future pandemics
Belief scarring

-0.08
-0.1
2020

2100

2040

2060

2080

2100

Figure 5: Long-term costs of with future pandemics.

Scenario 2

0.2

Change in Investment (p.p)

Change in Investment (p.p)

Scenario 1

Learning
No learning (REE)

0.1

0

-0.1
2020

Figure 6:

2040

2060

2080

2100

0.2
Learning
No learning (REE)

0.1

0

-0.1
2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

Without belief scarring, investment surges.

Results show average aggregate investment, with scarring of beliefs (solid line) and without (dashed line). Common parameters listed in Table 1.

Scenario-specic parameters are: Scenario 1:

Ï†Ìƒ2020 = 0.95.

25

Ï†Ìƒ2020 = 0.90

Scenario 2:

Investment and Labor.

Figure 6 shows the eect of belief changes on investment. When

agents do not learn, investment surges immediately (as the economy replenishes the obsolete
capital). With learning, investment shows a much smaller surge (starting in 2021), but eventually falls below the pre-COVID levels.

Scenario 1

Scenario 2

0.02
Learning
No learning (REE)

0.01

Change in Labor (p.p)

Change in Labor (p.p)

0.02

0
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
2020

Figure 7:

2040

2060

2080

0.01
0
-0.01
-0.02
-0.03
2020

2100

Learning
No learning (REE)

2040

2060

2080

2100

Labor with scarring of beliefs (solid line) and without (dashed line).

Common parameters listed in Table 1. Scenario-specic parameters are: Scenario 1:

Ï†Ìƒ2020 = 0.90

Scenario 2:

Ï†Ìƒ2020 = 0.95.
In gure 7, we see that the initial reaction of labor is milder than for investment, but
the bigger dierences arise from 2021 onwards. When the transitory shock passes, investment
surges, to higher than its initial level, to compensate for the obsolescence shock.

But labor

remains below the pre-COVID levels, reecting the eect of the scarring eect on the stock of
capital and through that on the demand for labor.

Defaults, Riskless Rates and Credit Spreads.

The scenarios dier in their short-term

implications for default as well. Default spikes only in 2020, the period of impact, returning to
average from 2021 onwards. But, the higher default rate in scenario 1 (6% relative to 4% in
Scenario 2) contributes to greater scarring (since default amplies obsolescence). This result
suggests a role for policy: preventing default/bankruptcy can lead to long-lasting benets. In
Section VI, we present a quantitative analysis of such a policy.
Nearly immediately, after the pandemic passes, default rates in both scenarios return to
their original level. While defaults leave permanent scars on beliefs, the defaults themselves are
not permanently higher. It is the memory of a transitory event that is persistent.
Because defaults were elevated, the pandemic had a large, immediate impact on credit
spreads. However, these high spreads were quickly reversed. Some authors have argued that
heightened tail risk should inate risk premia, as well as credit spreads (Hall, 2016).

26

While

Scenario 2

Learning
No learning (REE)

0.06

Realized default

Realized default

Scenario 1

0.04

0.02

0.06

0.04

0.02

2020
Figure 8:

Learning
No learning (REE)

2040

2060

2080

2100

2020

2040

2060

2080

2100

Realized default does not respond much to beliefs.

Results show with scarring of beliefs (solid line) and without (dashed line), often with the two lines on top of
each other. Common parameters listed in Table 1. Scenario-specic parameters are: Scenario 1:
Scenario 2:

Ï†Ìƒ2020 = 0.90

Ï†Ìƒ2020 = 0.95

the argument is intuitive, it ignores any endogenous response of discounting, investment or
borrowing. A surge in risk triggers disinvestment and de-leveraging. Because rms borrow less,
this lowers default rates back down, which osets the increase in the credit spread. We can see
this channel at work in the drop in debt and the lack of change in long-run defaults (Table 3).
The credit spread is the implied interest on risky debt,

1/qt

less the risk-free rate

rf .

The credit

spread in the stochastic steady state under the 2019 belief is less than a basis point higher is the
post-pandemic long-run. Thus, belief revisions can have signicant and long-lived real eects,
even if the long-run change in credit spreads is very small.

Equity markets and implied skewness.

One might think the recent recovery in equity

prices appears inconsistent with a persistent rise in tail risk. The model teaches us why this
logic is incomplete. When rms face higher tail risk, they also reduce debt, which pushes in the
opposite direction as the rise in risk. Furthermore, when rms reduce investment and capital
stocks decline, the marginal value of capital rises. Finally, when interest rates and thus future
discount rates decline, future equity payments are worth more in present value terms. These
competing eects cancel each other out. In our model, the market value of a dividend claim
associated with a unit of capital is nearly identical under the post-COVID beliefs than under
the pre-COVID ones. In other words, the combined eect of the changes in tail risk and debt
reduction is actually mildly positive. While the magnitudes are not directly interpretable, our
point is simply that rising equity valuations are not evidence against tail risk.
If credit spreads and equity premia are not clear indicators of tail risk, what is? For that, we

27

2019

Credit Spreads

Scenario 1

Scenario 2

Baseline

level

change

level

change

0.837%

0.842%

+0.5 bps

0.838%

+0.1 bps

Debt

2.75

2.56

-0.19

2.63

-0.12

Default

2.0%

2.0%

0

2.0%

0

3.66%

3.46%

-20 bps

3.54%

-11 bps

0.44

0.45

+0.01

0.44

0

102.7

111.3

+8.6

104.2

+1.5

-1.5

-9.8

-8.3

-2.6

-1.1

Risk free rate
Equity market value
SKEW
Third moment

Table 3:

E

h

e

R âˆ’ RÌ„e

3 i

Changes in nancial market variables: Baseline, Scenarios 1 and 2.

Baseline is the steady state pre-pandemic, under 2019 beliefs. Columns labelled change are the raw dierence
between the long-run average values under 2019 and 2020 beliefs in each scenario. They do not capture any
changes that take place along the transition path or during the pandemic. The aggregate market capitalization
in
h
3 i
e
e
R âˆ’ RÌ„
our model is the value of the dividend claim times the aggregate capital stock. Third moment is E
Ã—

104 ,

where

Re

is the return on equity. The expectation is taken under the risk-neutral measure. For the no-

learning model, all changes are zero.

need to turn option prices, in particular out-of-the-money put options on the S&P 500, which
can be used to isolate changes in perceived tail risk.

A natural metric is the third moment

of the distribution of equity returns. The last row of Table 3 reports this object (computed
under the risk neutral measure).
more negatively skewed.

It shows that the perceived distribution after the shock is

16

This might sound inconsistent with the behavior of the SKEW index reported by the CBOE.
This showed a short-lived spike at the onset of the pandemic, but recovered quite rapidly. To
understand this pattern, note that the SKEW indexes the

standardized

third moment implied

by options prices, which is obtained by dividing the third moment from the previous paragraph
by the implied standard deviation (or VIX). Tail events typically lead to a spike in market
volatility, both realized and implied.

This increase in VIX tends to mechanically lower the

skewness. More generally, the SKEW index confounds changes in the third moment with the
changes in the second moment, which often reects many other factors. This is the main reason
why we focus on the (non-standardized) third moment. As we saw, this measure clearly reveals
the persistent change in beliefs and is consistent with evidence from newspapers and surveys in
Barrero and Bloom (2020).

16 It is straightforward to compute this from the SKEW and VIX indices reported by the CBOE. The third

3

100âˆ’SKEW t
Â· VIX 3t . This calculation reveals
10
that, between February and May 2020, the market implied third moment also became signicantly more negative
central moment under the risk-neutral measure is

E Re âˆ’ RÌ„e

(from -0.04 to -0.09).

28

=

V

Liquidity and Interest Rates

In this section, we augment the baseline model to include a liquidity friction. This is motivated
by evidence showing liquidity becoming more scarce following the onset of the pandemic  see
Boyarchenko et al. (2020). As we will show, a liquidity motive amplies the eects of tail risk
on rates of return for liquid assets, such as Treasuries. This helps bring this dimension of the
model's predictions closer to the observed drops in recent months. We also present evidence
from bond markets consistent with the rise in liquidity premia.
Recall that, in the baseline model, riskless rates fall in response to higher demand for safe
assets. Just as rms react to the increased tail risk by de-leveraging, investors would like to
protect themselves against low-return states by holding more riskless assets. They cannot all
hold more. Therefore, the price increases (the rate of return falls) to clear the market. Table
3 reports the riskless rate falls by 20 bps (10 bps) in Scenario 1 (Scenario 2). The sign of this
change is consistent with what we saw following the onset of the pandemic, but the magnitude
is not: interest rates, especially in the Treasury market, fell much more dramatically.
We introduce liquidity considerations using a stylized yet tractable specication, in the
spirit of Lagos and Wright (2005).

17

A positive NPV investment opportunity requires liquid

funds. Both capital and government bonds provide liquidity (the former only partially). An
adverse capital obsolescence shock reduces the value of capital and thus the amount of liquidity
it provides. Thus, an increase in the risk of such a shock makes capital liquidity uncertain and
raises the value of riskless bonds, which are always retain their full, liquid value. Thus, higher
tail risk also raises liquidity risk and makes riskless bonds, which serve as liquidity insurance,
even more attractive.

This channel amplies the eect on their return and turns out to be

quantitatively very large. The increased tail risk brought on by the pandemic, combined with
liquidity risk, will turn out to depress interest rates three and a half times as much as in the
model without liquidity risk.
Formally, rms are assumed to have access to a protable intra-period opportunity, yielding
a net return of

xt = x

âˆ—

H(xt ) âˆ’ xt

where

xt

is the amount invested. The net return is maximized at

xt

cannot exceed the amount of pledgable

Â¯t
xt â‰¤ at + dk

(22)

. But, the rm faces a liquidity constraint:

collateral. Formally,

where the parameter

dÂ¯ indexes

the pledgability of capital and

asset. This can be interpreted narrowly as government bonds

at

18

denotes a riskless, fully liquid

, but it could also be thought of

17 See also Kozlowski et al. (2019).
18 For concreteness, we adopt this assumption in our analysis. The bonds are issued by a government, which

29

as the total liquidity available from other sources. Note that the liquidity value of capital is a
function of

eective

capital, i.e. net of obsolescence. As a result, shocks to capital obsolescence

inuence the availability of liquidity.
The supply of the liquid asset is assumed to be xed at
the opportunity in

t

is given by

Â¯ t ).
xt = min(x , aÌ„ + dk
âˆ—

aÌ„.

Thus, the amount invested in

The liquidity premium is the marginal

value (in units of consumption) of an additional unit of pledgable collateral:

Âµt = H 0 (xt ) âˆ’ 1 .

(23)

The return on government bonds, i.e. the liquid asset, is characterized

1
= Et [Mt+1 (1 + Âµt+1 )] .
Rta

(24)

The nal model alternation is that the liquidity premium shows up in the rst term of the
optimality condition for capital (16), which becomes

Parameterization.



k
Â¯ t+1 ) .
Et Mt+1 (Rt+1
+ dÂµ

To set values for the liquidity parameters, we follow the strategy in

Kozlowski et al. (2019). We use the following functional form for the benet to invest on liquid
assets:
liquid

âˆš
H(x) = 2Î¹ x âˆ’ Î¾ . The
Â¯, is set to 0.16 to
asset, d

parameter that governs how much of capital is a pledgeable,
match the ratio of short-term obligations of US nonnancial

aÌ„ = 0.8 and
the return parameter Î¹ = 1.4 are chosen so that the ratio of liquid assets to capital is 0.08 and
their return in the pre-COVID steady state equals 2%. Finally, the parameter Î¾ = 1.94 is set
corporations to the capital stock in the Flow of Funds. The liquid asset supply

so the net return of the project is close to zero (on average) in the pre-COVID steady state.

Riskless rates with liquidity premia.

The purpose of this extension was to explore how

liquidity considerations aect scarring-induced changes in riskless rates. To evaluate this, we
compute riskless rates in the stochastic steady states associated with the pre- and post-COVID
beliefs.

These are presented in Table 4.

The model predicts that the yield on liquid bonds

drops by 67 bps in the new steady state. In contrast, the return on a riskless but completely
illiquid asset falls only by 8 bps: in other words, the liquidity premium rises by 59 bps.
The table also shows changes in various market interest rates between January and July
2020. The yield on the 1y and 5y Treasuries were almost

1.4% lower in July 2020 (relative to the

beginning of the year). Note that these are not directly comparable to the model numbers. The
latter compare steady-states and so are most appropriately thought of as long-run predictions
while the current data obviously reect short-term, more transitory considerations as well. We
balances its budget with lumpsum taxes/transfers.

30

Pre-COVID

Post-COVID

Chg

2.12%

1.46 %

-67 bps

4.97%

4.89 %

-8 bps

1y Treasury yield (nominal)

1.56%

0.14%

-142 bps

5y Treasury yield (nominal)

1.67%

0.28%

-139 bps

5y forward rate (real)

-0.09%

-0.98%

-89 bps

Model
Riskless rate (liquid)

Rta âˆ’ 1

Riskless rate (illiquid)
Data

AAA Yield

2.53%

1.48%

-105 bps

AAA Spread (rel. to 5y Treasury)

0.86%

1.20%

34 bps

Table 4: Implications for interest rates with liquidity frictions, model vs data. Data comes from
FRED. Pre-COVID (post-COVID) data are for January 1, 2020 (July 16, 2020).

therefore construct a proxy for the long-run rates using forward rates implied by the Treasury
yield and long-term ination expectations. Specically, we use the instantaneous rate 5 years
forward from the Treasury yield curve and 5y5y ination expectations

19

to calculate the change

in long-term real rates. This shows a decline of about 89 bps, smaller than short-term rates
and closer to the model's predictions.
Next, the table also reports the change in the yield on AAA corporate bonds.

These

securities carry very little default risk, but are not as liquid as Treasuries. As a result, the yield
spread on these bonds relative to Treasuries is often viewed as a proxy for liquidity premia 
see, e.g., Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2012) and del Negro et al. (2017). In recent
months, this spread rose by 34 bps, consistent with increased liquidity scarcity.

The model

liquidity premium reported in the table shows a larger rise. This is to be expected since the
model object is dened as the spread of a

completely

illiquid security whereas AAA bonds are

probably partially liquid.
Figure 9 shows the time path of the natural rate of interest.

Notice that the short-run

uctuations are much larger than the long-term eects reported in the table. This is consistent
with short-term market disruptions that are now settling down.
Finally, in interpreting recent data, it is worth pointing out that the last few months have
seen unprecedented policy interventions in bond markets, which almost certainly have contributed to the drop in interest rates on both liquid and illiquid assets  see Boyarchenko et al.
(2020). Our analysis completely abstracts from such interventions

20

so it is perhaps not too

surprising that the model under-predicts the fall in interest rates. Overall, these results suggest

19 5y5y ination expectations are the expectations of ination over the ve-year period, starting ve years
from today. Source: FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. The series tickers are THREEFF5 and T5YIFR
respectively.

20 We do evaluate the eects of a nancial policy in the following section.

31

Figure 9:

Belief scarring lowers riskless rate in the long-run.

Results show the return on a riskless asset, in scenario 1, with scarring of beliefs (solid line) and without (dashed
line). Common parameters listed in Table 1. Scenario-specic parameters are Scenario 1:

Ï†Ìƒ2020 = 0.90.

a quantitatively meaningful role for the belief scarring mechanism in the recent behavior of
interest rates.

VI

The Role of Financial Policy

The COVID-19 pandemic has sparked an unprecedented policy response.

These responses

fall into three broad categories: social distancing and other mobility restrictions, transfers to
households and nancial assistance to rms. We explored the consequences of more lax social
distance policy in constructing scenarios for our baseline results. Transfers to households has an
important role to mitigate the economic fallout, but does not directly aect productive capacity,
the key object in our analysis. Financial assistance to rms, on the other hand, can help the
economy maintain productive capacity, for example by preventing widespread bankruptcies. In
our setting, such a policy would have benecial long-run eects as well, since they mitigate the
consequences of belief scarring.

In this section, we use our baseline model to quantify these

long-run benets. We nd that the longer-term eects of a policy of debt relief are as much as
10 times larger than the short-run eects.
The need for policy intervention in the model stems from the presence of debt and the
associated risk of bankruptcy.

Bankruptcy is socially costly because it exacerbates capital

obsolescence. Therefore, we model nancial policy as designed to prevent/limit bankruptcies
by reducing rms' eective debt. This could take the form of the government or other policy-

32

maker buying up the debt from private creditors or oering direct assistance to rms. Before
examining the eects of such a policy, we perform a simple exercise to quantify the costs of
bankruptcy in our baseline model. This is the cost that nancial policy might plausibly remedy.

Benchmark

No default feedback

0

0

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04

-0.06

-0.06
Capital obsolescence
Future pandemics
Belief scarring

-0.08
-0.1
2020
Figure 10:

2040

2060

2080

Capital obsolescence
Future pandemics
Belief scarring

-0.08
-0.1
2020

2100

2040

2060

2080

2100

Default feedback increases long-run eects.

Results show with scarring of beliefs (solid line) and without (dashed line), often with the two lines on top of
each other. Common parameters listed in Table 1. Scenario-specic parameters are: Scenario 1:
Scenario 2:

Ï†Ìƒ2020 = 0.90

Ï†Ìƒ2020 = 0.95

Eect of the default-obsolescence feedback.

To understand the role of this feedback

rule, suppose that obsolescence is entirely exogenous, i.e. it does not vary with default. This
amounts to setting

Âµ=0

in (11). Figure 10 shows the GDP impact of the COVID-19 shock

under our benchmark specication (in the left panel) and without default feedback (in the right
panel). The broad patterns are similar with belief revisions accounting for a signicant portion
of the impact, but the magnitudes are slightly smaller in the right panel (GDP falls by just
under 4% in the long-run, relative to a 5% drop in the benchmark). This dierence between
the two panels is the eect of the the default-obsolescence feedback.

VI.A

Financial Assistance Policy.

We consider a simple policy that prevents bankruptcy by reducing rms' debt burden, specifically a reduction in each rm's debt by 10%.

This in turn mitigates the eective capital

obsolescence and consequently beliefs are slightly less pessimistic going forward. We then simulate the model with these new beliefs and calculate the short- and long-term GDP eects,
reported in Table 5.
The table shows that nancial assistance of this magnitude only saves 1% of GDP in 2020.

33

No assistance

10% debt reduction

Benet

-9%

-8%

1%

from belief scarring

-52%

-45%

7%

from obsolescence

-38%

-34%

4%

GDP drop in 2020
NPV of long-term output loss

Table 5:

Firm Financial Assistance Policy:

Results are for scenario 1 (Ï†Ìƒ2020

= 0.90).

No Assistance vs. 10% Debt Reduction

Numbers shown are in percentages of the pre-COVID steady-state

GDP.

From that metric alone, one might judge the cost of the policy to be too high.

21

However, pre-

venting bankruptcies in the short-run also helps reduce losses over time. The present discounted
value of those savings are worth 11% of 2019 GDP. Of that 11%, 7% comes from ameliorating
belief scarring and another 4% comes from the direct eects of limiting capital obsolescence.
This exercise shows that considering the long-run consequences can signicantly change the
cost-benet analysis for nancial policies aimed at assisting rms.

VII

What if we had seen a pandemic like this before?

In our benchmark analysis, pre-COVID beliefs were formed using data that did not witness
a pandemic (though it did have other tail events like the 2008-09 Great Recession).

But,

pandemics have occurred before  Jorda et al. (2020) identify 12 pandemics (with greater than
100,000 deaths) going back to the 14th century. This raises the possibility that economic agents
in 2019 had some awareness of these past tail events and believed that they could happen again.
To understand how this might change our results, we assume that the pre-COVID data sample
includes the 1918 episode. Unfortunately, we do not have good data on capital utilization and
obsolescence during that period,

Ï†Ìƒt

22

so we simply use the time series for the capital return shock

from 1950-2020 as a proxy for the

Ï†Ìƒt

series from 1880-1949. In other words, we are asking:

What if we had seen all of this unfold exactly the same way before?
The previous data does not change the short-term impact of the shock. But, it does cut the
long-term eect of in half. Just before the pandemic of 2020 struck, our data tells us that there
has been one pandemic in nearly 140 years. We assess the probability to be about 1-in-140.
After 2020, we saw two pandemics in 141 years. Therefore, we revise our perceived probability

21 Strictly speaking, in our model with a representative agent and lump-sum taxes, there is no real cost
to implementing this policy.

But, obviously, in a more realistic setting with heterogeneity and distortionary

taxation, taking over 10% of corporate debt would entail substantial costs/dead-weight losses.

22 See Correia et al. (2020) and Velde (2020) for analysis of the economic eects of the 1918 over the short-

to medium-term.

34

from 1-in-140 to 2-in-141. That is about half the change in probability, relative to the original
model where the probability rose from zero to 1-in-70.
But considering data from so long ago does raise the question of whether it is perceived as
less relevant. There is a sense that the world has changed, institutions are stronger, science
has advanced, in ways that alter the probability of such events. Such gradual change might
logically lead one to discount old data.
In a second exercise, we assume that agents discount old data at the rate of 1% per year.
In this case, two forces compete. The presence of the 1918 events in the sample reduces the
surprise of the new pandemic as before, albeit with a much smaller weight. The countervailing
force is that when old data is down-weighted, new data is given a larger weight in beliefs. The
larger role of the recent pandemic in beliefs going forward makes belief scarring stronger for
the next few decades. These forces more or less cancel each other out leaving the net results
indistinguishable, in every respect, from the original results with data only from 1950.
Of course, more recently, we saw SARS, MERS and Ebola arise outside the U.S. Other
countries may have learned from these episodes. But the lack of preparation and slow response
to events unfolding in China suggests that U.S. residents and policy makers seem to have
inferred only that diseases originating abroad stay outside the U.S. borders.

VIII

Conclusion

No one knows the true distribution of shocks to the economy. Macroeconomists typically assume that agents in their models know this distribution, as a way to discipline beliefs.

For

many applications, assuming full knowledge has little eect on outcomes and oers tractability. But for unusually large events, like the current crisis, the dierence between knowing these
probabilities and estimating them with real-time data can be large. We argue that a more plausible assumption for these phenomena is to assume that agents do the same kind of real-time
estimation along the lines of what an econometrician would do. This introduces new, persistent dynamics into a model with otherwise transitory shocks. The essence of the persistence
mechanism is this: once observed, a shock (a piece of data) stays in one's data set forever and
therefore persistently aects belief formation. The less frequently similar data is observed, the
larger and more persistent the belief revision.
When we quantify this mechanism, our model's predictions tell us that the ongoing crisis
will have large, persistent adverse eects on the US economy, far greater than the immediate
consequences.

Preventing bankruptcies or permanent separation of labor and capital, could

have enormous consequences for the value generated by the U.S. economy for decades to come.

35

References
Alvarez, F. E., D. Argente, and F. Lippi (2020, April). A Simple Planning Problem for COVID19 Lockdown. Working Paper 26981, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Angeletos, G.-M. and J. La'O (2013). Sentiments.
Atkeson, A. (2020, March).

Econometrica 81 (2), 739779.

What Will Be the Economic Impact of COVID-19 in the US?

Rough Estimates of Disease Scenarios. Working Paper 26867, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Baker, S., N. Bloom, S. Davis, and K. Kost (2019, March).

Policy news and stock market

volatility. Working paper.
Barrero, J. and N. Bloom (2020).

Economic uncertainty and the recovery.

Economic Policy Symposium Proceedings .

Jackson Hole

Beaudry, P. and F. Portier (2004). An Exploration into Pigou's Theory of Cycles.

Monetary Economics 51, 11831216.

Journal of

Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. J. Terry (2018).
Uncertain Business Cycles.

Really

Econometrica 86 (3), 10311065.

Boyarchenko, N., A. Kovner, and O. Shachar (2020). It's What You Say and What You Buy:
A Holistic Evaluation of the Corporate Credit Facilities. Technical report, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, Sta Report.
Carvalho, V. M., S. Hansen, Ã. Ortiz, J. R. Garcia, T. Rodrigo, S. Rodriguez Mora, and
P. Ruiz de Aguirre (2020). Tracking the Covid-19 Crisis with High-Resolution Transaction
Data.
Cochrane, J. (2020). What shape recovery? Available at

com/2020/04/what-shape-recovery.html

https://johnhcochrane.blogspot.

(2020/04/06).

Cogley, T. and T. Sargent (2005). The Conquest of US Ination: Learning and Robustness to
Model Uncertainty.

Review of Economic Dynamics 8, 528563.

Corbae, D. and P. D'Erasmo (2017, June). Reorganization or liquidation: Bankruptcy choice
and rm dynamics. Working Paper 23515, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Correia, S., S. Luck, and E. Verner (2020). Pandemics Depress the Economy, Public Health
Interventions Do Not: Evidence from the 1918 Flu.

36

SSRN Working Paper Series .

CPPI (2020).

Commercial Property Price Index.

Technical report, Green Street Adivsors.

Accessed: May 15, 2020.
del Negro, M., D. Giannone, M. Giannoni, and A. Tambalotti (2017). Safety, Liquidity, and
the Natural Rate of Interest.

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , 235294.

Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz (1981). Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical
Analysis.

The Review of Economic Studies , 289309.

Eichenbaum, M. S., S. Rebelo, and M. Trabandt (2020, March).

The Macroeconomics of

Epidemics. Working Paper 26882, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Elenev, V., T. Landvoigt, and S. Van Nieuwerburgh (2020). Can the Covid Bailouts Save the
Economy?

COVID Economics 17.

Fajgelbaum, P. D., E. Schaal, and M. Taschereau-Dumouchel (2017, 05). Uncertainty Traps.

The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (4), 16411692.
Farboodi, M., G. Jarosch, and R. Shimer (2020, April). Internal and External Eects of Social
Distancing in a Pandemic. Working Paper 27059, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gangestad, S. and D. Buss (1993). Pathogen Prevalence and Human Mate Preferences.

and Sociobiology 14(2), 8996.
Gourio, F. (2012).

Disaster Risk and Business Cycles.

Ethology

American Economic Review 102(6),

273466.
Gourio, F. (2013).

Credit Risk and Disaster Risk.

nomics 5(3), 134.
Hall, R. E. (2016).

American Economic Journal: Macroeco-

Macroeconomics of Persistent Slumps.

In

Handbook of Macroeconomics,

Volume 2, pp. 21312181. Elsevier.
Hansen, B. E. (2015).
Hansen, L. (2007).

Econometrics.

Beliefs, Doubts and Learning: Valuing Macroeconomic Risk.

Economic Review 97(2), 130.

American

Huo, Z. and N. Takayama (2015). Higher Order Beliefs, Condence, and Business Cycles.
Jaimovich, N. and S. Rebelo (2006). Can News About the Future Drive the Business Cycle?

American Economic Review 99(4), 10971118.
37

Johannes, M., L. Lochstoer, and Y. Mou (2016). Learning About Consumption Dynamics.

Journal of Finance 71 (2), 551600.

The

Jorda, O., S. Singh, and A. Taylor (2020). Longer-Run Economic Consequences of Pandemics.

COVID Economics 1, 115.
Kaplan, G., B. Moll, and G. Violante (2020). Pandemics according to HANK.
Kermack, W. O. and A. G. McKendrick (1927). A Contribution to the Mathematical Theory
of Epidemics.

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A 115 (772), 700721.

Khan, A., T. Senga, and J. K. Thomas (2017). Default Risk and Aggregate Fluctuations in an
Economy with Production Heterogeneity. 2017 Meeting Papers 889, Society for Economic
Dynamics.
Koren, M. and R. PetÂ® (2020).

Business Disruptions from Social Distancing.

nomics 2, 1331.

COVID Eco-

Kozeniauskas, N., A. Orlik, and L. Veldkamp (2014). What Are Uncertainty Shocks?

of Monetary Economics 100, 115.

Journal

Kozlowski, J., L. Veldkamp, and V. Venkateswaran (2019). The Tail that Keeps the Riskless
Rate Low.

National Bureau of Economic Research, Macroeconomics Annual 33 (1), 253283.

Kozlowski, J., L. Veldkamp, and V. Venkateswaran (2020).

The Tail that Wags the Econ-

omy: Belief-Driven Business Cycles and Persistent Stagnation.

omy 128 (8), 28392879.

Journal of Political Econ-

Krishnamurthy, A. and W. Li (2020, May). Dissecting Mechanisms of Financial Crises: Intermediation and Sentiment. Working Paper 27088, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Krishnamurthy, A. and A. Vissing-Jorgensen (2012).
Debt.

The Aggregate Demand for Treasury

Journal of Political Economy 120 (2), 233267.

https://www.nytimes.com/
2020/04/01/opinion/notes-on-the-coronacoma-wonkish.html (2020/04/01).

Krugman, P. (2020).

Notes on the Coronacoma.

Available at

Lagos, R. and R. Wright (2005). A Unied Framework for Monetary Theory and Policy Analysis.

Journal of Political Economy 113 (3), 463484.

Leibovici, F., A. M. Santacreu, and M. Famiglietti (2020).
Distancing

Ripples

through

the

Economy.

38

Available

at

How the Impact of Social

https://www.stlouisfed.

org/on-the-economy/2020/april/impact-social-distancing-ripples-economy
(2020/04/07).
Loehle, C. (1995).

Social Barriers to Pathogen Transmission in Wild Animal Populations.

Ecology 76 (2), 326335.
Lorenzoni, G. (2009). A Theory of Demand Shocks.

American Economic Review 99 (5), 2050

84.
Ludvigson, S. C., S. Ma, and S. Ng (2020, April). Covid19 and the Macroeconomic Eects of
Costly Disasters. Working Paper 26987, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Moody's Investors Service (2015).

Annual Default Study: Corporate Default and Recovery

Rates, 1920-2014. Technical report.
Nimark, K. (2014). Man-Bites-Dog Business Cycles.

American Economic Review 104(8), 2320

67.
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogo (2009).

This Time Is Dierent: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly.

Princeton University Press.
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogo (2020). The Coronavirus Debt Threat. Available at

wsj.com/articles/the-coronavirus-debt-threat-11585262515
Stock, J. H. (2020, March).

https://www.

(2020/03/26).

Data Gaps and the Policy Response to the Novel Coronavirus.

Working Paper 26902, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Straub, L. and R. Ulbricht (2013). Credit Crunches, Information Failures, and the Persistence
of Pessimism.
Van Nieuwerburgh, S. and L. Veldkamp (2006). Learning Asymmetries in Real Business Cycles.

Journal of Monetary Economics 53(4), 753772.
Velde, F. R. (2020). What Happened to the US Economy During the 1918 Inuenza Pandemic?
A View Through High-Frequency Data.
Veldkamp, L. and J. Wolfers (2007).

SSRN Working Paper Series .

Aggregate Shocks or Aggregate Information?

Information and Business Cycle Comovement.

Costly

Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 3755.

Wang, H., Z. Wang, Y. Dong, R. Chang, C. Xu, X. Yu, S. Zhang, L. Tsamlag, M. Shang,
J. Huang, et al. (2020).

Phase-adjusted estimation of the number of Coronavirus Disease

2019 cases in Wuhan, China.

Cell Discovery 6 (1), 18.
39

A

Solution

A.A

Equilibrium Characterization

An equilibrium is the solution to the following system of equations:

1

 k  k
= EMt+1 Rt+1
J (v t )

k
Rt+1

=

1 âˆ’ Î³ ct
Î³ 1 âˆ’ lt

=

(1 âˆ’ Î¸) Et [Mt+1 v t f (v t )]
ct
Ut

(1 âˆ’

1âˆ’Î±
Î±
Î±)Ï†Î±+Î½
t+1 kÌ‚t+1 lt+1

(25)

+ (1 âˆ’ Î´) Ï†t+1 kÌ‚t+1

(26)

kÌ‚t+1

(1 âˆ’ Î±)yt
l
 t 
Ï‡âˆ’1
=
Et [Mt+1 (1 âˆ’ F (v t ))]
Ï‡

(27)

(28)

= Ï†Î±+Î½
kÌ‚tÎ± lt1âˆ’Î± + (1 âˆ’ Î´) Ï†t kÌ‚t âˆ’ kÌ‚t+1
t
1


 1âˆ’Ïˆ  1âˆ’Ïˆ
1âˆ’Ïˆ
1âˆ’Î· 1âˆ’Î·
=
(1 âˆ’ Î²) (u (ct , lt ))
+ Î²E Ut+1

(29)

(30)

where

ln Ï†t
vt
J k (v t )
Mt+1

A.B

=
=

ln Ï†Ìƒt âˆ’ ÂµF (v t )1âˆ’$
levt+1
k
Rt+1

1 + (Ï‡ âˆ’ 1) v t (1 âˆ’ F (v t )) + (Ï‡Î¸ âˆ’ 1) h (v t )

âˆ’1
âˆ’Ïˆ

h 
i Î·âˆ’Ïˆ
dUt
dUt
u (ct+1 , lt+1 )
1âˆ’Î·
1âˆ’Î·
Ïˆâˆ’Î·
=
= Î² E Ut+1
Ut+1
dct
dct+1
u (ct , lt )
=

Solution Algorithm

To solve the system described above at any given date
recursive form with grids for the aggregate state

(kÌ‚)

Âˆ

Estimate

Âˆ

Start with a guess (in polynomial form) for

Âˆ

Solve (25)-(28) for

Âˆ

Verify/update the guess for

gÌ‚

t

(i.e. after any observed history of

and the shocks

Ï†Ìƒ.

U (kÌ‚, Ï†Ìƒ), c(kÌ‚, Ï†Ìƒ), l(KÌ‚, Ï†Ìƒ).

using a non-linear solution procedure.

U, c, l

using (29)-(30) and iterate until convergence.

1

we recast it in

We then use an iterative procedure:

on the available history using the kernel estimator.

kÌ‚ 0 , lev 0 , l

Ï†Ìƒt ),

