NBER WORXING PAPER SERIES

HUMAN

RESOURCE POLICIES AND

UNION-NONIJNION PRODUCTIVITy DIFFERENCES

Steven C. Allen

Working Paper No. 2744

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1988

This paper was presented at the Academy of Management meetings in Anaheim,
August 9, 1988. I have received helpful comments from
Barry Cerhart, John
Fossum, Dan Hamermesh, Barry Hirsch, and Brian Bemmels. This paper is part
of NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2 744
October 1988

HUMAN RESOURCE POLICIES AND
UNION-NONUNION PRODUCTIVITY DIFFERENCES

ABSTRACT

Many researchers in both economics departments and business schools

recently

have become interested in examining how much of an effect human resource

decisions and policies have on firm performance. This paper surveys the
literature on unionism and productivity and discusses its

implications for

future research on more general issues. The main focus is on (I) conclusions
as to whether unions raise or lower productivity and (2) procedures used to
identify the channels through which unions affect productivity.

The studies of unions and productivity have documented

large productivity

differences between seemingly comparable union and nonunion establishments. In
many cases unionism is associated with higher productivity, especially when
unionized firms are in a competitive environnent.

However, the mechanisms

responsible for union-nonunion productivity differences in each study remain
poorly understood, either because detailed information on how unions affected
company decisions was not available or because the available information

produced inconclusive results. These conclusions suggest that human resource
policies can have a very large effect on financial outcomes, but our ability to
estimate the magnitude of that effect for a particular policy is currently very
limited.

Steven C. Allen
Department of Economics and Business
North Carolina State University
Box 8110
Raleigh, NC 27695-8110

In mainstream economic theory, unions are viewed mainly as

wage-raising

institutions. Managers respond to higher wages by cutting back or shutting
down operations that are no longer profitable. Beyond this, they take steps to
offset the cost of higher wages by substituting capital for labor and
increasing the skill level of the work force through adjustments in training

and hiring procedures. The result is greater observed productivity in union
than nonunion establishments. Despite the productivity gains, econonists view
union-generated wage increases as socially undesirable because in theory the
cost of higher wages is never completely offset by additional productivity,

resulting in greater unit costs and reduced output. Unions further reduce
output and productivity through strikes and restrictive work practices.
This itandard view has been challenged over the last dozen years by work
initiated by Professors Richard Freeman and James Medoff of Harvard University.

Drawing from Hirschman's (1970) "exit-voice" model, Freeman and Medoff (1984)
argued that unions should be viewed as institutions that give workers voice at

the workplace. Union voice can result in increased productivity through a
variety of mechanisms -

- reduced

turnover, more informal training and

information sharing among workers, better communication between workers and

management, and improved morale. It can also have a "shock effect" on
management, the result of which is that decision making becomes more sensitive
to worker reactions (Slichter, Healy and Livernash, 1960).

There is now a sizable empirical literature examining the effect of unions

on productivity. This literature is highly relevant for understanding the
impact of human resource policies on firm performance for two reasons. First,
despite the sharp drop in union organizing success, the question of what is
likely to happen to a f inn if it becomes unionized remains a very important

issue. Faced with the threat of unionization, managers must judge whether the

2

costs of becoming organized are greater than the costs of attempting to remain

nonunion. Today in the private sector it is quite clear that almost all
managers believe the costs of becoming organized are greater. However, there
is evidence that managerial views on this question were quite different in the
l940s (Kochan, Katz, and McKersie (1986)) and one should not totally discount
the possibility that these views may change again in the future.
Second, many of the studies in the literature on unions and productivity
(Ui') attempt to identify the key mechanisms causing any observed productivity

differences, a central issue in the new literature on human resources and firm

performance

(HRFP). Because the focus is almost always on human resource

practices, the UP studies end up asking exactly the same types of questions as
the HRFP studies, as one can see from the surveys of the HRFP literature in
Kleiner

j. (1987). Not only does the UP literature provide a set of

"preliminary results," but also it points out the difficulties in obtaining
useful conclusions about the impact of human resource practices.

After a suary of the key mechanisms through which unions affect
productivity, this paper surveys the UP literature. The survey focuses on (1)
conclusions as to whether unions raise or lower productivity and (2) studies
that attempt to identify channels through which unions affect productivity.

The last section of the paper assesses what is currently known about unions and
productivity and discusses useful future research directions for both the UP
and HRFP literatures.

3

I. HOW UNIONS INFLUENCE PRODUCTIVITY
One important route through which unions influence productivity has

already been noted in the introduction: higher union wages create an incentive
to find substitutes for labor. This is but one of many channels through which
a union can influence the productivity of an establishment. A newly unionized
establishment is likely to witness across-the-board changes in its human
resource policies, especially those dealing with hiring, promotion, layoffs,

training, and planning. The adjustments in compensation practices will be much
more complex than a simple change in the overall wage level. Unionized firms
tend to have relatively small occupational and geographical wage differentials.

They also tend to spend a larger share of their compensation package on
employee benefits and a smaller share on pay linked to individual or group

performance. Management behavior also changes under unionism. In the short
run, one must consider the initial shock effect of union organization, the
constraints spelled out by the current contract, union recourse under grievance

procedures, and the desire for peaceful settlement of future contracts. Over a
longer time horizon, policies toward union cooperation or union avoidance often
turn out to be a key element in corporate strategy.

Some of the most salient features of unionism that are believed to

influence productivity are summarized in Table 1. This table is not intended
to be all inclusive, nor does each factor listed in the table apply to every

organization. The table should be viewed as merely a reflection of how today's
economists think unions affect productivity. Although there is much more to
this thinking than the simple textbook tale about factor substitution, it is
useful to emphasize the distinction between productivity changes arising from
higher wage levels and productivity changes arising from sources other than

4
wage levels. This is done in the table by indicating whether the main source
of a particular channel of union influence is wage (W) or nonwage (N). Because
one would naturally expect unions to raise productivity through higher wage
levels, every UP study attempts to control for wage-induced changes in capital

intensity and skill levels. HRFP studies will also have to make this
distinction whenever the HR practice under examination is correlated with the
wage level.

Both the wage and nonwage channels of union influence should result in a

workforce with an upgraded skill level. Higher union wage levels give managers
the incentive to raise hiring standards and cut back on unskilled labor, With
the higher wage there is also generally a queue of workers wanting jobs,
enabling firms to make these adjustments without extra recruiting expenditures.

Higher union wages reduce turnover, thereby increasing the incentive to spend

more on training. Freeman (1980a) has shown that the overall reduction in
turnover under unionism is much larger than one would expect from higher union

wages. He attributes this turnover reduction to the greater voice unions give
employees in workplace decision making. With voice at the workplace, union
members are less likely to quit their jobs when they are unhappy with working
conditions or human resource policies, leading to even more training under

unionism. Another factor leading to more investments in training under
unionism is the continued reliance in sectors such as construction on an
occupational mix molded by craft traditions, with apprenticeship remaining the

key route of entry into the craft. A final reason to expect workers in
unionized establishments to be more highly skilled than their nonunion
equivalents is the greater cost of false positive errors in hiring decisions.

S

Managers are likely to raise their hiring standards in order to offset unionimposed restrictions on job assignments, layoffs and dismissals.

If work effort is a simple matter of carrots and sticks, then one would

naturally expect unions to be a negative factor. The use of seniority in
making promotion decisions in unionized establishments is well known.

Many

nonunion establishments base their promotions on seniority as well (Abraham and
Medoff, 1985).

This does not mean that union and nonunion carrots for

promotion are identical. Compensation packages under unionism tend to have
highly compressed occupational wage differentials (Freeman, 1980b, 1982). The
spread in compensation among different jobs is further compressed by the

large

share of the package which goes to health insurance, retirement plans, and paid

time off (Freeman, 1981). Another factor that may diminish the size of the
union carrot is the less frequent use of merit pay and other incentive pay
mechanisms, although this requires the controversial and empirically
questionable (Ehrenberg and Milkovich (1987)) assumption that such pay systems
actually influence employee behavior in the desired fashion.
Two other key mechanisms through which unions are believed to reduce work

effort are work rules and grievance procedures. Work rules, both written and
unwritten, result in too many jobs and too much break time, accompanied by
restrictions on output levels and management's ability to get the job done in

the most efficient manner. Crievances undermine productivity by reducing the
penalty for shirking and by protecting incompetent and dishonest workers.
Once one goes beyond this no-carrots/no-sticks scenario to examine other
factors believed to influence work effort, a different picture

emerges. Some

of the very factors listed above as decreasing productivity under unionism from
a carrots/sticks framework turn out, when viewed from a different perspective,

6

also to be factors leading to increased productivity. For instance, compressed
pay structures and promotion and layoff by seniority reduce the incentives for
rivalry in the workplace and make it easier to promote cooperation among

workers. Limitations on the ability of supervisors to discharge make employees
feel more like long-term stakeholders, thereby encouraging them to be more
committed to their employer.

The "exit-voice" model is also relevant for work effort. Freeman and
Medoff (1984) argue that unions are essential if employees are to have a true

voice in the work place. One obvious reason that unions are viewed as
essential for voicing worker concerns is fear. In a nonunion setting, a worker
who speaks out about workplace issues at a minimum risks being labelled as

noncooperative and at a maximum risks losing his job. Another reason is that
working conditions, human resource policies and the behavior of managers are
what economists call "public goods," conditions that everyone in the workplace

"consumes." No public good, whether it be national defense or occupational
safety, will be provided in adequate amounts by voluntary, individual behavior
because the individual bears all the costs and must share the benefits with

everyone else. The economically rational individual will instead wait for
someone else to speak out about public goods at the workplace, the result being

an inadequate flow of information to management about worker concerns. Workers
will speak out only when the costs of doing so are offset by the expected

benefits to them as individuals. The collective institution of unionism can
get around this problem in theory by sharing the costs of voice behavior
equally across all workers, changing the decision rule to a tradeoff between
group benefits and group costs.

7

Unions send messages to managers through informal day-to-day interaction

as well as through formal grievance procedures and contract negotiations. Many
nonunion firms have attempted to put their own grievance systems into place,

but unless such systems are subject to outside arbitration or a balanced review
panel containing both workers and managers, workers still may view such systems

as an extension of management and use them infrequently. As a result, managers
in unionized workplaces are likely to be better informed, which should increase

productivity. Workers are also more likely to make suggestions for
productivity improvements when bargaining allows the gains to be shared between

the firm and the workforce. Grievances and contract negotiations also give
workers a voice in how the workplace is run. If more voice at the workplace
raises morale, productivity is even further enhanced. Needless to say, many
managers dispute this theory, pointing out cases where unions have created
conflict where none previously existed and other cases where dissatisfaction
with the union resulted in reduced efficiency.

The response of management to unionization is a critical factor in

determining the influence of unions on productivity. Slichter, Healy, and
Livernash and Clark (l9BOb) note that in many cases there are often dramatic
changes in managerial practices when a plant becomes covered by a collective

bargaining agreement. There is a greater reliance on company or plant policy
in making decisions and less reliance on the judgment of any individual

manager. When policies are not applicable or when developing policies,
management becomes more likely to think through the consequences of any

decisions and make appropriate adjustments. The emphasis on policy and
accountability often spreads to other areas of decision making, such as

production scheduling and quality control. There are also usually some

8

personnel changes; frequently the plant manager is replaced and supervisors are
either replaced or retrained.

Any productivity gains obtained from more professional managerial
techniques can be offset by the reduction in flexibility which inevitably takes

place under unionism. Union and nonunion managers alike almost always claim
that the biggest advantage to remaining nonunion is flexibility. Occupational
jurisdictions and contract provisions limit the ability of managers to

optimally assign workers to jobs. Fluctuations in the demand for labor result
in further inefficiencies as unions limit managerial discretion in layoffs,

overtime, and subcontracting. However, many nonunion firms voluntarily follow
policies that are just as "inflexible" as those followed in their unionized

counterparts. These include promises to workers that they will not be laid off
and de facto seniority rules for promotions.

Unions can also influence the amount of resources the firm allocates to

managerial tasks. For instance, lower turnover under unionism reduces
recntiting, hiring, and training costs; the union even performs a number of
personnel functions in industries such as shipping and construction. However,
higher union wages also imply a queue of applicants that must be screened more
carefully because of union-imposed restrictions on the right to dismiss or
reassign.

A final factor behind any observed union-nonunion productivity differences
is technology. In a static context, the direction of union impact is unclear.
Managers have an incentive to use a less labor-intensive technology to offset

the higher wages, but union work rules may limit this type of adjustment. Over
a longer time horizon, managers must trade off the gains from R&D oriented

9

toward further reductions in labor intensity against the risk that the union
will be able to expropriate such gains at the bargaining table.
As the above discussion and the accompanying table indicate, it is hard to
draw any general conclusions about the overall impact of unions on productivity

from a purely theoretical discussion. The research question that various
studies have tried to address is to determine the net effect of the nonwage

channels of union influence discussed above, If they show no change or a
reduction in productivity, then the institution of unionism is clearly
undesirable on economic grounds (although not necessarily on the grounds of

equality and social cohesion). If the influence is positive, it is important
to learn whether the productivity gains are large enough to offset the output

losses associated with higher wages. Regardless of whether the effect is
positive or negative, it is also important to determine whether the sources of
the productivity gains can be isolated so the forces that determine
productivity at the workplace can be better understood.

II. EVIDENCE ON OVERALL UNION IMPACT

To estimate the impact of unions on productivity through channels other
than increased wages, the procedure most commonly used in the UP literature is
to estimate a Cobb-Douglas production function where the intercept is allowed

to vary with unionization. The usual specification is an OLS regression of the
log of output per hour or employee on the log of the capital-labor ratio, some

control variables for labor quality, and a unionization variable. Two types of
data have been used in these studies. Brown and Medoff (1978) and Allen (1984)

10

use Census data broken down by two-digit industry and state or region,
supplemented by data on percentage union members and labor quality from the

public use tapes for the Current Population Survey. This type of data set has
been widely used by economists to study such issues as the effect of education

on productivity and the substitutability of labor for capital. The advantage
of using such data is that they are comprehensive, reasonably accurate, and
readily available in the government documents section of the campus library.

All other studies use some type of micro data, usually collected from

establishments. These data sets generally contain information on more
variables than the Census reports and the results are free of any possible
aggregation bias created by arbitrary state by industry classifications of
heterogeneous establishments.
The productivity measure used in the earliest studies is value added
(dollar value of output minus expenditures for materials) per hour or employee.

Most studies done in the l980s have used some physical measure of output. In
theory the value added concept allows the researcher to compare output and
productivity levels across different industries or within an industry where
there is considerable product differentiation.
In practice there are two difficulties with using value added as an output

measure in a UP study. The main difficulty is that prices of homogeneous goods
and hedonic price functions of heterogeneous goods vary over establishments,

geographic location, and time. This requires some type of price deflation to
make sure that the variation in value added reflects output variation rather

than price variation. A related concern is that value added not only equals
the value of output to buyers, but also equals the cost of labor and capital to

producers. Higher union wages translate into higher labor costs as long as

11

labor demand is sufficiently insensitive. Critics of the UP studies often
claim that the studies are actually reporting wage equations, not productivity
equations.

In practice this claim seems to be totally unsubstantiated. The unionnonunion wage difference, generally believed to be in the neighborhood of 15

percent, is much smaller than the productivity difference reported in many of

the studies. Also, some studies report results for both value added and some
physical measure of output. The results show no tendency to obtain
systematically larger estimates of productivity gains under unionism when

output is measured in terms of value added. This concern about possible
systematic upward bias seems to have unnecessarily limited the scope of recent
UP studies to markets where output can be measured in physical terms.

Turning from methodology to results, there seem to be three main

conclusions from the private sector UP studies summarized in Table 2. The most
striking conclusion is that many studies tend to find productivity to be higher
under unionism, even after one controls for the greater capital and skill

intensity of unionized workplaces. This implies that there are sizable
productivity gains associated with the voice and shock effects discussed above
and that the productivity losses associated with union work rules, reduced
management flexibility, and no-carrots/no-sticks are relatively small.

Brown and Medoff (1978) was the first published study to show productivity

to be higher under unionism. They found that in 1972, productivity in
unionized manufacturing establishments was as much as 25 percent higher than in

nonunion settings. Work done by Jonathan Leonard reported in Freeman and
Medoff (1984) replicated this finding for 1977. Further substantiating
evidence was provided in Frantz's (1976) study of the furniture industry. All

12

of these studies used value added as their output measure. Clark (1980a,b)
found similar conclusions in the cement industry in both a cross section study
based on 1973-1976 data and a before-after comparison of productivity in six

plants unionized between 1953 and 1976. Clark was the first to report results
where output was measured in physical units (tons of Portland cement).
Two manufacturing studies found no union-nonunion productivity difference:

Clark's (1984) study of lines of business in 902 large corporations and Kaufman

and Kaufman's (1987) study of 37 auto parts manufacturing plants. Almost all
of Clark's sample consists of Fortune 1000 companies, whereas other studies

examine firms of all sizes. If the union productivity advantage found in other
studies is limited to smaller organizations, then his results could still be
consistent with studies finding a positive overall union productivity effect.

Another possible explanation for the difference between Clark's results and
those of Brown and Medoff is that tiP studies are very sensitive to different

aggregation techniques. It is instructive to note that Clark's study also
finds that unions reduce profit rates in unconcentrated industries but not in
concentrated industries, exactly opposite to the pattern found in other studies

of unionization and profitability using Census and stock market data. Further
work is needed to determine the role played by aggregation and sample
restrictions based on firm size in generating these two very different sets of

results for manufacturing. It is more difficult to pinpoint possible
explanations for the findings of Kaufman and Kaufman, except to note that there

is no reason to expect unions to be associated with higher productivity in
every setting.

Finally, Bemmels (1988) finds productivity to be 32 percent lower in

unionized plants in manufacturing. This finding is based on 46 responses

13

generated from a survey of 1,000 firms, raising questions about the

representativeness of the sample. The results also imply an implausibly low
estimate of capital's share of output. Despite these limitations, this is the
only UP study based on recent data.

The second main conclusion is that the impact of unionism on productivity

varies with product market structure. This is shown very strikingly in my
studies (1986a, 1986b, l988b) of various types of construction projects. In
private sector work, the productivity of union contractors is much greater than
that of nonunion contractors, whereas there is no significant union-nonunion

productivity difference in projects completed for the public sector. These are
the same unions and the same contractors. In the hospital and nursing home
sample, they are the same types of structures. Two key reasons for the
difference in the results seem to be inadequate pressures for cost minimization
in the public sector and prevailing wage laws that effectively prevent
competition from nonunion contractors in many markets.

The third main conclusion is that the impact of unionism on productivity

can change dramatically over time. Connerton, Freeman, and Medoff (1983) found
that in 1965 productivity of union mines in the bituminous coal industry was 25

to 30 percent greater than that of nonunion mines. A mere ten years later,

productivity in union mines was 20 to 25 percent lower. They attribute this
largely to changes in the leadership of the United Mine Workers (UMW) union.

Until 1960 the union was run by John L. Lewis. Operations were centralized and
internal dissent was not tolerated. After Lewis' retirement there was frequent
turnover in union leadership (including the conviction of union president Tony
Boyle for ordering the murder of his opponent Joseph Yablonski) and a breakdown
in discipline, reflected in a rapid increase in the number of wildcat strikes.

14

The union productivity advantage has also declined substantially in the

construction industry. My l988a study shows that for the entire industry union
productivity was about 20 percent higher than nonunion productivity in 1972,

but a statistically insignificant 6 and 8 percent higher in 1977 and 1982. A
key factor behind this change seems to be the rising share of union members
working for nonunion contractors, which has offset the lack of training
possessed by most nonunion workers. In both bituminous coal and construction,
the market share of unionized establishments has declined substantially as one
would expect when higher wages are no longer offset by higher productivity.
Only one study has been done of the impact of unions in the service

sector. Craddy and Hall (1985) compared productivity of the 30 banking
establishments unionized in 1982 with e matched sample of 30 nonunion banks.
They found productivity to be 11 percent lower in the unionized banks.
Even in cases where unionism is associated with higher productivity, the
"bottom line" question is whether this efficiency gain is offset by higher

union wages. The most direct way of examining this question is to estimate a
cost function, a relationship linking total costs to input prices and

output.

The cost function evidence is mixed. My 1987 study finds that average cost per
square foot is about the same for office buildings constructed by union and
nonunion contractors, with union contractors having a cost advantage

on large

office buildings and nonunion contractors having an advantage on smaller

projects. The same study found nonunion contractors had a cost advantage in
school and hospital construction. In retail construction,

my 1988b study found

roughly equal costs for union and nonunion contractors. Cost studies have also
been done for hospitals. Salkever (1982) and Sloan and Adamache (1984) both
find unionism associated with higher costs.

15

Indirect cost estimates can be obtained by comparing the union effects on

productivity and wages as long as information is available on labor's share of

total costs. Estimates of the impact of unions on wages almost always come
from data on individual workers, whereas the productivity results are based on

establishments or Census aggregates of establishments. Lewis concludes that
estimates of union-nonunion wage gaps based on aggregated data "substantially

overestimate" (1986, p. 45) the true union impact. Without knowing the impact
of aggregation on the productivity gap estimates, comparisons of wage and

production equation results must be interpreted with some care. These
comparisons generally find that when unions are associated with higher

productivity, the union-nonunion wage gap is slightly larger than the

productivity gap, implying that union and nonunion costs are comparable. Of
course, in studies finding zero or negative union productivity effects, higher
union wages necessarily imply higher costs.
The most relevant "bottom line" measure from the firm's point of view is

profits. Studies of the effect of unions on profitability are surveyed in
Freeman and Medoff (1984, ch. 12) and Addison and Hirsch (1989). The profit

studies all reach the same conclusion: unions reduce profits. Whether this
reflects a transfer from owners to union members or a loss in efficiency
remains a subject of ongoing research, which is discussed very well by Addison
and Hirsch.

16

III.

EVIDENCE ON SOURCES OF UNION IMPACT

The evidence sununarizeci above shows that unionization is often correlated

with higher productivity and that the impact of unionization on productivity
varies across different sectors of the economy and over time within each

sector. Yet it does not reveal any information about the mechanisms through
which these productivity adjustments take place. In fact, many of the studies
summarized above make no effort to account for the sources of the reported

union-nonunion productivity difference. In these studies unionism is nothing
more than a label on a black box, inside of which are hidden the true
mechanisms of adjustments at the workplace (Lewin and Feuille, 1983).
In defense of the "black box" studies, including Allen (1986b. 1988b),

three points should be noted. First, the reaction of most academic economists
to studies that claimed to find higher productivity under unionism (holding
skills and capital-labor ratios constant) can be best characterized as
incredulous. This meant that the authors of the earliest studies had to devote
a considerable amount of research effort to establishing the robustness of
their results to all conceivable theoretical and econometric objections. These
efforts seem to be much more appreciated within the economics profession than

in other academic circles. Second, many of the studies have relied on
secondary data sources and in many cases the party collecting the data was not

at all concerned with UP issues. In such situations it is extremely difficult
for the researcher to derive any statistical conclusions about what is going on

inside the black box. Third, it can be argued that the black box criticism
applies across all research areas in labor economics, not just the UP

literature. Why are education and experience correlated with earnings? Why
are real wages procyclical? What determines when a person will retire? Many

17

other fields of research in labor economics have not advanced very far beyond
the black box stage.

One simple approach used in many UP studies to establish the mechanisms
through which unions influence productivity is to add interaction ternis between

unionization and other variables or, equivalently, to split the sample into

smaller groups and compare the union coefficients of each group. For instance,
Clark (1980a) finds that the union coefficient in cement manufacturing is
greater in the Southwest than in the South or North Central regions and is

positive for new plants but near zero for old plants. Noting the prevalence of
nonunion plants in the Southwest, Clark points out that union plants in that

region may be responding to greater competitive pressure. Another example of
this approach is my 1988a study, in which the union coefficient varies with the

percentage of union construction workers employed by nonunion contractors. The
results showed that the union productivity advantage is much smaller in areas

where a large share of union workers are employed in the open shop. This
suggests that worker characteristics such as training and experience are key

sources of the union productivity advantage in that sector. Clark (1984)
tested whether the union coefficient varied with the market share of the firm
or with percentage of the firm unionized but found that neither factor had any
impact on the size of the union coefficient. Graddy and Hall tested the impact
of the size of the bargaining unit and the maturity of the labor-management
relationship on productivity in their union sample, but once again neither

variable had any explanatory power. Other researchers have no doubt tried this
approach as well and come up emptyhanded. Estimating interaction terms thus
far has yielded a couple of useful clues about possible sources of unionnonunion productivity differences but no hard evidence.

18

An approach that would seem to be much more promising is to collect data
on the mechanisms believed to cause union-nonunion productivity differences and

add these variables to the model. This is based on the premise that the union
productivity effect varies within the sample and that some of this variation
reflects differences across both union and nonunion firms in such causal

variables as turnover, job satisfaction, communication, and management. In
theory one could account for how much of the union productivity advantage

results from a particular variable by observing the change in the union

coefficient when that variable is added to the model. For instance, suppose
that differences in job satisfaction fully account for the union-nonunion

productivity difference in a particular sample. Then when this variable is
added to the model, the union coefficient should become zero.
This approach was first used by Brown and Medoff to determine how much of

their estimated union productivity advantage could be explained in terms of

reduced turnover. When they added the quit rate to their model, the union
coefficient dropped from .205 to .160, indicating that lower turnover accounts
for 22 percent of the overall effect and that other factors (communication,
morale, management, etc.) account for the remainder.
In their study of the coal industry, Connerton, Freeman, and Medoff
compared the growth in strikes across different states to productivity growth,

finding that productivity declined the most in states where strikes increased
most rapidly.

I have also used this approach in two of my studies of the construction

industry. In my 1984 study using Census data, I added the ratio of production
workers to total employment and the fraction of workers who have completed

apprenticeships to the model. The first variable was meant crudely to adjust

19

for changes in the occupational structure (a control for observable labor
quality associated with experience and education was already in the model)1

whereas the second reflected training practices. These two variables accounted
for 15 to 27 percent of the union effect on productivity.

The data set analyzed in Allen (1986a) was collected by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics to measure and analyze productivity in the construction

industry. A likely source of some of the union productivity advantage in
office building construction was lower supervisory requirements. To test this,
I added the ratio of supervisor to total hours and found this accounted for 10
percent of the union effect.

A unique aspect of this data set was that the interviewers asked the
general contractors questions about the impact of seven different factors on
productivity in their project: weather, strikes, building codes, apprenticeship

programs, prefabricated components, standardized components, and supply of

skilled workers. Although this battery of questions ignores some obviously
important factors, one would think ex ante that some of this information would
help identify the underlying sources of higher union productivity.

Ex post this information turned out to be nearly useless. There turned
out to be very little difference between the responses of union and nonunion
contractors.

"No effect" was by far the most common response for every factor

on the survey. The factor that seemed to have the biggest impact on
productivity in the contractors' minds was the weather, especially among union

contractors (for reasons unknown). Complicating matters further was the
finding that when each factor was added to the model, its coefficient almost

always turned out to be zero. The only reportable result I obtained from this
analysis was a finding that the greater tendency among union contractors to

20

report that standardized components raised productivity accounted for as much

as 8 percent of the overall effect. Combining this with the supervisor ratio
and two other variables (ratio of unskilled and semiskilled hours to total

hours and dollar volume of office building construction), I was able to
"explain" 26 percent of the overall union effect.
Kaufman and Kaufman also tried this approach and came up emptyhanded.
Their study probed into eight different personnel policies: grievances,

promotions, layoffs, restrictive work rules, job reassignment during slack

periods, work by supervisors, job posting systems, and profit-sharing. They
found union plants made greater use of seniority in promotions and layoffs and

were more likely to have restrictive work rules, grievance systems, and job

posting systems. Union plants were less likely to have profit sharing plans
and managers in those plants had less ability to reassign workers or use

supervisors. Ho one should find any of these conclusions especially
surprising. What is a bit shocking, however, is that none of these policy
variables were at all related to productivity. Granted the sample size was
small (30 plants for this part of the analysis), but it is naive to think that
anyone looking into these issues is going to have the CPS-esque luxury of
thousands of observations.

The only other way to determine the sources of union productivity effects
besides statistical probing is that old, familiar business school standby -.

the case study. The case study will rarely produce quantitative evidence, but
it holds some promise in regard to its ability to determine whether a

particular channel of union effect has played an important role in a particular

situation. To explain his before-after finding that unionization raises
productivity by 6 to 8 percent, Clark (l980b) interviewed union officials and

21

management. His interviews successfully isolated changes in personnel
practices. When they were nonunion, plants tended to have no formal grievance
procedures (and thus very few grievances); promotions, layoffs, and recalls

were made by foremen using unspecified criteria. This all changed in a
predictable fashion after unionization.

Clark found substantial changes in management. In each case a new plant
manager was brought in and foremen were either replaced or retrained. In most
plants, formal methods of organizational control were introduced. This usually
involved setting production targets, followed by reviewing and assessing actual

performance. One plant manager noted that "..

.before

the union this place was

run like a family; now we run it like a business." Clark concludes that these
changes were one of the "key adjustments to unionization."
Clark's findings about changes in workers' behavior point out another

potential limitation of the case study approach. Unable to collect beforeafter data on turnover, absenteeism, worker attitudes, or discipline problems,
Clark had nothing to draw on except interviews with union and management

representatives. He found no solid evidence of any change in turnover or
absenteeism, whereas union and management views concerning changes in morale
often differed.

IV. ASSESSMENT AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

The UP literature has documented large productivity differences between

seemingly comparable union and nonunion establishments. The sign and the

22

magnitude of the estimated differences vary considerably across different

studies. Evidence indicates that unionized establishments are most likely to
have a productivity advantage when they must compete on equal terms with the

nonunion sector. The two studies that have examined unionism and productivity
from a dynamic standpoint have both found the estimated union-nonunion
difference to have changed dramatically over time in a direction unfavorable to
the competitive position of unionized establishments.
Faced with this evidence, it would seem very difficult to deny that
differences in the human resource practices and policies must be at least

partly responsible for these productivity differences. This is a very
encouraging signal for the HRFP literature. The prospect that human resource
management can generate productivity changes of as much as 25 percent should be
sufficient to motivate and support HRFP research.
Nonetheless, I think it would be fair to say that most academic labor
economists today remain far from convinced that such a conclusion can be drawn

from the UP literature. A detailed critique is provided by Addison and Hirsch.
Here I will focus on what I believe to be the two most serious contentions.
One reason behind this skepticism is that information about labor quality in
the UP literature is usually limited to occupational mix, schooling, and

experience. If this were all employers really needed to know about the
potential contribution of a job applicant, they would not have to spend any

resources on screening. Of course, we all know that employers learn much more
than this about all applicants and employees. This information, known to the
employer but not to the person analyzing the data, is usually referred to as

unobservable labor quality. The problem this poses for the UP literature is
that under the greater competitive restraint imposed by higher wages, managers

23

in the union sector should tend to hire more productive individuals than those

in the nonunion sector. Thus, some of any estimated union productivity
advantage is likely to be attributable to unobservable labor quality.

The issue is "how much?" The estimated union-nonunion productivity
difference has not been at all sensitive to the inclusion of observable labor

quality control variables in any UP study. If the estimates are not sensitive
to factors such as schooling, experience, and occupation, it is very hard to

believe they will be more sensitive to some missing variable. Observable human
capital variables generally explain as much as half the interpersonal variation

in wages. Are we to believe that unobservables explain a much larger fraction
of interestablishment differences in productivity?

Selectivity bias is another rationale given by those who discount the UP

literature. Unions presumably are successful in raising wages whenever they

organize an establishment. Some organizations adapt successfully. The data
sets used in the UP studies generally do not contain information on those that

do not. As a result, the estimated productivity level of unionized
establishments is biased upward.

This criticism can be questioned on both theoretical and empirical

grounds. Theoretically, selection bias can operate in either direction. The
case outlined above is one of positive selection bias where the "best plants"

are the ones that get organized. Yet from a logical standpoint, one must also
admit the possibility of negative selection bias where the "worst plants" get
organized, in which case the union-nonunion productivity difference is

underestimated by OLS regressions. Most experts on union organizing campaigns
will tell you that today it is the "worst plants" that stand the best chance of

getting organized. Whether this was true fifty years ago when CIO-affiliated

24

unions were organizing the likes of U.S. Steel and Ford is more questionable.

The observed distribution of union and nonunion establishments in any data set
is a byproduct of selection processes from different historical periods. Their
overall direction is uncertain.
Empirically, note that Clark obtained exactly the same results in simple
cross section and longitudinal analysis in his studies of cement industry

productivity. This is difficult to reconcile with pronounced selectivity bias.
More fundamentally, many studies of the union wage effect have attempted to
isolate a positive selectivity bias in OLS wage equations generated by the same

process that supposedly has biased the UP literature. These studies,
summarized in Lewis (1986), have failed to produce any agreement about not only
whether the bias is small or large but also whether it is positive or negative.
Even if one accepts the conclusion that the UP literature has firmly

established that human resource management practices can generate large
productivity differences, the one discouraging signal for the HElP literature
is the extremely limited knowledge that has been obtained about the mechanisms

through which human resource policies and outcomes affect productivity. The UP
literature has produced quantitative evidence that productivity is related to

supervision and training in construction and turnover in manufacturing. In
each case, however, most of the union-nonunion productivity difference remains

unexplained. All other studies that have attempted to obtain quantitative
evidence about sources of union-nonunion productivity differences have been

unsuccessful. Clark (1980b) obtained some useful conclusions about the impact
of unionization on management from interviews, but even here one is left with
the question of which was more important - - changes in managerial techniques or

25

changes in managerial personnel? Recall also that the interview approach was
poorly suited for learning about changes in worker behavior.
To some extent this dearth of conclusions can be attributed to faulty

experimental design. One can point in some cases to the use of secondary data
sources; in others, to inadequate resources for primary data collection or the

inherent limitations of interviews. If one accepts this line of argument, it
would then be sensible to conclude that one way to increase the odds that
future studies will be more successful is to provide those doing such studies
with more resources and to direct those resources toward collecting more
quantitative data on a wider array of variables from more establishments.
This very well may be the ticket, but after reading Katz, Kochan, and

Keefe (1987), I have reservations. Katz, Kochan, and Keefe analyzed
productivity differences across 53 plants of a major automobile manufacturer in

the United States and Canada. They were able to examine how four productivity
measures (supervisors per 100 production workers, labor hours per vehicle,
adjusted labor hours, and a product quality index) were related to grievances,
absence rates, relative wage levels, local unemployment rates, and responses to
a 48-question survey on managerial discretion, pace of work, worker and union

participation, and the use of teams. The data sets used in even the best UP
studies seem spartan in comparison.

Did "more data" break open the black box? The first new challenge the
authors faced was a surplus of data, more variables than observations napped

with multicollinearity. To deal with this, they resorted to principal
components analysis to reduce 48 survey responses to four variables. This
raises the hackles of economists, who always go for Colonel Sanders and pass on

the McNuggets. Focusing on the results rather than the processing method, one

26

sees that even with massive amounts of information, it is hard to establish
quantitative links between human resource management variables and "bottom

line" outcomes. The principal component reflecting management discretion and
pace of work was the only variable to be consistently related to the

productivity variables. Except for the absence rate, which was related to two
productivity variables, the other variables were either only weakly correlated
or uncorrelated with productivity.

The message here is not to belittle the final product. The findings on
managerial discretion and work pace are a very important contribution to the

literature. The point here is simply that new, bigger data sets are not a
guaranteed route to success. The key methodological message I received from
Katz, Kochan, and Keefe's study is that the linkages between human resources
and productivity are very difficult to sort out and that models that try to do
the whole job in a single step (equation) may not be up to the job.

An alternative approach to getting inside the black box is that used by
studies that focus on a specific mechanism through which unions affect
productivity but do not attempt to go further and show how that mechanism is

related to productivity in the particular sample being examined. Summaries of
selected studies are reported in Table 3; Freeman and Medoff (1984) contains a

more comprehensive set of references. These studies have shown that unions are
associated with lower turnover, higher absenteeism, less management flexibility
in staffing, more work effort, less overall job satisfaction, reduced wage

dispersion, greater employee benefits, and less investment in R&D. The
findings at this stage seem very robust; each is derived from a number of
different data sets using a variety of specifications.

27

One way of integrating the results of the UP studies with those of studies

focusing on intervening variables is illustrated in Figure 1. The figure
demonstrates a simple model of how human resource policies affect firm
performance. It is not overly dissimilar front the approach used in some

textbooks on human resource management. Companies make choices about how they
hire, train, pay, and manage their workers. This in turn determines human
resource outcomes, as exhibited by easily measured variables such as labor
costs and turnover and by not so easily measured variables such as effort and

cooperation. The "bottom line" depends on the interaction of human resource
outcomes with other firm decisions (e.g., marketing) and the external
environment.

The best UP studies attempt to link productivity directly to changes in

human resource policies associated with unionization. The studies that focus
directly on the intervening variables through which unions influence firm

performance in effect attempt to link human resource outcomes to policies. One
obvious gap is that our knowledge of how these intervening variables are

related to firm performance indicators is very limited. Some progress has been
made along these lines in the studies of turnover, absenteeism, and work rules

cited in Table 3. The studies of grievance procedures summarized in Ichniowski
and Lewin (1987) are also noteworthy in this regard.
Even though the UP studies indicate that human resource policies and
outcomes have a large influence on firm performance, the challenge facing the

HRFP literature is to develop testable hypotheses that will advance the theory
well beyond what is presented in Figure 1 and to develop data sources

appropriate for testing them. Economic theories about labor markets and
employment contracts often focus on decision variables involving selection,

28

compensation, supervision, and training. Sometimes the models are really
designed for welfare analysis (e.g., share economy) or to explain phenomena

that seem paradoxical to economists (e.g., wage rigidity). New models or
perhaps even the retooling of some existing models could lead to new insights
into how firms make hiring and compensation decisions.
In other cases, the empirical implications of the model are quite clear,

but appropriate data for empirical testing are not available. More data
collection funded by the government, as suggested by Hamermesh (1988), is one

route that shows promise. The development of closer linkages between academic
economists and human resource practitioners could also help in developing

better case studies of single firms and possibly assembling panels of
establishment data.

B.

A.

Onthe-job

Occupational

2.

3.

skilled

in

Compreeeed sage Structure reduces
incentives to advance
Pay raises rarely based on merit
Seniority rule, restrict ability
to promote on merit
Incentive pay plans resisted by
many unions
Seniority rules for promotion,
job-based pay systems eliminate
excessive rivalry and encourage
informal on-thejob training

Incentives for
pay and
promotion

Cooperation
among sorkers

2.

use of
labor
response
increased labor costs
and compressed sage structure
Cratt traditions in some trades
More use of skilled labor reduces
eupervisor-sorker ratio

to

Nore

ratees

Longer tenure Of union sorkers
payoff to firm From training

Apprenticeahi p programs encourage
broader training in certain trades

Raised to offset increased labor costs
Raised to offset restrictions on
managemenVe ability to re-assign
or terminate

1.

Effort Level,

training

Hiring standards

1.

Union Effect

HoR Productivity Chanlee Under Unionism

Variable

1.

Skill levels

Table

Negative

N

N

Positive

Negative
Negative

N

N

Negative

Positive
Positive

Positive

N

N. N

N

N

Positive

N

H,

Positive

Positive
Positive

Impact on
Productivity

H, N

N
N

N=nonsage)

(Nsage,

effect

Type of

'C

C.

1.

(continued)

1.

break time

Norkors have greater voice in how
workplace is run, increasing morale
Diesatiefaotion with union interferes

Job
satisfaction

Professionalism

Impact on

Positive
Positive

N
N,H

Negative

Negative
N
N

Positive

Positive
N

N

Positive
N

Positive

Positive
N

N

Negative

Negative

Productivity

N

N

Nnonwage)

(Nwae.

Type of
effect

on policy in making
dayto-day decisions
'Establish system of production goals and
targets, accompanied by regular reviews
and meetings with supervisors

Greater emphasis

Union creates dissatisfaction where
none previously existed

with work

management
Suggestions more likely when bargaining
allows gains to be shared between
firm, workers
Norkers more willing to use chennele
in union establishment

Negotiations, grievances open channels
for corkers to send messages to

Grievance procedures used to protect
inoompetent or dishonest workers
Supervisors unable to discipline or
discharge workers on arbitrary basis

exeseive

Excessive staffing, requirements of
unnecessary work, output restrictions.

Union Effect

tion

Labormanage
ment communica-

Discipline

Hork rules

Management

b.

5.

1*.

3.

Variable

Table

D.

1.

(continued)

Technology

intensive methods, inveet.ent in
labor-saving RID
Nork rules prevent uee of most
eftioient technologies
RID reduced out of fear union nih
capture all benefits

Higher ages encourage more capital-

Negative
Negative

N
N

N

Positive

Negative
Positive
N

R,N

Longer tenure reducee recruiting
and hiring expenditures
Applioatione must be screened more carefully
Hiring halls organize labor market uhen
morkere not attached to a single
employer

Personnel
functions

Positive

Negative

N

R,N

Negative

N

3.

Negative

N

Dnion juriedictiona restrict ability
to reassign personnel during slack
periods
Seniority rules interfere nith staffing
especially during layoffs
Contracts limit subcontracting, overtime

Flexibility

2.

Frequently
positive

N

Impact On
Productivity

Replao.ment of plant manager,
replacement or retraining
of eupervisore

(Rnage,
Nnonwage)

Profeeeionaiiem
(continued)

Union Effect

Type of
effect

1.

Variable

Table

2.

buildings,

19714

Commercial office

Square footage

36 to 38

1972: 17 to 22
1977: 8
1982: 6

Value added
deflated by
price or cost
index

State by industry
aggretates

1972-1982

Structures

1q65:
1970:
1975:
1980:

Tons

Establishments

Bituminous coal,
19651980

33 to 38
U to 8
20 to 17
18 to 14

2

Value added

Establishments

Luto parts, 1982

(19814a,

Allen (1Q86.)

Allen

1988a)

Connerton, Freeman and
Nedoff (1983)

(1987)

kaufman and Kaufman

Clark (1980b)
6 to 8

Tons

Before-after
comparisons of six
establishments

1953-1976

Cement,

Clark (1980.)
7 to 10

Establishments

1973-1976

Cement,

Tons

Value added

Construction,

(19814)

Bemmels (1988)

Clark

Bronn and Kedoff (1978)
Freeman and Nedoff (198k)

Source

Frants (19Th)

32

2

1977: 31

1972:10 to 25%

Results

15

Value added

Value added

Value added

Establishments

Establishments

tions

Linen of business
in large corpora-

State by industry
aggregates

Output
Measure

Nooden household
furniture, 19Th

1983

Manufacturing,

Manufacturing,
1970-1980

19721977

Type of Data

EvidenoS on Union-Nonunion Productivity Difference. in the Private Sector

Manufacturing,

Sample

Table

(continued)

Commercial banking,
1978

Retail

Lending products 11

to $

Establishment.

51

2

23

1

ResultS

Square footage

Square footage

Square footage

Square footage

Output
Measure

Structures

Structures

Public hospitals
and nursing
ho..., 1976

store. and
shopping centers,
197?

Structures

Structure.

Type of Date

Private hospital.
and nursing
homes, 1976

1972

Elementary and
secondary school.,

Sample

Table 2.

(1985)

Graddy and Hall

Allen (1988b)

Allen (1986W

Allen (1986b)

Allen (1986a)

SoUrce

3.

,Job

satisfaction

Union members report more satisfaction with
breadandbutter aspects, but less satis
faction with promotions, supervisors, job
Overall
content, and resource adequacy.
levels of job satisfaction are lower for
union workers.

penalty.

Kochan (1979),
Freeman (1978)

Duncan and Stafford (1980)

Allen (19860)

Union and nonunion construction contractors
and subcontractors have equal flexibility in
substituting capital and materials for labor,
but union contractors have less flexibility
in substituting supervisory and unskilled
labor for skilled labor. Results in excess
staffing of 3%, excess cost8 of 2%.
Union members report greater work effort, more
difficulty in getting a couple of hours oft'
work, less choice in how they can do work,
and less ability to refuse overtime without

Freeman and Hedoff (1982)

Union end nonunion establishments in aanuracturing have equal flexibility in adjusting
capitallabor ratios, but union establishments
have loss flexibility in adjusting ratio of
production to nonproduction labor.

Nanagement
flexibility

Work effort

Allen (1984b)

Absence rates are 30 to 40 percent higher
among union members.

Absence rate

Free.an (1980a)

Voluntary quits are 50 to 100 percent lower
among union members.

Source

Turnover

Results

Evjd.nc. on Sourcs Di' UnionNonunion Productivity Differences

Variable

T.ble

3.

(continued)

dispersion

Firms in highly unionized industries invest
lees intensively in RID nd RID adds
relatively less to the market value of'
such firms.
Unionized firms invest less in capital

Investment

Retired union corkers receive larger benefits
upon retirement and larger benefit increases
after retire.ent.
Union iorkers retire
earlier, allocing them to collect benefits
over a longer period.

Unionhted establishments more likely to have
pension., health insurance, overtime premiums,
.nd shift differentials, chore.. they are
les, likely to have bonuses.

Union cage policies reduce cage dispersion
cithin and across establishmente.

Results

RID

Employee benefits

Rage

Variable

Table

and

Bronars and Deere (1987),
Hirsch (forthcoming)

Rtrschey (1986)

Hirsch,

and Clark (1986)

Connolly,

Allen

Freeman (1981)

Freeman (1980b, 1982)

Source

36

Financa

Human resource
outcomes

Human resource

policies

Selection

outcomes
PrOL'its

Employee voice

Performance
Turnover

Training

Attendance

Costs

Compensation

Flexibility
Job satisfaction

Monitoring
Labor relations

Labor

costs

Stock value

I

Productivity
Growth
Market share

External

Other firm

influences

policies

Production

Labor supply
Collective bargaining
Legal environment

Marketing

Competition

IS & U
Information

Consumers

Figure 1. Model of human resource policies and firm

Finance

performance

37

REFERENCES
Abraham, Katharine G., and Medoff, James L. "Length of Service and Promotions
in Union and Nonunion Work Groups." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 38
(April 1985): 408-420.

Addison, John T., and Hirsch, Barry T. "Union Effects on Productivity,
Profits, and Growth: Has the Long Run Arrived?" Journal of Labor Economics 7
(January 1989): forthcoming.
Allen, Steven C. "Unionized Construction Workers Are More Productive."
Quarterly Journal of Economics 99 (May 1984): 251-274 (a).

"Trade Unions, Absenteeism, and Exit-Voice." Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 37 (April 1984): 331-345 (b).
.

"Unionization and Productivity in Office Building and School
Construction." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 39 (January 1986): 187201 (a)
.

"The Effect of Unionism on Productivity in Privately and Publicly Owned
Hospitals and Nursing Homes." Journal of Labor Research 7 (Winter 1986): 59.

68 (b).
. "Union Work Rules and Efficiency in the Building Trades." Journal of
Labor Economics 4 (April 1986): 212-242 (c).

"Declining Unionization in Construction: The Facts and the Reasons."
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 41 (April 1988): 343-359 (a).
.

"Further Evidence on Union Efficiency in Construction." Industrial
Relations 27 (Spring 1988): 232-240 (b).
.

Allen, Steven C., and Clark, Robert L. "Unions, Pension Wealth, and AgeCompensation Profiles." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 39 (July 1986):
502-517.

Bemmels, Brian. "Managerial Efficiency, Unions, and Productivity at
Manufacturing Plants." Mimeograph. Edmonton, Alberta: University of Alberta,
1988.

Bronars, Stephen C., and Deere, Donald R. "Union Threats, Unionization, and
Firm Behavior: A Decision Event Study." Mimeograph. Santa Barbara, Cal.:
University of Claifornia, 1987.
Brown, Charles, and Medoff, James L. "Trade Unions in the Production Process."
Journal of Political Economy 86 (June 1978): 355-378.
Clark, Kim B. "Unionization and Productivity: Micro-Econometric Evidence."
quarterly Journal of Economics 95 (December 1980): 613-639 (a).

38

"The Impact of Unionization on Productivity: A Case Study." Industrial
and Labor Relations Review 33 (July 1980): 451-479 (b).
.

"Unionization and Firm Performance." American Economic Review 74
.
(December 1984): 893-919.
Connolly, Robert A.; Hirsch, Barry T.; and Hirschey, Mark. "Union Rent Seeking,
Intangible Capital, and Market Value of the Firm." Review of Economics and
Statistics 68 (November 1986): 567-577.
Connerton, Marguerite; Freeman, Richard B.; and Medoff, James L. "Industrial
Relations and Productivity: A Study of the U.S. Bituminous Coal Industry."
Mimeograph. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University, 1983.

Duncan, Greg J., and Stafford, Frank P. "Do Union Members Receive Compensating
Wage Differentials?" American Economic Review 70 (June 1980): 355-371.
Ehrenberg, Ronald C., and Milkovich, George T. "Compensation and Firm
Performance." In Human Resources and the Performance of the Firm, edited by
j. Madison, Wis.: Industrial Relations Research Association,
M.M. Kleiner
1987.

Frantz, John R. "The Impact of Trade Unions on Production in the Wooden
Household Furniture Industry." Senior honors thesis, Harvard College, 1976.
Freeman, Richard B. "Job Satisfaction as an Economic Variable." American
Economic Review 68 (May 1978): 135-141.

"The Exit-Voice Tradeoff in the Labor Market: Unionism, Job Tenure,
Quits, and Separations." Quarterly Journal of Economics 94 (June 1980): 643674 (a).
.

"Unionism and the Dispersion of Wages." Industrial and Labor Relations
Review 34 (July 1980): 3-23 (b).
.

"The Effect of Unionism on Fringe Benefits." Industrial and Labor
Relations Review 34 (July 1981): 489-509.
.

"Union Wage Practices and Wage Dispersion Within Establishments."
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 36 (october 1982): 3-21.
.

Freeman, Richard B., and Medoff, James L. "Substitution between Production
Labor and Other Inputs in Unionized and Nonunionized Manufacturing." Review of
Economics and Statistics 64 (May 1982): 220-233.
.

What Do Unions Do? New York: Basic, 1984.

Craddy, Duane B. , and Hall, Gary. "Unionization and Productivity in Commercial

Banking." Journal of Labor Research 6 (Summer 1985): 249-262.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. "Data Difficulties in Labor Economics." National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2622. Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, 1988.

39

"Innovative Activity, Productivity Growth, and Firm
Hirsch, Barry T.
Performance: Are Labor Unions a Spur or a Deterrent?" In Advances in ADDlied
Microeconomics, Vol. 5, edited by Albert N. Link and V. Kerry Smith.
Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press, forthcoming.
Hirscbman, Albert 0. Exit. Voice, and Loyalty. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard, 1970.

Ichniowski, Casey, and Lewin, David. "Grievance Procedures and Firm
Performance." In Human Resources and the Performance of the Firm, edited by
M.M. Kleiner . Madison, Wis.: Industrial Relations Research Association,
1987.

Katz, Harry C.; Kochan, Thomas A.; and Keefe, Jeffrey H. "Industrial Relations
and Productivity in the U.S. Automobile Industry." BrookinEs Papers on Economic
Activity (1987:3): 685-728.
Kaufman, Robert S., and Kaufman, Roger T. "Union Effects on Productivity,
Personnel Practices, and Survival in the Automotive Parts Industry." Journal of
Labor Research 8 (Fall 1987): 333-350.
Kleiner, Morris M.; Block, Richard N.; Roomkin, Myron; and Salsburg, Sidney W.,
eds. Human Resources and the Performance of the Firm. Madison, Wis.: Industrial
Relations Research Association, 1987.

Kochan, Thomas A. "How American Workers View Labor Unions." Monthly Labor
Review 102 (April 1979): 15-22.
Kochan, Thomas A.; Katz, Harry C.; and McKersie, Robert B. The Transformation
of American Industrial Relations. New York: Basic, 1986.
Lewin, David, and Feuille, Peter. "Behavioral Research in Industrial
Relations." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 36 (April 1983): 341-360.

Lewis, H. Gregg. Union Relative Waze Effects: A Survey. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1986.
"Unionization and the Cost of Producing Hospital Services."
Salkever, David S.
Journal, of Labor Research 3 (Summer 1982): 311-33.
Slichter, Sumner H.; Healy, James J.; and Livernash, E. Robert. The InDact of
Collective Bargaining on Manaement. Washington: Brookings Institution, 1960.

Sloan, Frank A., and Adamache, Killard W. "The Role of Unions in Hospital Cost
Inflation." Industrial and Labor Relations Review 37 (January 1984): 252-262.

