                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                PHYSICIAN CHARACTERISTICS AND PATIENT SURVIVAL:
                     EVIDENCE FROM PHYSICIAN AVAILABILITY

                                          Joseph J. Doyle Jr.

                                        Working Paper 27458
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w27458


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2020




I thank Charlie Brown, Michele Belot, Janet Currie, Gordon Dahl, Francesco Decarolis, David
Dranove, Andrea Ichino, Chris Knittel, Steven Levitt, Bentley MacLeod, Doug Miller, Kevin
Murphy, Mel Stephens, Tavneet Suri, and seminar participants at the Bocconi University, Cornell
University, European University Institute, University of Bologna, Ca'Forsci University, Einaudi
Institute for Economics and Finance, Georgetown University, Paris School of Economics, Prague
University of Economics, University of Bergen, University of Copenhagen, University of
California at San Diego, University of Chicago, University of Michigan, University of Verona,
University of Virginia, University of Zurich, for helpful suggestions. I thank Mauricio Caceres
and Kyle Barron for excellent research assistance. I gratefully acknowledge support from the
National Institutes of Health R01 AG41794. The views expressed herein are those of the author
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Joseph J. Doyle Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
Physician Characteristics and Patient Survival: Evidence from Physician Availability
Joseph J. Doyle Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 27458
July 2020
JEL No. I10

                                          ABSTRACT

Measuring physician quality is fundamental to understanding healthcare productivity, yet patient
sorting can confound attempts to estimate the types of physicians that improve survival. This
paper aims to overcome selection bias by exploiting plausibly exogenous variation in the mix of
physicians available to treat patients when they are admitted to the hospital via the emergency
department. One innovation is the construction of proxy measures for the types of physicians
available using 100% Medicare claims data. Physician characteristics considered include
specialty training, medical school quality rankings, sex, years of experience, and patient volume.
The main finding is that when heart failure patients enter the hospital when more cardiologists are
available, they are more likely to be treated directly by a cardiologist, have more invasive
procedures, and survive over the following year.


Joseph J. Doyle Jr.
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-516
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
jjdoyle@mit.edu
1     Introduction

What types of physicians achieve better health outcomes for their patients? The answer is
clearly important to patients choosing physicians, which is why healthcare providers, pay-
ers, and state-licensing organizations provide information on physician characteristics such
as specialty, medical training, sex, and years of experience. The answer is also impor-
tant to providers when making hiring decisions and determining the relative sizes of their
departments. Payers would also like to understand the types of physicians that provide
higher-quality care when choosing provider networks and compensation models. Indeed,
most leading ideas for payment reforms revolve around “paying for quality” to replace the
current method of “paying for quantity” of care. Related, public policies affect physician
characteristics directly, such as concentrating care at regional providers to increase physician
experience. For all of these reasons, it would be useful to know the effectiveness of different
types of physicians.
    A prime example is the case of specialists. A robust finding is that specialists provide more
intensive treatments, but evidence on improved patient health has been mixed. Steinwald
et al. [2019] summarize the evidence and find that a 1 percentage-point increase in the
proportion of physicians who provide primary care as opposed to specialist care would result
in $100 billion in healthcare savings over 10 years without any tradeoff in quality of care. As
a result, health policy advocates call for policies that reduce the disparity in pay between
specialists and general practitioners and subsidize the choice to become a general practitioner
in the first place [Basu et al., 2019, Levine et al., 2019, Steinwald et al., 2019].
    Despite this interest in the ability to characterize the types of physicians that achieve
better health outcomes, there are concerns that endogenous patient selection confounds
comparisons across physicians. For example, patients assigned to specialists appear healthier
than patients assigned to internal-medicine physicians, consistent with younger, healthier
patients being more suitable for invasive procedures. Another confounding factor is that
different types of physicians are matched to work environments that can differ with regard

                                                1
to complementary physical and human capital.
   The aim of this paper is to circumvent these estimation problems for a subset of pa-
tients—those who have health shocks and are admitted to the hospital via the emergency
department. Recent studies find that physician scheduling is effectively random within a
given hospital across short periods of time [Chan, forthcoming, Silver, 2020, Tsugawa et al.,
2017c]. The causal framework developed below uses this idea to compare patients exposed to
different combinations of physicians available on the day they enter the hospital. This empir-
ical strategy provides direct evidence on the implications of changing the mix of physicians
available (e.g. favoring the training and hiring of more general practitioners over specialists)
and indirect evidence on the returns to being treated by different types of physicians.
   One innovation in the paper is the construction of a proxy for physician availability from
claims data. In particular, 100% Medicare inpatient claims data are used to trace out which
physicians are admitting Medicare patients on any given date. Measures of the types of
physicians available are then constructed using “leave-out measures” that are not affected
by the physician assigned to any patient whose outcomes are studied.
   The main analysis focuses on heart failure patients, the most common diagnosis for
inpatient admission in the US [Hall et al.].1 The ubiquity of the condition helps insure
against concerns that physician schedules are set to match the types of patients arriving on
a given date or that the admission of a given patient changes the mix of physicians available
(through summoning an on-call physician for an unusual case, for example). In fact, internal
medicine physicians, not cardiologists, usually treat heart-failure patients, and the analysis
will test whether patients would benefit from greater involvement by cardiologists.
   The analysis considers the following physician characteristics: physician specialty, med-
ical school rankings, sex, years of experience, and patient volume. The results suggest that
within a given hospital, heart failure patients exposed to more cardiologists are more likely
   1
      Heart failure is the most common among the disaggregated conditions considered. Similarly, heart
failure is the most common primary 3-digit ICD-9 diagnosis code for patients in fee-for-service Medicare
studied here.



                                                   2
to survive to one year following the emergency admission. The results also show that having
more available cardiologists is strongly related to both treatment by a cardiologist and more
invasive procedures, and the higher level of treatment intensity appears to be worth the extra
expense.
    The other physician characteristics studied have more muted effects. One exception is
physician experience: when the mix of available physicians have a higher volume of heart-
failure patients over the prior year, patients have somewhat lower mortality. While these
other physician characteristics may relate to quality in general, the empirical strategy com-
pares different types of physicians within the same hospital. The comparison of specialists
and non-specialists is particularly relevant because it mimics the triage of patients across hos-
pital departments such as cardiology and internal medicine units, and it can inform policies
aimed at reducing the use of specialists in favor of lower-cost general practitioners.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 places the research in
the context of previous literature that relates physician characteristics to patient health
outcomes. Section 3 discusses the economic framework, empirical model, and data used to
estimate it. Section 4 presents the main results, and Section 5 concludes.



2     Background

This section reviews the literature that describes the relationship between the type of physi-
cian treating patients and the cost and quality of care provided. The main results relate to
returns to specialty care, and this aspect of the literature is described in more detail. Other
physician characteristics studied include volume and experience, physician training and prac-
tice styles, and physician sex. The empirical literature describing physician scheduling is then
described, as it forms the basis of the empirical strategy.




                                               3
2.1     Measuring Returns to Physician Specialty

2.1.1   Potential mechanisms for returns to specialty care

Specialization can improve productivity through greater experience and training. Currie and
Macleod [2017] develop a model to assess physician productivity along two dimensions: de-
cision making and procedural skill, and Abaluck et al. [2016] and Chan et al. [2020] highlight
the quality of diagnostic skill that varies across physicians. Specialization of training and
practice may improve performance along both of these dimensions. For example, the idea
that specialists have more current information was highlighted by Ayanian et al. [1994]. They
surveyed cardiologists, internists and family practitioners and found that cardiologists were
better informed than other physicians with respect to recent evidence on the effectiveness of
different drug therapies for acute myocardial infarction (AMI) patients.
   Further, the typical tradeoff associated with specialization is between the greater skill
of the specialist against the cost of coordination [Becker and Murphy, 1992, Meltzer, 2001].
In the current context, the assignment of a specialist as an attending physician would in-
crease the use of specialists but would actually reduce the need for coordination because the
specialist is treating the patient directly.
   When estimating returns to care, it is also well known that specialists are associated with
greater levels of treatment intensity. A question is whether any improved outcomes found
are worth the extra expense. In the end, the comparison of outcome and cost differences
is an empirical question. This paper considers one (particularly costly) element: returns to
specialty care during health emergencies.


2.1.2   Patient-level evidence

There is a large number of studies that compare patients treated by specialists vs. non-
specialists. Hartz and James [2006] reviewed the literature on the effects of specialist care
for AMI patients among articles written between 1990 and 2003. The review shows that spe-



                                               4
cialists tend to provide more care and are often found to be associated with lower mortality,
although there is mixed evidence on the mortality relationship. The literature makes clear
that specialists treat younger, healthier patients compared to general practitioners, which
can confound comparisons. The review notes that different practice environments can also
make comparisons difficult.
   Go et al. [2000] provide another review for treatment of coronary disease and heart
failure. They conclude that cardiologists provide more evidence-based care and “probably
better outcomes”. Harrold et al. [1999] offer a third review of the literature from 1981-1998.
Specialists again are found to be more knowledgeable, as they are more likely to use medicines
shown to be effective and comply with routine guidelines. They also employ more diagnostic
tests, procedures, and are associated with longer hospital stays. This review argues that
health outcomes are less likely to be studied, but better outcomes tend to be found for
patients of specialists among AMI, stroke and asthma patients. The reviews caution that
these studies are often small in scale, and there remain concerns over selection bias.
   When mortality differences are found, they tend to be large in magnitude. In a relatively
large observational study, Zaman et al. [2015] studied 85,000 patients in England and Wales
with non-ST elevation myocardial infarction and controlled for patient characteristics in
a multivariate analysis. They found that cardiologists’ patients had 42% lower mortality
for those aged under 65 and 13% lower mortality for those aged 85 and over. Another
relatively large study by Casale et al. [1998] studied 30,715 AMI patients in Pennsylvania and
controlled for patient, hospital, and payer characteristics. They found 17% lower mortality
for those treated by cardiologists. Similarly, Jollis et al. [1996] studied Medicare patients
in 1992 admitted for AMI. Patients admitted by cardiologists were found to be healthier at
admission, were more likely to be prescribed effective drug therapies such as beta-blockers,
and underwent cardiac procedures at a much higher rate (e.g. 49% with angiography vs.
30% for internal medicine physicians and 21% for other general practitioners). They were
also 13% less likely to die within one year compared to a general practitioner. Importantly


                                              5
for this paper, (1) results were similar whether they used the detailed controls contained
in the Cardiovascular Cooperative Project or a larger sample of claims data similar to the
data used here, and (2) in the vast majority of cases the admitting physician is the same as
the attending physician (“the clinician who is primarily and largely responsible for the care
of the patient from the beginning of the hospital episode”), a feature used in the empirical
strategy described below.
   Similar results have been found for heart failure episodes, often using smaller samples
and selection on observables for identification. Uthamalingam et al. [2015] studied 496
patients in New Hampshire and relied on a rich set of controls. They found that heart
failure patients treated by cardiologists received more guideline-adherent care, had lower
readmission rates (16% vs. 40%), and had lower mortality at 6 months (6% vs. 11%). Kondo
et al. [2018] studied acute heart failure patients in Japan who entered the hospital via the
emergency department. Using propensity-score matching among 932 patients, the authors
found that ED patients treated by cardiologists received more intensive treatment compared
to emergency physicians, although they found little difference in in-hospital mortality.
   Other conditions have also been studied. Gillum and Johnston [2008] studied stroke
patients at 115 academic medical centers from 1997-1999 and found that patients assigned
to neurologists had lower in-hospital mortality rates compared to those assigned to general
practitioners (4.6% vs. 9.5%). They note that this could be due to selection bias and
compare patients across hospitals, finding no difference in mortality with respect to the
rates of neurologist assignment at those hospitals. Goldstein et al. [2003] carried out the
VA Stroke Study, involving 1073 patients admitted with ischemic stroke and found that
those who received care from a neurologist received substantially more tests and had lower
inpatient mortality (5.6% vs. 13.5%); controlling for (potentially endogenous) measures of
stroke severity and comorbidities explained about half of the mortality gap. Meanwhile,
Mitchell et al. [1996] analyzed stroke patients in Medicare in 1991. Neurologists were found
to order more tests, such as CT scans and brain MRIs, had higher overall costs, and 90-day


                                              6
mortality was significantly lower for patients of neurologists compared to family practitioners,
internists, and patients cared for by a combination of a neurologist and an internist – the
group with the highest costs. The role of pulmonologists in the care of pneumonia patients
has received relatively less attention. Lin et al. [2008] grouped pulmonary and critical care
medicine specialists in Taiwan and found mortality rates were lower for those assigned a
specialist (9.8% vs. 15.3%).
   In summary, patient-level analyses show that specialist usage is associated with higher
quantities of care, and specialists tend to have better information about the relative effective-
ness of different types of therapies. There is mixed evidence on outcomes, but most larger
studies find that specialists are associated with better outcomes. The primary literature
reviews caution that selection bias can contaminate these comparisons, however, and call for
empirical strategies that use quasi-experimental variation in specialist treatment to estimate
returns to their care.


2.1.3   Evidence from regional variation

Another approach to measure returns to specialization relies on the wide regional variation
in the use of specialists in the U.S. Baicker and Chandra [2004a,b] find that markets that use
specialists at higher rates have higher costs, including greater intensive-care unit services and
more doctors seen in the last six months of life. Higher usage is also associated with lower
adherence to evidence-based care and little difference in patient satisfaction and mortality.
As a result, they argue that specialists may not be worth their extra expense.
   Skinner et al. [2006] study changes in the number of physicians treating heart attack
patients–a measure related to the reliance on specialists–within health referral regions be-
tween 1986 and 2002. The areas with the largest increases in the number of physicians
treating a patient were associated with higher spending but smaller survival gains: 8.7% in
the top quartile vs. 11.2% in the lowest quartile. Agha et al. [2019] focus on patient movers
to measure the extent to which treatment in areas with different levels of fragmentation


                                               7
affect healthcare and health outcomes. They find that patients with chronic conditions who
move to areas with more specialist care had higher levels of utilization. They provide some
evidence of greater guideline-adherent care among patients with diabetes, such as biomet-
ric tracking. Chernew et al. [2009] also used Medicare data to show that areas with more
primary care physicians have lower levels of spending, but there was little relationship with
spending growth between 1995 and 2005.
   Together these studies find that areas with more specialists have higher costs, lower
procedural-quality measures, and little difference in health outcomes. When within-area
variation in specialists is explored, there is mixed evidence of an increase in costs, but little
relation with procedural quality and health outcomes. These regional comparisons also tend
to relate to differences in the treatment of chronic conditions, whereas the analysis here will
speak more directly to effects of specialist usage following a health shock.


2.2     Other Physician Characteristics

2.2.1   Volume and experience

There is also a vast literature documenting a volume-outcome relationship: physicians that
treat more patients tend to have better health outcomes [Chandra and Staiger, 2007, Shahian
and Normand, 2003, Birkmeyer et al., 2003]. However, there is a concern that selection bias
can inflate this correlation beyond the causal effects from skill development. Archampong
et al. [2012] review evidence for the role of volume and specialty in the treatment of colorectal
cancer and conclude that because it is difficult to randomize these characteristics of physi-
cians, there continues to be a need for quasi-experimental evidence on these relationships.
   Of particular concern is that high-volume physicians treat different types of patients
compared to those who treat fewer. For example, if a physician rarely treats a particular
type of patient, then the fact that a given patient is treated by that physician may mean
that there is something special about the circumstances of the match, such as the lack of
time to transport the patient or call in a physician who is more suited to the case.

                                               8
2.2.2   Physician training and practice styles

There is also an interest in whether physician training, including medical school and resi-
dency quality, leads to differences in practice styles and patient health outcomes. It is well
established that physicians vary widely in their treatment patterns, even within small areas
[Glover, 1938, Wennberg and Gittelsohn, 1973], and this variation may point to significant
waste [Fisher et al., 2003]. Tsugawa et al. [2017c] studied Medicare data from 2011-2014 and
found that within-hospital variation in treatment intensity is greater than the much-studied
variation across hospitals. They also found that higher-spending physicians did not have
better outcomes than those with lower levels of spending, pointing to a potential source of
wasteful spending. One concern when using this variation to estimate returns to spending is
that higher-spending may be related to physician skill [Doyle et al., 2010]. Chan et al. [2020]
find that in the case of radiologists, treatment intensity is likely correlated with physician
skill, which implies that instrumental-variable estimates using this type of variation may be
biased due to violations of the exclusion restriction and monotonicity assumptions.
   When researchers investigate physician characteristics that are related to treatment in-
tensity, however, relatively little has been found [Berndt et al., 2015, Epstein and Nicholson,
2009, Cutler et al., 2019, Chan, forthcoming]. This includes little correlation with the medi-
cal school attended. Meanwhile, when medical school quality is examined more directly, the
typical result is that US trained physicians achieve better outcomes compared to non-US
trained physicians, although the evidence here is mixed [Ko et al., 2005, Tsugawa et al.,
2017b, Zaheer et al., 2017].


2.2.3   Physician sex

One characteristic that is often observed in data but not studied as extensively as charac-
teristics such as specialty and patient volume is the sex of the physician [Berthold et al.,
2008]. Treatment by a female physician has been found to be positively correlated with
higher-quality care. Wallis et al. [2017] studied 3314 physicians in Ontario, Canada and


                                              9
found that female surgeons have a 12% lower 30-day mortality rate. Tsugawa et al. [2017a]
studied hospitalists and found that patients treated by female physicians have a 4% lower
30-day readmission rate and a 4% lower 30-day mortality rate.
   There is also interest in the gender concordance of physicians and patients. Greenwood
et al. [2018] focused on heart-attack patients in Florida and found that patients assigned
female physicians had lower in-hospital mortality rates compared to those assigned to male
physicians, especially when the patient was female. Roter et al. [2002] reviewed the lit-
erature and found that one potential explanation is that female physicians have different
communication styles compared to male physicians.


2.3    Physician Availability

One of the main assumptions underlying the empirical strategy is that physician availability
is exogenous within a hospital, especially for the treatment of patients who enter the hospital
via the emergency room over short periods of time. While there is triage of patients across
areas of the hospital, for example admission to a cardiology unit versus an internal medicine
unit, the staffing of those units vary from day to day in ways that are arguably unrelated
to patient characteristics after controlling for day of the week and season. Previous papers
have looked within a given institution, or within a given specialty, and noted that the
scheduling of physicians is not geared toward expected patient characteristics nor co-worker
characteristics [Chan, forthcoming, Silver, 2020, Tsugawa et al., 2017b]. This paper studies
a common health condition and uses the idea of non-targeted scheduling in an attempt to
exploit plausibly exogenous variation in the the availability of different types of physicians,
as described in more detail in the next section.




                                              10
3     Empirical Framework and Data Description

This section describes the empirical framework and the data used to clarify the empirical
question and approach.


3.1    Health production function and empirical model

The main question in the paper is what types of physician characteristics improve patient
health. Consider a simple health production function that relates patient health to the labor
and capital that is used to treat a patient:


                                      H = f (L, K; X, E)                                    (1)

where L is a vector of different forms of labor, including different types of physicians and
complementary labor such as nurses and assistants. K is a vector of capital employed, such
as imaging capabilities and lab quality. X represents patient characteristics to allow the pro-
duction function to vary by patient illness severity, for example. E represents characteristics
of the environment, such as congestion, that can alter the way labor and capital translate
into health outcomes.
    The empirical model takes the following form for patient i treated in hospital h on date
d during quarter q(d) on day-of-the-week dow(d):


                    Yihd = β0 + β1 Phd + β2 Xi + β3 Ehd + λhq(d)dow(d) + ihd               (2)


The main health outcome studied is 1-year mortality, and similar models will be employed
to study effects on healthcare utilization. P is the vector of characteristics that describe the
set of physicians available to treat a patient on the admission date, such as the number of
cardiologists available. This estimation strategy traces out effects as the types of available
physicians changes and provides transparent estimates of the relationship between the mix


                                               11
of available physicians and health outcomes.2
    X represents patient controls, including indicators for patient age, race, sex, and quintile
of one-year lagged spending paid to inpatient plus outpatient facilities to reflect the under-
lying health of patients prior to the health emergencies studied here. To the extent that
physician characteristics are effectively random, the main estimates should not be affected
regardless of whether patient controls are included in the model. The analysis will also test
whether estimates vary with patient characteristics.
    E represents characteristics of the environment, namely indicators for the number of other
patients admitted on the same day and the number of physicians observed on the same day,
which may be important given the empirical strategy. When controlling for the number of
physicians available, examining the effect of the number of a particular type of physician, say
cardiologists or male physicians, is akin to considering the change in the mix of physicians
available holding the number of physicians constant.
    Other features of the health production function include complementary labor and capi-
tal. The effects of these factors are interesting in their own right, but the empirical approach
to isolate the effects of physician characteristics will compare patients within cells where
these additional influences are assumed to be absorbed by the set of fixed effects defined
by hospital x quarter x day-of-week cells. For example, this within-cell variation compares
patients entering the same hospital on a Thursday in the spring of 2007. Models using hos-
pital x month x day-of-week cells are also reported. The within-cell variation also attempts
to absorb unobserved differences in patients arriving at different times of the year or across
   2
     An alternative estimation strategy would be to estimate a mortality model with fixed effects for each
physician and then relate those effects to physician characteristics. A key limitation with this approach is a
lack of precision, which leads researchers to (1) limit the estimates to physicians with more than a minimum
number of patients and (2) shrink estimates to account for the noise, which is larger for physicians with
fewer patients. The number of observations per physician is endogenous–the well-known volume-outcome
relationship described in this paper–and these corrections impose additional structure that introduces new
bias concerns. When mapping characteristics to outcomes is the goal, the current approach retains more
data, which helps with precision and sample-selection-bias concerns, and allows physician effects to vary
over time. In any event, in the current context when limiting the sample to focus on plausibly exogenous
variation, the average number of heart failure patients per physician ID is 6, which is below traditional
benchmarks for estimating such fixed effects.



                                                     12
days of the week.
   In terms of interpretation, the inclusion of these fixed effects alter the question from
whether physician training, say, matters at all to whether it matters across physicians within
a given hospital. For example, physicians who went to different medical schools that vary
significantly in quality but work at the same hospital may have similar outcomes because
they came through the same screen of the hospital’s hiring committees. As a result, some
characteristics may matter less within a hospital relative to across hospitals. Instead, the
estimates speak to the debate on the effectiveness of different types of physicians controlling
for their practice environment and directly inform questions regarding the optimal mix of
physicians that could be available to treat patients in a given time and place.
   One limitation of the empirical strategy is that data on the availability and characteristics
of nurses are not available. Instead, the empirical strategy relies on the literature reviewed
above that suggests that complementary labor availability is not correlated with physician
availability when single institutions are studied, which is consistent with anecdotal evidence
that nurse schedules are set independently from physician schedules outside of surgical teams.
To the extent that in some contexts physicians work in teams with complementary labor,
then any impact on outcomes found would stem the bundled characteristics of the teams
associated with treatment by particular types of physicians.
   Welfare implications depend on findings related to both health and healthcare costs.
This paper studies patient mortality as an objective, but incomplete, measure of patient
health. Nevertheless, when changes in mortality are found, they tend to dominate welfare
comparisons given the high value of statistical life. In terms of costs, results below will show
estimates of equation (2) where the outcomes are treatment intensity at the time of the
health shock and over the following year. The ratio of the effects of physician characteristics
available on mortality to the effects on treatment intensity provides an estimate of the local
average treatment effect (LATE) of treatment intensity on mortality. This estimate would
be valid under the strong assumption that the only way physician availability measures


                                              13
affect mortality stems from changes in the treatment intensity.3 Further, this change in
mortality related to the change in treatment at each level of physician availability can be
used to estimate marginal treatment effects [Heckman and Vytlacil, 2005]. While these
instrumental-variable estimates are useful for context, the reduced-form estimates of the
effects of availability directly on health and treatment intensity can inform polices that
affect that types of physicians that are available at the time of a health shock.
    Standard errors are clustered at the hospital level to take into account correlated errors
across patients within institutions. The leave-out measures of physician characteristics are
generated from the data; when standard errors are bootstrapped to take into account the
noise generated from constructing them, they are slightly smaller than the asymptotic stan-
dard errors reported below. In that limited sense, the reported standard errors are relatively
robust and conservative compared to bootstrapped standard errors.


3.2     Data Description

The analysis uses Medicare inpatient and outpatient claims data between 1998 and 2012. The
main analysis focuses on patients whose primary diagnosis is heart failure.4 In terms of the
hospital setting, the claims data include an identifier for the hospital and the admission and
discharge dates. The data have been linked by the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services
(CMS) to vital statistics data to provide mortality outcomes at different time horizons.
    Treatment intensity can be measured by procedures performed, as well as Medicare ex-
penditures and hospital (list) charges. Three identifiers for physicians who treated the pa-
tient are present in the data: the attending physician responsible for the care of the patient,
which is always recorded, as well as an operating physician and an “other” physician that
are sometimes listed; these latter two categories represent physicians who have substantial
billing associated with the episode, when applicable.
   3
      Interpretation of the estimates as a LATE also requires a monotonoicity assumption that the availability
of more cardiologists, say, does not reduce the likelihood that a patient would be treated by one [Imbens
and Angrist, 1994, Chaisemartin, 2017].
    4
      The primary diagnosis has a 3-digit ICD9 code of 428.

                                                     14
   Patient characteristics include age, race, sex and Medicare facility spending such as previ-
ous inpatient admissions and office visits in the calendar year prior to the index admission–a
measure of health that is highly predictive of mortality.


3.2.1   Measuring physician availability

Hospital scheduling data are not available in this nationwide dataset. Instead, one of the
innovations of the current paper is the construction of proxy measures for the number of
different types of physicians available in a given hospital on any given date using the 100%
inpatient claims from CMS. The proxies are based on the attending physicians who admitted
Medicare patients on those dates (including patients with diagnoses other than heart failure).
   These are proxy measures because physicians may be present on a given date but do not
admit a Medicare patient that day. If the noise of the proxy measurement approximates
classical measurement error, the estimated coefficients will be biased toward zero. To ex-
plore the influence of noise on the results further, the analysis will test for robustness when
examining different dates when the proxy is thought to vary in quality. In addition, under
strong assumptions, the proxies for physician characteristics can be used as instruments to
test the effects of care provided by a particular type of physician.
   A primary concern with the use of claims data to identify physicians available on a given
date is that the measurement is a function of how many other patients are admitted on that
date: a level of activity that can have its own impact on treatment intensity and ultimately
on patient outcomes. As a result, the empirical model includes flexible controls for the level
of activity. Specifically, the models include a set of indicators for the number of patients
and the number of physicians observed on a given date to nonparametrically control for the
relationship between these activity levels and outcomes. While a key concern at the outset,
in this context the estimates are not sensitive to the inclusion of these flexible controls or
when other robustness tests are performed.
   When calculating the characteristics of physicians observed on the date of admission, the


                                              15
patient’s own attending physician will affect that calculation, but that physician’s character-
istics may be endogenous. Another innovation in the use of claims data to exploit plausibly
exogenous physician availability is a sample restriction: the sample used in the main analysis
is restricted to patients assigned to physicians who admitted at least one other patient on
the same date. This allows the availability measures to be constructed based on the char-
acteristics of physicians assigned to all other patients admitted on the same date: leave-out
measures that are not influenced by endogenous physician assignment. For example, the
calculation of the number of specialists available on a given date is unchanged regardless of
whether the patient was assigned to a specialist or not. The resulting estimates will apply
to physicians who admitted at least one other Medicare patient on the same date.
   Another endogeneity concern is that the physician could have been called into the hos-
pital to treat a particular patient and then subsequently treated another patient. Following
discussions with physicians, it seems that this is unlikely in the case of very common diag-
noses where the staff in the hospital are expected to treat those patients without calling in
a physician. The main analysis focuses on heart failure patients. This is the most common
3-digit ICD-9 diagnosis for admission via the emergency room in Medicare claims data by
a fairly wide margin. In 2007 – the middle of the sample period for the analysis – 476,137
patients met this definition compared to 384,266 for the next-most-common diagnosis: pneu-
monia. The analysis below will also examine whether observable characteristics of patients
are balanced with respect to measures of physician availability as a check on the plausibility
of the exogeneity assumption.


3.2.2   Physician characteristics

The claims data include identifiers (UPIN and NPI) for the attending physician, an operating
physician for the principal procedure performed if applicable, and a third field for “other
physician” who generated substantial claims during the hospital stay when applicable. These
identifiers were linked to the American Medical Association’s Masterfile, which lists the


                                              16
physician’s year of graduation, sex, primary and secondary specialty, and medical school.5
The medical school IDs have been matched to the US News and World Report’s medical
school rankings for 2004, including measures for the ranking in primary care instruction as
well as a separate ranking for research. A related characteristic is an indicator for whether
the physician graduated from a U.S. medical school. Physician experience is measured using
the 100% inpatient claims data and calculated as the number of heart failure patients the
physician served as the attending physician over the prior year.


3.3     Analysis Sample

A number of sample restrictions are imposed to focus on the natural experiment described
above. First, in order to measure patient characteristics prior to and after the beneficiary’s
first heart failure admission in the Medicare data, the sample is restricted to patients who
have been continuously enrolled in fee-for-service Medicare, as opposed to the approximately
20% of beneficiaries who enroll in Medicare Advantage over this time period and whose
data are either not available or thought to be less reliable. Second, to avoid endogenous
assignment due to scheduled admissions, the sample is restricted to patients who are admitted
via the emergency room. Third, for an uncensored measure of 1-year mortality and 1-year
lagged measures of patient health the empirical model is estimated using data from 1999-
2011. Fourth, to focus on larger hospitals that allow for more precise estimates and where
the measures of physician availability are more stable, hospitals with fewer than 100 heart
failure patients over the entire sample period are excluded. Fifth, to examine patients at
higher risk of invasive treatment, the main analysis studies patients who are less than 90
years old, although results are similar without this restriction. Last, a small number of
observations are also excluded due to missing observations. The resulting dataset includes
   5
      Specialty types are defined as being indicated as either a primary or secondary specialty. Approximately
90% of the specialists are defined due to their primary specialty. 15% of attending physicians either did not
list a specialty or did not match to the AMA Masterfile. These physicians are assumed to be non-specialists,
and results predicting specialist usage are nearly identical when patients assigned to these physicians are
excluded.



                                                     17
909,083 heart failure patients treated at 2,760 hospitals. The number of unique attending
physician identifiers is 144,355.6
    The analysis sample is much smaller than the full sample in large part due to the restric-
tion to patients assigned to physicians observed to be the attending physician for at least
two patients on any given admission date in the 100% Medicare inpatient claims data (see
Table A1). The results will apply to patients whose attending physicians are relatively busy,
although robustness to different levels of activity are shown below.
    The analysis sample is broadly similar to the wider set of heart failure patients (Table
A2). The analysis sample is somewhat younger (78 vs. 80 years old), similar in terms of
race and ethnicity and more likely to be male (46% vs. 43%). One-year lagged spending is
slightly higher in the analysis sample, and the mortality rate is slightly smaller. In terms of
physician characteristics, more physicians are observed in the analysis sample: 16 per day
compared to 13 in the full sample. That said, the composition of the physicians is similar,
with the number of physicians who attended a top 50 medical school (out of 126 schools)
averaging 28% in both samples, and the fraction male averaging 82% in both samples. The
analysis sample has slightly higher rates of cardiologist availability, averaging 12.7% in the
analysis sample and 12.1% in the full sample.
    Figure 1 explores the amount of variation in the number of cardiologists observed after
the data have been de-meaned at the hospital-quarter-day of week level. On average, there
are 2 cardiologists available in the analysis sample, and Figure 1 shows that this ranges from
about 1 less to 1.5 more cardiologists in the heart of the data. Similarly, Table A3 reports the
amount of within-cell variation in the measures of physician characteristics observed. The
overall standard deviation in the number of cardiologists is 2.5, and when this measure is de-
meaned within these cells, the resulting standard deviation is only 1.0. Similarly, across the
attending physicians available on a given date, the average volume of heart failure patients
   6
    The number of attending physicians identifiers is defined by the number of unique UPIN identifiers
when available, and NPI identifiers otherwise. It is possible that the same physician billed under more than
one UPIN or NPI.



                                                    18
over the prior year has a standard deviation of 6.91 patients, but this falls to 2.6 within the
hospital-quarter-day of week cells. In an effort to exploit plausibly exogenous variation in
the availability of different types of physicians within hospitals over short periods of time,
the tradeoff is the use of less variation at the cost of less-precise estimates.



4        Results

4.1        Plausibility

Selection bias may confound comparisons of patients assigned to different types of physicians,
and a key identifying assumption is that the mix of physicians available to treat a patient
on the date of admission is exogenous. As a first look at these concerns, Table 1 compares
observable characteristics of patients across (1) the type of attending physician assigned to
the patient to consider the potential role for selection bias, and (2) across dates that differ
with respect to the availability of different types of physicians as a balance check. The main
results focus on specialists, so Table 1 makes these comparisons in relation to the use or
availability of cardiologists.
    Column (1) is the sample mean among patients assigned to attending physicians other
than a cardiologist, while Column (2) is this mean plus the estimated coefficient on an
indicator for cardiologist assignment from a linear regression that predicts each characteristic
and includes hospital x quarter x day-of-week fixed effects to focus on the same within-cell
comparisons as the other comparisons in the paper.7 One of the largest differences is the sex
of the patient, where patients assigned to a cardiologists are 11 percentage more likely to be
male (55% vs. 44%). Patients assigned to a cardiologist tend to be one year younger than
those assigned to a general practitioner (77.4 vs. 78.4 years old). There are some differences
in terms of race: 7% of patients assigned to a cardiologist are African American compared to
12% of patients assigned to a non-cardiologist. One-year lagged spending on both inpatient
    7
        Similar differences are found for the subset of patients assigned to a cardiologist or a general practitioner.


                                                          19
and outpatient facility claims is found to be lower for those assigned to a cardiologist ($11,900
vs. $13,300), an 11% difference. These comparisons show that cardiologists treat somewhat
healthier patients, consistent with the prior literature.
   The number of physicians admitting patients, and the number of patients admitted,
on the same date are similar across the two groups. Meanwhile, patients assigned to a
cardiologist are more likely to enter on dates when there are more cardiologists (2.2 vs. 1.6),
which previews the result that the mix of physicians available impacts the types of physicians
that treat the patient.
   Columns (3) and (4) compare patients who arrive on dates that vary by the number
of cardiologists available as a balance check. Specifically, a low-cardiologist date is one
when the number of cardiologists observed in the hospital is less than the mean within
the hospital x quarter x day-of-week cell. Column (4) is analogous to Column (2): the
low-cardiologist-date mean plus the coefficient from an indicator that the date had a high
number of cardiologists available, controlling for the cell fixed effects. Observable differences
are considerably smaller, although many are statistically significantly different due in part
to the large sample size. Most striking is that in contrast to the assignment of cardiologists,
the fraction of patients who are male is remarkably similar across dates when cardiologist
availability differs (45% vs. 46%). The average age (78.3 vs. 78.2), the fraction black (11%
vs. 10%), and 1-year lagged spending ($13,000 vs. 12,900) are all notably similar across the
different types of dates. The similarity in observable characteristics is consistent with the
exogeneity of the number of cardiologists observed within a hospital x quarter x day-of-week
cell due to effectively random variation from physician scheduling.
   While the patient characteristics are similar across these types of dates, the comparison
introduces a difference in the practice environment: days that have a high number of cardiol-
ogists observed also have a higher number of physicians observed overall (15.7 vs. 13.6) and
the number of patients is also higher (22.0 vs. 19.6). The number of cardiologists available
is higher (3.11 vs. 1.21), by construction. More patients admitted on the same date allows


                                               20
the proxy to measure more physicians. Busier days, albeit with more physicians, can impact
treatment intensity and health outcomes directly, which motivates the use of flexible controls
for these environmental characteristics as well as robustness checks. While such differences
represent a key concern when using claims data to proxy for physician availability, in this
context such differences in activity do not appear to be driving the main results.


4.2     Specialist Availability and Mortality

The main physician characteristic that is found to be related to survival is the availability of
cardiologists. This is particularly policy relevant for within-hospital comparisons given the
triage of patients between cardiac and internal-medicine units. It also informs the policies
aimed at increasing reliance on lower-cost general practitioners, at least along the dimension
of survival for these emergency patients.
   Figure 2 plots the main result. The x-axis reports the number of cardiologists observed
to be available ranging from from 0 to 4-or-more.8 There are two outcomes shown. The
blue line with the circular markers reports the relationship between the number of available
cardiologists and predicted 1-year mortality, where predicted 1-year mortality was estimated
using a probit model and the full set of patient controls. The orange line with square mark-
ers is actual 1-year mortality. The relationships between these outcomes and cardiologist
availability reported in the figure were estimated using a linear regression model that in-
cluded hospital x quarter x day-of-week fixed effects along with indicators for the number of
available cardiologists. Results that incorporate controls will be reported below.
   This figure shows that mortality falls with each level of available cardiologists. Compared
to when there are zero cardiologists observed available, having 4 or more cardiologists is as-
sociated with a 2 percentage-point reduction in mortality (or 6% of the mean). In contrast,
predicted mortality is relatively unrelated to the number of cardiologists available. Com-
pared to zero cardiologists available, when there are 4 or more cardiologists the patients are
   8
     Figure A1 shows the distribution of the number of cardiologists observed; each of these physician-
availability categories includes 10% or more of the data).

                                                  21
only slightly healthier: a coefficient of -0.002, which is statistically significant but arguably
not economically significant. The other coefficients are even smaller and not statistically
significant.
   To examine the effects of cardiologist availability across a wide number of analyses, the
remaining Tables compare patients across three levels of cardiologist availability: the 34% of
the sample with zero observed cardiologists, the 22% with one available cardiologist (a mea-
sure of the extensive margin) and the remaining 44% with 2 or more available cardiologists.
   Table 2 reports these results. First, columns (1) to (4) report estimates from a regres-
sion of mortality on whether the patient was assigned a cardiologist as an attending physi-
cian or was treated by a cardiologist at all, including those undergoing cardiac operations.
Comparing patients in the same hospital, month, and day-of-week cells, 1-year mortality is
substantially lower for those treated by a cardiologist (approximately 30% lower than the
mean). When informative controls (especially age and lagged spending) are added to the
model, patients assigned to cardiologists continue to have lower mortality: 8 percentage
points lower, or 24% lower than the mean. There remain concerns that patients differ in
terms of unobserved characteristics such that selection bias may inflate these coefficients.
   The table further examines how mortality falls with the availability of cardiologists. In
models similar to those shown in Figure 2, mortality is regressed on indicators for the level
of cardiologist availability. A regressor for the number of other specialists is also included
(1) to hold constant both the number of other specialists and (in most models) the number
of physicians in total such that residual variation in the number of cardiologists stems from
a policy-relevant reduction in the number of general practitioners, and (2) as a specification
check on whether unrelated specialists are related to mortality for heart failure patients
controlling for the number of cardiologists, which could happen if specialist availability were
related to unobserved differences in patient mix or hospital staffing.
   Column (5) reports results with no controls other than the fixed effects for the hospital
x quarter x day-of-week cells. The estimates show that moving from zero cardiologists


                                               22
observed to one cardiologist observed lowers mortality by 0.7 percentage points. Moving from
zero cardiologists to two or more cardiologists roughly doubles the effect: a 1.3 percentage-
point reduction in mortality.9 To compare these magnitudes with those in Columns (1)-(4),
the relationship between cardiologist availability and direct treatment by a cardiologist is
explored below. Meanwhile, the number of other specialists is largely unrelated to 1-year
mortality controlling for the number of cardiologists.
   The next column shows results when the number of physicians and the number of patients
observed are controlled in a flexible way. This changes the interpretation from the number
of cardiologists available to the number of cardiologists available conditional on the number
of physicians available – in essence considering the change in the mix of physicians rather
than the levels. Further, given that the proxy for availability is a function of the number
of patients observed, this is a potentially important control for the analysis. The point
estimates increase only slightly in magnitude when they are included. In the end, while
the idea that the proxy is a function of how busy the hospital is continues to be a concern
more generally, in this context the results are not sensitive to controlling flexibly for these
environment variables.
   Column (7) adds controls for patient characteristics described above. When they are
added, the point estimates decline slightly, although the estimates are not statistically dis-
tinguishable from the model with no controls. In particular, increasing from zero to one
cardiologist observed in the data results in a 0.65 percentage-point reduction in mortality,
and increasing from zero to two-or-more cardiologists results in a 1.2 percentage-point re-
duction in mortality. The next column shows that these coefficients are barely affected when
controlling for other physician characteristics, which are explored in more detail below.
   Columns (9) and (10) replace hospital x quarter x day-of-week fixed effects with the
more stringent hospital x month x day-of-week fixed effects. These cells are much smaller
and the standard errors typically double. Nevertheless, the point estimates are notably
   9
       Appendix Table A4 shows that these results appear at 30 days as well.



                                                     23
similar, especially the estimate of increasing from zero to two or more cardiologists. While
this level of within-cell variation does not support precise estimates, it is reassuring that
similar estimates are found when comparing patients that are even more likely to be similar
to one another: those who enter the same hospital on the same day of the week in the same
month of the year (e.g. Thursdays in April 2007).


4.3       Other Physician Characteristics and Mortality

Table 3 reports the results describing the relationship between the vector of physician charac-
teristics and 1-year mortality. Column (1) displays estimates when each physician-availability
characteristic is estimated separately. These estimated effects will include the overlap in the
measures, while column (2) reports results where the full vector of characteristics is included
in the same regression.
   Similar to the previous subsection, the first row reports the linear relationship between
the number of cardiologists available and mortality: a two standard deviation increase in
the within-cell variation is approximately 2 cardiologists (Figure 1), and Table 3 shows that
this is associated with a 0.7 percentage-point reduction in mortality. The magnitude is
remarkably similar when the model only includes the number of cardiologists or when the
model includes all of the physician characteristics, as shown in column (2).
   The remaining characteristics have analogous effect sizes that are less than half as large
as the number of cardiologists. Only one other measure has a meaningful relationship with
mortality when estimated alone and with all of the other characteristics: physician experience
with heart-failure patients. For a two standard deviation increase in the within-cell variation
of this measure (5.2), the coefficient from column (1) implies that mortality falls by 0.26
percentage points (or 0.8% of the mean), and when the model includes all other physician
characteristics measured here, the implied effect is a 0.21 percentage-point reduction (or
0.6% of the mean).10
  10
       When physician experience as an attending over the prior year is measured for all patients, a two-


                                                    24
    When controlling for other patient characteristics (Column 2), there are three other mea-
sures that have point estimates where these two-standard deviation increases in availability
would lead to mortality changes of between 0.6 and 0.9 % of the mean: the number of physi-
cians graduating from a top 50 (out of 126) medical schools in terms of primary care and
research, with the primary care ranking associated with lower mortality while the research
ranking is associated with a modest increase in mortality; and the number of male physicians
available is associated with an increase in mortality. Among these measures, the magnitudes
are relatively small and only the number of physicians who gradated from a top 50 medical
school in terms of primary care is statistically significant at the 10% level. For two standard-
deviation increases in the other measures, mortality falls by less than 0.1 percentage points
or lower.
    All of these results should be interpreted in light of (1) they are within-hospital com-
parisons and (2) the measure of availability is measured with noise, which can dampen the
estimated relationships. The largest (and most robust) result is that having more cardiolo-
gists present on the date of admission appears to reduce mortality for heart failure patients.
The remainder of the paper further explores this result about the mix of specialists avail-
able on a given date in terms of treatment intensity, robustness checks, and other health
conditions.


4.4     Specialist Availability and Treatment Intensity

4.4.1    Direct treatment by a cardiologist

Given that greater specialist availability appears to result in lower mortality, it is useful to
understand how patients are treated differently across these dates. Figure 3 and Table 4
consider the most obvious implication: that the patients are more likely to be treated by
cardiologists directly.
standard deviation increase in within-cell mean experience is associated with a 0.1 percentage-point increase
in mortality, which is not statistically significant.



                                                     25
    The first result is the mean of the dependent variable: only 17% of these patients are
assigned a cardiologist as an attending, and only 25% are substantively treated directly by a
cardiologist. In fact, the claims data show that heart failure emergency patients are typically
treated by internal medicine physicians.
    Figure 3 is analogous to Figure 2; it shows that as the number of cardiologists available
increases, so does the likelihood that the patient will be treated directly by a cardiologist.
Increasing from zero to four-or-more cardiologists available is associated with a 26 percentage-
point increase in the likelihood of having cardiologist treatment.11
    Meanwhile, Table 4 is similar to Table 3, but the outcome now is treatment by a car-
diologist. Panel A shows that as the number of cardiologists observed increases from zero
to one, the likelihood the patient receives a cardiologist as an attending physician increases
by 11 percentage points. Increasing from zero to two-or-more observed cardiologists roughly
doubles the estimate, an increase of 22 percentage points. These increases are remarkably
stable to the addition of controls for patient characteristics, other physician characteristics,
as well as the use of hospital x month x day-of-week fixed effects. Further, the number of
non-cardiologist specialists available is unrelated to treatment by a cardiologist holding the
number of cardiologists available constant.
    Panel B considers the likelihood that a cardiologist is listed on the inpatient claim as
an attending, operating, or other physician. The point estimates are similar to panel A: an
increase of 10 and 18-20 percentage points when increasing to the two levels of cardiologist
availability, respectively.
    To place the mortality results in context, consider a simple model where the patient ben-
efits from cardiologist availability only by being treated directly by a cardiologist, as opposed
to consultations that are not recorded in the claims data. Under this strong assumption, to
estimate marginal treatment effects of cardiologist care, the change in mortality as the level
of available cardiologists increases in Table 3 can be divided by the corresponding change
  11
    Figure A2 shows a similar relationship with assignment to a cardiologist as an attending physician,
where increasing from zero to four-or-more cardiologists is associated with a 30 percentage-point increase.


                                                    26
in cardiologist treatment from Table 4. Increasing from zero to one cardiologist appears to
reduce mortality by 0.0065, and dividing by 0.10 (the increase in any cardiologist treatment)
implies that cardiologist treatment reduces mortality by 6.5 percentage points. Similarly, an
analogous increase in availability from one to two-or-more cardiologists implies that cardiol-
ogist treatment results in a 6.3 percentage-point reduction in mortality. These estimates are
qualitatively similar to the (more precise) OLS estimate in Table 4 (-8 percentage points),
albeit smaller in magnitude as expected given the likely direction of selection bias.
   It is reassuring that similar marginal treatment effects are found for the different levels
of variation in availability in the sense that they help rule out some competing explanations.
For example, if the gain from having a cardiologist treat a given heart failure patient resulted
in a cardiologist being summoned to the hospital and re-introduce selection bias, this is a
less likely scenario in the instance when more than one cardiologist is observed in the data
because the other cardiologist(s) could have treated the patient.


4.4.2   Procedures and hospital charges

Table 5 reports results for other measures of treatment intensity. Panel A shows that opera-
tions on the cardiovascular system increase substantially with the observed number of cardi-
ologists. 22% of these patients undergo such a major operation, and increasing the number
of available cardiologists from zero to two or more on the date of admission increases the
likelihood by 1.9 percentage points, or 9% of the mean. Similarly, cardiac catheterization is
an invasive procedure that can lead to subsequent care and is often used to measure treat-
ment intensity for cardiac patients and has a sample mean of 0.08. This procedure is again
significantly more likely with additional cardiologists observed. Here, the coefficient when
going from zero to two or more is 0.012. This is consistent with the literature documenting
that specialist treatment is associated with more invasive treatments. For context, Table A5
shows that having a cardiologist attending is associated with a 50% increase in the likelihood
of an operation on the cardiovascular system in a model with full controls, which is similar


                                              27
to the increase found in Table 5 re-scaled by the likelihood of being assigned a cardiologist
as an attending.
    The lower panels report results when the outcomes are measures of utilization in the
form of the number of major procedures over the 30 days following admission and hospital
charges during the index admission: list prices that are used in negotiations with payers
and are positively correlated with treatment intensity. Similar to the catheterization result,
cardiologist availability is positively related to the number of major procedures overall.
    As for charges, increasing from zero to two or more cardiologists is associated $600 higher
list fees. If the increase in hospital charges is due to having direct treatment by a cardiologist,
then the implied effect of the attending assignment would be on the order of $3000 in charges
during the index admission, or about 12% of the mean.12


4.4.3    Medicare Spending

Another policy-relevant measure of utilization is Medicare spending. A limitation with these
inpatient claims is that they do not include physician fees paid to the specialists, which is of
course highly relevant to any discussion of cost effectiveness. Table 6 reports results using a
20% random sample of beneficiaries where these physician fees are observed in addition to
the inpatient and outpatient facility claims.
    When a cardiologist is assigned to be the attending physician, index-event total spending
is $2300 higher. When we add treatment by a cardiologist including the operating and
other physician IDs, this increases to $3500. When the empirical strategy that focuses on
cardiologist availability is used, the estimates are not precisely estimated, but they suggest no
relationship when increasing from zero to one cardiologist available and $218 higher spending
when moving from zero to two-or-more cardiologists available (s.e. = 371).
    In terms of 1-year spending, the average is $33,000. Interestingly, patients assigned to
cardiologists as their attending physician have only slightly higher 1-year spending ($323, s.e.
  12
      With typical cost to charge ratios on the order of 0.5, this would imply a change in costs during the
initial hospital stay on the order of $1500.


                                                    28
= 874), while adding in the operating and other physicians results in an increase of $2700.
When the number of available cardiologists increases from zero to two or more, the 1-year
spending is found to be lower by $760, but the estimate is again not precisely estimated
(s.e.=1361).13
    Another commonly used measure of short-term patient health and utilization is 30-day
readmission. Table A7 shows that cardiologist availability is relatively unrelated to this
outcome, with coefficients and implied effects that are close to zero.
    Overall, these estimates suggest that cardiologist treatment results in higher Medicare
spending on the order of $3000, primarily due to greater treatment at the initial hospital-
ization. Recall that under the strong assumption that cardiologist availability only affects
patients by being treated by a cardiologist directly, the implied effect of cardiologist treat-
ment on 1-year mortality is 6 percentage points. This in turn would imply a cost per at
least one life year saved of $50,000 (=3000/0.06). This is substantially below the $100,000 -
$250,000 value of a statistical life year often used in cost effectiveness analysis. While useful
for context, this estimate may be biased upward or downward due to measurement error
and the potential influences of cardiologist availability that go beyond those measured by
Medicare spending.


4.5     Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

Given that cardiologists tend to be assigned to somewhat healthier patients, it is possible that
the effects of cardiologists vary with the patients that are typically seen as more appropriate.
It is likely that returns to specialty care are non-monotonic in patient health, as the healthiest
patients do not require invasive procedures and patients in the worst health are not eligible
  13
     100% claims are available for facility fees, but the initial stay has facility payments that are rela-
tively fixed by the diagnosis through Medicare’s prospective payment system. Table A6 reports results for
index-admission facility fees and 1-year payments made to inpatient and outpatient facilities. Cardiologist
availability is associated with $300 higher spending at the index admission when increasing from zero to
two-or-more cardiologists; the estimate drops to a statistically-insignificant $100 higher spending at one
year, suggesting that post-discharge spending is modestly lower when there are more cardiologists available,
offsetting higher spending found at the time of the initial hospitalization.



                                                    29
for those procedures.
   To investigate this further, a probit model predicting 1-year mortality was estimated
using the full set of patient controls, and the sample was then divided into two based on the
median of this measure. Table 7 shows that the point estimates are larger in magnitude for
patients in worse health. The relationship between availability and cardiologist assignment
is fairly similar across the two samples. Unfortunately, the standard errors more than double
when the sample is divided in half, which makes it difficult to make comparisons with any
precision.
   In addition to heterogeneity across patients, there could be heterogeneity across hospitals.
For example, are lower-quality hospitals especially prone to need specialists to achieve better
outcomes or do the mortality differences between specialist and non-specialist physicians
scale with hospital quality? As a first look along this line, the sample was divided into two
groups based on overall patient volume, with the idea that higher-quality hospitals have
higher volumes [Birkmeyer et al., 2002]. Table 7 again shows larger standard errors, but this
time the point estimates are relatively similar across both high- and low-volume hospitals.
High-volume hospitals are more likely to assign a cardiologist attending compared to low-
volume hospitals (22% vs. 13%) and the effect of availability is larger at the low-volume
hospitals. The implied effect of a cardiologist attending (if this is the only channel by which
cardiologist availability impacts mortality) is a 5 percentage-point reduction in mortality in
low-volume hospitals and an 8 percentage-point reduction in high-volume hospitals. This
is suggestive evidence that returns to specialty care are somewhat larger in higher-quality
hospitals.
   As noted above, one concern is that by the nature of the proxy measurement for cardiolo-
gist availability, more patients admitted the same day can lead to more cardiologists observed,
and this greater volume can have its own direct effects on care via congestion. Further, holi-
days are typically less busy but may have differences in scheduling so that availability could
be correlated with patient characteristics. Last, the proxy may be more accurate when more


                                              30
patients are observed because they are more likely to trace out the availability of physician
types.14 The main results were shown to be robust to the inclusion of flexible controls for
how busy the hospital is on any given date. To investigate these issues further, Panel C
reports results when the data are divided into dates when the number of patients entering
a given hospital is above or below the mean for that hospital. The standard errors again
double when the sample is divided in this way, but the point estimates continue to point to
sizeable reductions in mortality when there are more cardiologists available regardless of the
volume level.


4.6     Specialist Availability and Other Health Conditions

A similar analysis can be conducted for other common admissions that occur via the emer-
gency room and have a substantial 1-year mortality rate. To consider the role of specialists,
the most common type of specialty among attending physicians assigned to patients was
identified: cardiologists are most common for acute myocardial infarction (heart attack)
and cardiac dysrhythmia, neurologists for stroke patients, orthopedic specialists for a wide
range of fractures including the commonly studied emergency condition of hip fracture, and
pulmonologists for pneumonia patients.
    Table 8 shows that across these conditions, greater specialist availability tends to be
associated with substantially lower mortality. In models with full controls, going from zero
to two-or-more specialists is associated with a 2.7 percentage-point reduction in mortality
among AMI patients, a 2.0 percentage-point reduction for cardiac dysrhythmia patients, a 2.5
percentage-point reduction for stroke patients, 2.6 percentage-point reduction for inpatients
with any type of fracture, and a 3.1 percentage-point reduction for patients with hip fracture
in particular. An exception is pneumonia, where a greater availability of pulmonologists is
associated with a small increase in mortality (0.5 percentage points), which is not statistically
  14
     As another check on proxy quality, similar results are also found when the maximum number of physi-
cians is calculated for each hospital over the sample period and the model is estimated for different levels of
the number of physicians observed on a given date relative to this maximum.


                                                      31
significant.
    The table also shows that (1) many patients are not treated by the most-common type
of specialist, and (2) greater availability of specialists substantially increases the likelihood
of treatment by one. For the cardiac conditions and fractures, specialists provide direct
treatment in about half of the cases, and nearly 80% of the hip fracture cases. In terms of
attending physician assignment, between 32-41% of these patients were assigned a specialist
as the attending physician. Specialist involvement is lower for stroke and pneumonia patients,
which suggests that the claims data should be regarded as identifying substantial involvement
of a specialist rather than any consultation whatsoever.
    The mortality results are more sensitive to the inclusion of patient controls compared
to the main analysis of heart failure patients. While the estimates are not statistically-
significantly different with or without full controls, the reduction in the magnitude of the
coefficient with controls suggests more caution when evaluating the results.15 These reduc-
tions also suggest some caution for the main heart failure results, although the ubiquity
of that health condition and the relative insensitivity to the inclusion of controls are more
supportive of the exogeneity assumption.
    Overall, patients admitted with common emergency conditions appear to benefit from
the availability of specialists, although this is not found in the case of pulmonologists, where
either the measurement issues are more severe or the returns are lower.
    One remaining question is whether the greater availability of specialists affects the treat-
ment intensity and outcomes for patients with conditions that they do not usually treat.
The main results showed that for heart failure patients, the availability of non-cardiologists
did not affect their care or outcomes. Table 8 continues to find that the availability of spe-
cialists other than one most common for a given condition does not affect the likelihood of
treatment by the most-common specialist, which is not surprising as the empirical model
  15
     For example, it is possible that for less-common conditions hospitals are more likely to either schedule
or call in a specialist to treat these patients. One solution would be to look at specialists who admitted
a patient prior to the time of admission rather than the date of admission, but these claims data do not
include the time of admission.


                                                     32
holds the number of most-common specialists constant. In terms of mortality, the effects
of the availability of “other specialists” tend to be small (mirroring the results for number
of other specialists in Table 2), and the sign is not consistent across the conditions. These
results imply that within the range of variation observed here, an increase in the proportion
of physicians who are specialists improves outcomes for patients who are commonly treated
by those specialties; such an increase does not appear to affect the treatment or health
outcomes for those with other common emergency conditions.



5     Conclusion

There are concerns that moral hazard problems in the US healthcare system have led to an
over-reliance on specialists, which are associated with greater resource use and only mixed
evidence of improved quality of care. As a result there are often calls for greater incentives
to channel care through less-intensive general practitioners.
    Comparisons of treatment and outcomes for patients treated by specialists versus non-
specialists may be confounded by selection bias. This paper uses 100% Medicare claims data
to calculate proxies for physician characteristics of those available on the date of admission.
For heart failure patients, arriving on a date with more cardiologists results in lower mortality.
The presence of more cardiologists also results in a greater likelihood that the patient will
be treated directly by a cardiologist, a higher likelihood of a major operation, and higher
Medicare spending. For context, the results are suggestive that this additional treatment
is worth the extra expense: under strong assumptions, the return to specialty care appears
high, with a cost per at least one life-year saved on the order of $50,000.
    In addition, the volume of heart failure patients seen by the physician over the past year is
also associated with lower mortality. While this effect is statistically significant, the economic
magnitude is half as large as the effects of specialty care. Other physician characteristics,
including physician sex, medical-school quality, and years of experience are largely unrelated



                                               33
to patient health.
   There are a number of limitations when interpreting the estimates. First, the measures
of availability are only proxies, and so a lack of a relationship found for some measures may
reflect the quality of the proxy rather than a lack of a true effect. Second, the comparisons
are made within hospitals to absorb differences in practice environments, but the results
may not apply to comparisons of physicians across hospitals. Third, while the availability of
specialists may benefit emergency patients, they may add to costs when they are available
to treat non-emergency patients. The current results show that at least among emergency
patients with common conditions, the availability of “other specialists” does not affect treat-
ment intensity or outcomes. This suggests that within the range of variation considered
here, the benefits of specialist availability are not countered by wasteful care for other emer-
gency patients. A more-general limitation of the current analysis is that these estimates are
for emergency patients (both main effects and spillovers on other patients), and effects of
specialist treatment for those with scheduled visits may well be different.
   The results here suggest that greater specialist availability improves survival at a rela-
tively low cost. If calls for greater reliance on lower-cost general practitioners are heeded,
such a shift in treatment priorities would likely come at the cost of lower-quality care for
emergency patients.




                                              34
References
Jason Abaluck, Leila Agha, Chris Kabrhel, Ali Raja, and Arjun Venkatesh. The determinants
  of productivity in medical testing: Intensity and allocation of care. American Economic
  Review, 106(12):3730–3764, 2016. doi: 10.1257/aer.20140260.
Leila Agha, Brigham Frandsen, and James B. Rebitzer. Fragmented division of labor and
  healthcare costs: Evidence from moves across regions. Journal of Public Economics, 169:
  144–159, 2019. doi: 10.1016/j.jpubeco.2018.11.001.
David Archampong, David Borowski, Peer Wille-Jørgensen, and Lene H Iversen. Workload
  and surgeons specialty for outcome after colorectal cancer surgery. Cochrane Database of
  Systematic Reviews, 2012. doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd005391.pub3.
John Z. Ayanian, Paul J. Hauptman, Edward Guadagnoli, Elliott M Antman, Chris L.
  Pashos, and Barbara J. Mcneil. Knowledge and practices of generalist and specialist
  physicians regarding drug therapy for acute myocardial infarction. New England Journal
  of Medicine, 331(17):1136–1142, 1994. doi: 10.1056/nejm199410273311707.
Katherine Baicker and Amitabh Chandra. Medicare spending, the physician workforce, and
  beneficiaries’ quality of care. Health Affairs, 23(Suppl1), 2004a. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.w4.
  184.
Katherine Baicker and Amitabh Chandra. The productivity of physician specialization:
  Evidence from the medicare program. American Economic Review, 94(2):357–361, 2004b.
  doi: 10.1257/0002828041301461.
Sanjay Basu, Seth A. Berkowitz, Robert L. Phillips, Asaf Bitton, Bruce E. Landon, and
  Russell S. Phillips. Association of primary care physician supply with population mortality
  in the united states, 2005-2015. JAMA Internal Medicine, 179(4):506, 2019. doi: 10.1001/
  jamainternmed.2018.7624.
G. S. Becker and K. M. Murphy. The division of labor, coordination costs, and knowledge.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(4):1137–1160, 1992. doi: 10.2307/2118383.
Ernst R. Berndt, Robert S. Gibbons, Anton Kolotilin, and Anna Levine Taub. The hetero-
  geneity of concentrated prescribing behavior: Theory and evidence from antipsychotics.
  Journal of Health Economics, 40:26–39, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2014.11.003.
H. K. Berthold, I. Gouni-Berthold, K. P. Bestehorn, M. Böhm, and W. Krone. Physician
  gender is associated with the quality of type 2 diabetes care. Journal of Internal Medicine,
  264(4):340–350, 2008. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2008.01967.x.
John D. Birkmeyer, Andrea E. Siewers, Emily V.a. Finlayson, Therese A. Stukel, F. Lee
  Lucas, Ida Batista, H. Gilbert Welch, and David E. Wennberg. Hospital volume and sur-
  gical mortality in the united states. New England Journal of Medicine, 346(15):1128–1137,
  2002. doi: 10.1056/nejmsa012337.
John D. Birkmeyer, Therese A. Stukel, Andrea E. Siewers, Philip P. Goodney, David E.
  Wennberg, and F. Lee Lucas. Surgeon volume and operative mortality in the united states.
  New England Journal of Medicine, 349(22):2117–2127, 2003. doi: 10.1056/nejmsa035205.
Paul N Casale, Jayne L Jones, Flossie E Wolf, Yanfen Pei, and L.marlin Eby. Patients treated
  by cardiologists have a lower in-hospital mortality for acute myocardial infarction. Journal
  of the American College of Cardiology, 32(4):885–889, 1998. doi: 10.1016/s0735-1097(98)
  00325-8.
Clément De Chaisemartin. Tolerating defiance? local average treatment effects without

                                             35
   monotonicity. Quantitative Economics, 8(2):367–396, 2017. doi: 10.3982/qe601.
David Chan, Matthew Gentzkow, and Chuan Yu. Selection with variation in diagnostic skill:
   Evidence from radiologists. 2020. doi: 10.3386/w26467.
David C. Chan. Influence and information in team decisions: Evidence from medical resi-
   dency. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, Forthcoming, forthcoming.
Amitabh Chandra and Douglas O. Staiger. Productivity spillovers in health care: Evidence
   from the treatment of heart attacks. Journal of Political Economy, 115(1):103–140, 2007.
   doi: 10.1086/512249.
Michael E. Chernew, Lindsay Sabik, Amitabh Chandra, and Joseph P. Newhouse. Would
   having more primary care doctors cut health spending growth? Health Affairs, 28(5):
   1327–1335, 2009. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.28.5.1327.
Janet Currie and W. Bentley Macleod. Diagnosing expertise: Human capital, decision
   making, and performance among physicians. Journal of Labor Economics, 35(1):1–43,
   2017. doi: 10.1086/687848.
David Cutler, Jonathan S. Skinner, Ariel Dora Stern, and David Wennberg. Physician
   beliefs and patient preferences: A new look at regional variation in health care spending.
   American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(1):192–221, 2019. doi: 10.1257/pol.
   20150421.
Joseph J. Doyle, Steven M. Ewer, and Todd H. Wagner. Returns to physician human capital:
   Evidence from patients randomized to physician teams. Journal of Health Economics, 29
   (6):866–882, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2010.08.004.
Andrew J. Epstein and Sean Nicholson. The formation and evolution of physician treatment
   styles: An application to cesarean sections. Journal of Health Economics, 28(6):1126–1140,
   2009. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2009.08.003.
Elliott S. Fisher, David E. Wennberg, Therese A. Stukel, Daniel J. Gottlieb, F. L. Lucas,
   and Étoile L. Pinder. The implications of regional variations in medicare spending. part
   2: Health outcomes and satisfaction with care. Annals of Internal Medicine, 138(4):288,
   2003. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-138-4-200302180-00007.
Leslie Allison Gillum and S. Claiborne Johnston. Influence of physician specialty on outcomes
   after acute ischemic stroke. Journal of Hospital Medicine, 3(3):184–192, 2008. doi: 10.
   1002/jhm.313.
J. Alison Glover. The incidence of tonsillectomy in school children. Proceedings of the Royal
   Society of Medicine, 31(10):1219–1236, 1938. doi: 10.1177/003591573803101027.
Alan S Go, Rajni K Rao, Kent W Dauterman, and Barry M Massie. A systematic review
   of the effects of physician specialty on the treatment of coronary disease and heart failure
   in the united states. The American Journal of Medicine, 108(3):216–226, 2000. doi:
   10.1016/s0002-9343(99)00430-1.
L.b. Goldstein, D.b. Matchar, J. Hoff-Lindquist, G.p. Samsa, and R.d. Horner. Va stroke
   study: Neurologist care is associated with increased testing but improved outcomes. Neu-
   rology, 61(6):792–796, 2003. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000082724.77447.3a.
Brad N. Greenwood, Seth Carnahan, and Laura Huang. Patient–physician gender concor-
   dance and increased mortality among female heart attack patients. Proceedings of the
   National Academy of Sciences, 115(34):8569–8574, 2018. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1800097115.
M. J. Hall, C. J. DeFrances, S. N. Williams, A. Golosinskiy, and A. Schwartzman. volume 29
   of National Health Statistics Reports.

                                              36
Leslie R. Harrold, Terry S. Field, and Jerry H. Gurwitz. Knowledge, patterns of care, and
  outcomes of care for generalists and specialists. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 14
  (8):499–511, 1999. doi: 10.1046/j.1525-1497.1999.08168.x.
A. Hartz and P. A. James. A systematic review of studies comparing myocardial infarction
  mortality for generalists and specialists: Lessons for research and health policy. The
  Journal of the American Board of Family Medicine, 19(3):291–302, 2006. doi: 10.3122/
  jabfm.19.3.291.
James Heckman and Edward Vytlacil. Structural equations, treatment effects and econo-
  metric policy evaluation. Econometrica, 73:669–738, 2005. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0262.2005.
  00594.x.
Guido W. Imbens and Joshua D. Angrist. Identification and estimation of local average
  treatment effects. Econometrica, 62(2):467–475, 1994. doi: 10.2307/2951620.
James G. Jollis, Elizabeth R. Delong, Eric D. Peterson, Lawrence H. Muhlbaier, Donald F.
  Fortin, Robert M. Califf, and Daniel B. Mark. Outcome of acute myocardial infarction
  according to the specialty of the admitting physician. New England Journal of Medicine,
  335(25):1880–1887, 1996. doi: 10.1056/nejm199612193352505.
Dennis T. Ko, Peter C. Austin, Benjamin T. B. Chan, and Jack V. Tu. Quality of care of
  international and canadian medical graduates in acute myocardial infarction. Archives of
  Internal Medicine, 165(4):458, 2005. doi: 10.1001/archinte.165.4.458.
Toru Kondo, Takahiro Okumura, Yuya Matsue, Atsushi Shiraishi, Nobuyuki Kagiyama,
  Tetsuo Yamaguchi, Shunsuke Kuroda, Keisuke Kida, Atsushi Mizuno, and Shogo Oishi.
  Specialty-related differences in the acute-phase treatment and prognosis in patients with
  acute heart failure— insights from reality-ahf —. Circulation Journal, 83(1):174–181,
  2018. doi: 10.1253/circj.cj-18-0724.
David M. Levine, Bruce E. Landon, and Jeffrey A. Linder. Quality and experience of out-
  patient care in the united states for adults with or without primary care. JAMA Internal
  Medicine, 179(3):363–372, 2019. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2018.6716.
Herng-Ching Lin, Sudha Xirasagar, Chi-Hung Chen, and Yi-Ting Hwang. Physician’s case
  volume of intensive care unit pneumonia admissions and in-hospital mortality. American
  Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 177(9):989–994, 2008. doi: 10.1164/
  rccm.200706-813oc.
David Meltzer. Hospitalists and the doctor-patient relationship. The Journal of Legal Studies,
  30(S2):589–606, 2001. doi: 10.1086/339294.
Janet B. Mitchell, David J. Ballard, Jack P. Whisnant, Carol J. Ammering, Gregory P.
  Samsa, and David B. Matchar. What role do neurologists play in determining the costs
  and outcomes of stroke patients? Stroke, 27(11):1937–1943, 1996. doi: 10.1161/01.str.27.
  11.1937.
Debra L. Roter, Judith A. Hall, and Yutaka Aoki. Physician gender effects in medical
  communication. Jama, 288(6):756, 2002. doi: 10.1001/jama.288.6.756.
David M Shahian and Sharon-Lise T Normand. The volume-outcome relationship: from
  luft to leapfrog. The Annals of Thoracic Surgery, 75(3):1048–1058, 2003. doi: 10.1016/
  s0003-4975(02)04308-4.
David Silver. Haste or waste? peer pressure and productivity in the emergency department.
  SSRN Working Paper, 2020. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3588769.
Jonathan S. Skinner, Douglas O. Staiger, and Elliott S. Fisher. Is technological change in

                                             37
   medicine always worth it? the case of acute myocardial infarction. Health Affairs, 25
   (Suppl1), 2006. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.25.w34.
Bruce Steinwald, Paul Ginsburg, Caitlin Brandt, Sobin Lee, and Kavita Patel.
   We need more primary care physicians: Here’s why and how, Jul 2019. URL
   https://www.brookings.edu/blog/usc-brookings-schaeffer-on-health-policy/
   2019/07/08/we-need-more-primary-care-physicians-heres-why-and-how/.
Yusuke Tsugawa, Anupam B. Jena, Jose F. Figueroa, E. John Orav, Daniel M. Blumenthal,
   and Ashish K. Jha. Comparison of hospital mortality and readmission rates for medicare
   patients treated by male vs female physicians. JAMA Internal Medicine, 177(2):206,
   2017a. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.7875.
Yusuke Tsugawa, Anupam B Jena, E John Orav, and Ashish K Jha. Quality of care delivered
   by general internists in us hospitals who graduated from foreign versus us medical schools:
   observational study. Bmj, 2017b. doi: 10.1136/bmj.j273.
Yusuke Tsugawa, Ashish K. Jha, Joseph P. Newhouse, Alan M. Zaslavsky, and Anupam B.
   Jena. Variation in physician spending and association with patient outcomes. JAMA
   Internal Medicine, 177(5):675, 2017c. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2017.0059.
Shanmugam Uthamalingam, Jagdesh Kandala, Vijairam Selvaraj, William Martin, Marlyn
   Daley, Eshan Patvardhan, Robert Capodilupo, Stephanie Moore, and James L. Januzzi.
   Outcomes of patients with acute decompensated heart failure managed by cardiologists
   versus noncardiologists. The American Journal of Cardiology, 115(4):466–471, 2015. doi:
   10.1016/j.amjcard.2014.11.034.
Christopher Jd Wallis, Bheeshma Ravi, Natalie Coburn, Robert K Nam, Allan S Detsky,
   and Raj Satkunasivam. Comparison of postoperative outcomes among patients treated
   by male and female surgeons: a population based matched cohort study. Bmj, 2017. doi:
   10.1136/bmj.j4366.
J. Wennberg and A. Gittelsohn. Small area variations in health care delivery: A population-
   based health information system can guide planning and regulatory decision-making. Sci-
   ence, 182(4117):1102–1108, 1973. doi: 10.1126/science.182.4117.1102.
Salman Zaheer, Samuel D. Pimentel, Kristina D. Simmons, Lindsay E. Kuo, Jashodeep
   Datta, Noel Williams, Douglas L. Fraker, and Rachel R. Kelz. Comparing international
   and united states undergraduate medical education and surgical outcomes using a refined
   balance matching methodology. Annals of Surgery, 265(5):916–922, 2017. doi: 10.1097/
   sla.0000000000001878.
M. Justin Zaman, Robert Fleetcroft, Max Bachmann, Toomas Sarev, Susan Stirling, Allan
   Clark, and Phyo Kyaw Myint. Association of increasing age with receipt of specialist care
   and long-term mortality in patients with non-st elevation myocardial infarction. Age and
   Ageing, 45(1):96–103, 2015. doi: 10.1093/ageing/afv162.




                                             38
                                       Figure 1: Within-cell Variation:
                               Vigntiles in Number of Cardiologists Observed
 3.5
    3
 2.5
    2
 1.5
    1
 0.5
    0
 ‐0.5
   ‐1
 ‐1.5
   ‐2
        1    2      3     4     5     6      7     8     9     10    11    12    13    14     15    16    17    18     19    20
This figure reports 20 equally-spaced points in the distribution of the standard deviation of the number of cardiologists observed
on the same date as the patient's admission after this availability measure has been de-meaned at the hospital x quarter x day-of-
week level.
                             Figure 2: Predicted Mortality & Actual Mortality
                                       vs. Cardiologist Availability

 Mortality &
  Predicted            0.005
  Mortality                0
                      -0.005
                       -0.01
                      -0.015
                       -0.02
                      -0.025
                       -0.03
                      -0.035
                       -0.04
                                         0                 1                  2                  3                 4+
                                                                                            Available Cardiologists

This figure plots coefficient estimates of the relationship between predicted and actual 1-year mortality versus the number of
available cardiologists from a model that includes hospital x quarter x day-of-week fixed effects. Predicted one-year mortality is
calculated using a probit model and the full set of patient characteristics described in the text. Dotted lines represent 95%
confidence intervals calculated using standard errors that were clustered at the hospital level.
                 Figure 3: Cardiologist Treatment vs. Cardiologist Availability

       Any
   Cardiologist          0.3
    Treatment
                       0.25

                         0.2

                       0.15

                         0.1

                       0.05

                           0
                                       0                 1                 2                 3                4+
                                                                                          Available Cardiologists
This figure plots coefficient estimates of the relationship between cardiologist treatment versus the number of available
cardiologists from a model that includes hospital x quarter x day-of-week fixed effects. Dotted lines represent 95%
confidence intervals calculated using standard errors that were clustered at the hospital level.
                             Table 1: Means by Cardiologist Assignment & Availability


                                         Attending physician assigned:                    Date when number of cardiologists observed is:
                                    Non-Cardiologist          Cardiologist                       Low                      High
A. Patient characteristics               (1)                      (2)                             (3)                      (4)

   Age                                     78.4                      77.4                          78.3                      78.2
   Male                                    0.44                      0.55                          0.45                      0.46
   White                                   0.84                      0.90                          0.85                      0.86
   African American                        0.12                      0.07                          0.11                      0.10
   Hispanic                                0.02                      0.02                          0.02                      0.02
   1-year lagged spending                 13334                     11906                         13045                     12913

B. Hospital environment per day
   Number of physicians                    14.8                      15.0                          13.6                      15.7
   Number of cardiologists                 1.59                      2.15                          1.21                      3.11
   Number of patients                      21.3                      21.5                          19.6                      22.0

    Observations                          909,083
Columns (1) and (3) are sample means; Columns (2) and (4) are calculated by adding these means and the point estimates from models of
each characteristic regressed on an indicator that the patient was assigned to a cardiologist attending (Column 2) or arrived on a date when
the number of cardiologists observed is higher than the cell mean (Column 4), along with hospital x quarter x day-of-week fixed effects.
                                                      Table 2: Cardiologists & Patient Mortality

                    Dependent Variable: 1-year mortality

                                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)
Cardiologist Attending                      -0.086      -0.078
                                           (0.0024)    (0.0023)

Any Cardiologist Treatment                                           -0.10       -0.082
                                                                   (0.0020)     (0.0019)

Number of Cardiologists Observed = 1                                                         -0.0070     -0.0072     -0.0066     -0.0064      -0.0054     -0.0052
                                                                                            (0.0025)    (0.0026)    (0.0025)    (0.0025)     (0.0052)    (0.0053)

Number of Cardiologists Observed > 2                                                         -0.0128     -0.0133     -0.0122     -0.0119      -0.0126     -0.0121
                                                                                            (0.0030)    (0.0031)    (0.0031)    (0.0031)     (0.0064)    (0.0064)

Number of Other Specialists Observed                                                        -0.00005     -0.0001     0.0001     0.0000005    0.00004     -0.00009
                                                                                            (0.0004)    (0.0005)    (0.0005)     (0.0005)    (0.0009)    (0.0010)
Controls for:
 Number of physicians and patients          No           Yes         No          Yes         No           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Patient characteristics                    No           Yes         No          Yes         No           No          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 Other physician characteristics            No           No          No          No          No           No          No          Yes         No          Yes
                                          Hospital-    Hospital-   Hospital-   Hospital-   Hospital-    Hospital-   Hospital-   Hospital-   Hospital-   Hospital-
Fixed effects                             Quarter-     Quarter-    Quarter-    Quarter-    Quarter-     Quarter-    Quarter-    Quarter-    Month-      Month-
                                            Day          Day         Day         Day         Day          Day         Day         Day         Day         Day

Mean of the dependent variable                0.326
Observations                                 909,083
Models that control for the number of physicians and patients include indicators for each value observed in the same hospital-date cell. Controls for patient
characteristics include those listed in Table 1, including indicators for each age and quintiles of lagged Medicare spending. Other physician characteristics are
described in Table 3. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by hospital.
                Table 3: Available-Physician Characteristics & Mortality

                                              Dependent Variable: 1-year mortality
                                                                          (1)                         (2)
        Physician types observed on the date of admission:

Number of cardiologists                                                       -0.0035                -0.0036
                                                                           (0.0007)***           (0.0007)***
Number of other specialists                                                    0.0004                -0.0004
                                                                             (0.0005)               (0.0005)
Number graduating from Top 50 medical school (Primary Care)                   -0.0007                -0.0011
                                                                             (0.0005)              (0.0006)*
Number graduating from Top 50 medical school (Research)                       0.00005                0.0008
                                                                             (0.0005)               (0.0006)
Number graduating from US medical school                                      -0.0002                -0.0002
                                                                             (0.0005)               (0.0006)
Number of male physicians                                                     0.0002                 0.0006
                                                                             (0.0006)               (0.0006)
Average years of experience (10s)                                             -0.0008                -0.0005
                                                                              (0.003)               (0.0028)
Average volume of HF patients per year                                        -0.0005                -0.0004
                                                                            (0.0002)**            (0.0002)**

                                                Separate regressions           Yes                    No

                                    Mean of the dependent variable           0.326
                                                      Observations          909,083
Models include hospital x quarter x day-of-week fixed effects, as well as the full set of controls listed in Table
2. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by hospital. *** = significant at 0.001; *= significant at
0.10.
                                      Table 4: Cardiologist Availability & Cardiologist Assignment

A. Cardiologist Attending                         Dependent variable: Cardiologist attending

                                                            (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                    (5)
Number of Cardiologists Observed = 1                       0.112                 0.112                 0.110                0.105                  0.104
                                                         (0.0033)              (0.0033)              (0.0032)              (0.0052)               (0.0051)

Number of Cardiologists Observed > 2                      0.218                  0.217                 0.212                 0.205                  0.201
                                                         (0.0052)              (0.0051)              (0.0050)              (0.0080)               (0.0078)

Number of Other Specialists Observed                      -0.0002              -0.0003                0.0005               -0.0011                -0.0004
                                                         (0.0004)              (0.0004)              (0.0005)              (0.0007)               (0.0008)
Controls for:
 Patient characteristics                                  No                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Other physician characteristics                          No                    No                    Yes                    No                   Yes
Fixed effects                                       Hosp-Quarter-Day      Hosp-Quarter-Day      Hosp-Quarter-Day       Hosp-Month-Day        Hosp-Month-Day

Mean of the dependent variable                            0.174
Observations                                             909,083

B. Any Cardiologist Treatment                     Dependent variable: Cardiologist attending, operating, or other

                                                            (1)                   (2)                   (3)                   (4)                    (5)
Number of Cardiologists Observed = 1                       0.104                 0.103                 0.101                0.0967                 0.0953
                                                         (0.0035)              (0.0034)              (0.0034)              (0.0059)               (0.0058)

Number of Cardiologists Observed > 2                      0.196                  0.194                 0.190                 0.183                  0.179
                                                         (0.0052)              (0.0051)              (0.0054)              (0.0084)               (0.0082)

Number of Other Specialists Observed                      -0.0001              -0.0002               0.00054               -0.0012               -0.00050
                                                         (0.0005)              (0.0005)              (0.0005)              (0.0009)              (0.0009)
Controls for:
 Patient characteristics                                  No                    Yes                   Yes                   Yes                   Yes
 Other physician characteristics                          No                    No                    Yes                    No                   Yes
Fixed effects                                       Hosp-Quarter-Day      Hosp-Quarter-Day      Hosp-Quarter-Day       Hosp-Month-Day        Hosp-Month-Day

Mean of the dependent variable                              0.259
Observations                                              909,083
All models include indicators for the number of physicians and the number of patients observed in the same hospital x quarter x day-of-week cell. Controls
for patient characteristics and other physician characteristics are the same as those described in Table 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by
hospital.
                                          Table 5: Cardiologist Availability & Short-term Treatment Intensity

                          Dependent Variable:              Operation on the cardiovascular system                                 Cardiac catheterization (30-days)

                                                        (1)                   (2)                    (3)                  (4)                    (5)                 (6)
Number of Cardiologists Observed = 1                  0.0084                0.0078                 0.0076               0.0062                 0.0057              0.0057
                                                     (0.0021)              (0.0021)               (0.0021)             (0.0014)               (0.0013)            (0.0013)

Number of Cardiologists Observed > 2                  0.0192                0.0178                 0.0175               0.0124                 0.0112              0.0111
                                                     (0.0027)              (0.0026)               (0.0026)             (0.0018)               (0.0018)            (0.0018)

Number of Other Specialists Observed                  0.0015                0.0013                 0.0013               0.0005                 0.0004              0.0005
                                                     (0.0004)              (0.0004)               (0.0004)             (0.0003)               (0.0003)            (0.0003)
Controls for:
 Patient characteristics                                No                    Yes                   Yes                   No                    Yes                   Yes
 Other physician characteristics                        No                    No                    Yes                   No                    No                    Yes

Mean of the dependent variable                         0.217                                                             0.082

                          Dependent Variable:                    Number of procedures (30-days)                                           Hospital charges

                                                        (7)                   (8)                   (9)                  (10)                   (11)                  (12)
Number of Cardiologists Observed = 1                  0.0213                0.0187                0.0186                 287                    235                   220
                                                      (0.0079)              (0.0078)              (0.0078)               (158)                 (158)                  (158)

Number of Cardiologists Observed > 2                  0.0485                0.0424                0.0417                  774                   644                   612
                                                      (0.0102)              (0.0100)              (0.0100)               (217)                 (215)                  (215)

Number of Other Specialists Observed                  0.0061                0.0054                0.0057                  104                    94                    98
                                                      (0.0016)              (0.0016)              (0.0017)               (38.1)                (37.9)                 (38.8)
Controls for:
 Patient characteristics                                No                    Yes                   Yes                   No                    Yes                   Yes
 Other physician characteristics                        No                    No                    Yes                   No                    No                    Yes

Mean of the dependent variable                            0.997                                                            24829
Observations                                             909,083
All models include indicators for the number of physicians and the number of patients observed in the same hospital x quarter x day-of-week cell. Controls for patient
characteristics and other physician characteristics are the same as those described in Table 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by hospital.
                                 Table 6: Cardiologists & Medicare Spending

                                                         Index Admission Facility                      1-year Facility
                            Dependent Variable:              + Physician Fees                         + Physician Fees

                                                      (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)
Cardiologist Attending                               2337                                      323
                                                     (460)                                    (874)
Any Cardiologist Treatment                                        3484                                     2686
                                                                  (440)                                    (802)
Number of Cardiologists Observed = 1                                           -10.1                                      222
                                                                               (283)                                     (1212)

Number of Cardiologists Observed > 2                                            218                                      -760
                                                                               (371)                                     (1361)

Mean of the dependent variable                      9,438                                   32,967
Observations                                       181,464
Dataset is a 20% random sample of beneficiaries where physician fees are available. All models include the full set of patient
and environment controls described in Table 2, including hospital x quarter x day-of-week fixed effects. Robust standard
errors in parentheses, clustered by hospital.
                           Table 7: Heterogeneous Treatment Effects

A. Across Patients
                            Dependent Variable:          1-year mortality            Cardiologist assignment
                                                       Low            High             Low            High
                                                     predicted      predicted        predicted      predicted
                                                     mortality      mortality        mortality      mortality

                                                        (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)
Number of Cardiologists Observed = 1                  -0.0005        -0.0094           0.107          0.090
                                                     (0.0047)       (0.0056)         (0.0055)       (0.0050)

Number of Cardiologists Observed > 2                 -0.0043        -0.0134            0.196          0.176
                                                     (0.0059)       (0.0070)         (0.0078)       (0.0074)

Mean of the dependent variable                        0.249          0.404             0.288          0.230
Observations                                         456,272        452,811           456,272        452,811

B. Across Hospitals
                            Dependent Variable:          1-year mortality            Cardiologist assignment

                                                   Low-volume High-volume          Low-volume High-volume

                                                        (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)
Number of Cardiologists Observed = 1                  -0.0054        -0.0085           0.132         0.0560
                                                     (0.0034)       (0.0039)         (0.0044)       (0.0040)

Number of Cardiologists Observed > 2                 -0.0126        -0.0123            0.240          0.138
                                                     (0.0045)       (0.0044)         (0.0064)       (0.0058)

Mean of the dependent variable                        0.330          0.322             0.206          0.312
Observations                                         454,867        454,216           454,867        454,216

C. Across Busy & Slow Dates
                       Dependent Variable:               1-year mortality            Cardiologist assignment

                                                   Low-volume High-volume          Low-volume High-volume

                                                        (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)
Number of Cardiologists Observed = 1                  -0.0099        -0.0052           0.119         0.0755
                                                     (0.0049)       (0.0046)         (0.0057)       (0.0044)

Number of Cardiologists Observed >= 2                 -0.0141        -0.0117           0.221          0.158
                                                     (0.0060)       (0.0054)         (0.0085)       (0.0061)

Mean of the dependent variable                          0.331          0.321            0.250          0.267
Observations                                          418,226         490,857         418,226         490,857
All models include full controls described in Table 2, including the number of other specialists observed and
hospital x quarter x day-of-week fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by hospital.
Panel A: Samples are defined by the patient's predicted 1-year mortality from a probit model of mortality and
the full set of patient controls. Panel B: Samples are defined by the volume in a given hospital year. Panel C:
Samples are defined by whether the number of patients in the hospital on a given date is below or above the
daily mean for that hospital.
                                                                   Table 8: Other conditions and specialties


                                             Acute Myocardial Infarction                       Cardiac Dysrhythmia                                       Stroke

          Dependent Variable:      1-year mortality            Any cardiologist      1-year mortality        Any cardiologist         1-year mortality            Any neurologist

                                      (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)           (9)       (10)          (11)        (12)
Number of Most-Common              -0.0253      -0.0163      0.1553      0.150      -0.0090     -0.0075      0.141      0.140        -0.0213    -0.0147        0.241       0.241
 Specialist Observed = 1          (0.0034)     (0.0032)     (0.0059)    (0.0057)   (0.0023)    (0.0022)     (0.0048)   (0.0047)     (0.0052)   (0.0049)       (0.0137)    (0.0136)

Number of Most-Common              -0.0411      -0.0270      0.252       0.244      -0.0221     -0.0195      0.251      0.247        -0.0360    -0.0245        0.363       0.363
 Specialist Observed > 2          (0.0040)     (0.0037)     (0.0071)    (0.0070)   (0.0027)    (0.0026)     (0.0063)   (0.0062)     (0.0093)   (0.0086)       (0.0165)    (0.0164)

Number of other specialists        -0.0016      -0.0010      -0.0050     -0.0053    -0.0007    -0.0007       -0.0012    -0.0013      0.0000     0.0001         0.0001      0.0001
                                  (0.0005)     (0.0005)     (0.0006)    (0.0006)   (0.0003)   (0.0003)      (0.0005)   (0.0005)     (0.0006)   (0.0006)       (0.0004)    (0.0004)

Patient characteristic controls     No           Yes           No          Yes       No          Yes          No         Yes          No          Yes              No        Yes
Mean of dep. var.                  0.295                      0.558                 0.165                    0.461                   0.293                        0.099
Observations                      632,297                                          817,694                                          408,916

                                                       Fractures                                   Hip Fracture                                      Pneumonia

          Dependent Variable:      1-year mortality            Any orthopedic        1-year mortality         Any orthopedic          1-year mortality        Any pulmonologist

                                     (13)         (14)        (15)        (16)        (17)       (18)          (19)       (20)        (21)       (22)           (23)        (24)
Number of Most-Common              -0.0236      -0.0165      0.195       0.194      -0.0269    -0.0216        0.149      0.149       0.0021     0.0025         0.0856      0.0853
 Specialist Observed = 1          (0.0022)     (0.0021)     (0.0059)    (0.0058)   (0.0040)   (0.0038)      (0.0069)   (0.0069)     (0.0021)   (0.0020)       (0.0032)    (0.0032)

Number of Most-Common              -0.0356      -0.0255      0.279       0.278      -0.0388    -0.0312        0.196      0.196       0.0039     0.0051          0.152       0.152
 Specialist Observed > 2          (0.0029)     (0.0027)     (0.0074)    (0.0073)   (0.0049)   (0.0048)      (0.0087)   (0.0087)     (0.0034)   (0.0033)       (0.0057)    (0.0057)

Number of other specialists        -0.0003      -0.0001      -0.0048     -0.0048    0.0004     0.0005        -0.0047    -0.0047      0.0021     0.0018         0.0015      0.0014
                                  (0.0004)     (0.0004)     (0.0005)    (0.0005)   (0.0007)   (0.0007)      (0.0007)   (0.0007)     (0.0004)   (0.0004)       (0.0003)    (0.0003)

Patient characteristic controls      No        Yes           No         Yes             No         Yes           No       Yes          No         Yes           No           Yes
Mean of dep. var.                  0.218                    0.575                     0.258                    0.781                  0.317                   0.074
Observations                      837,383                                            360,689                                        999,304
All models include indicators for the number of physicians and the number of patients observed in the same hospital x quarter x day-of-week cell. Controls for patient
characteristics are the same as those described in Table 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by hospital.
Supplemental Appendix
                                     Figure A1:
                      Distribution of Number of Cardiologists
  0.4

0.35

  0.3

0.25

  0.2

0.15

  0.1

0.05

    0
                 0                 1                 2                  3                4+
This figure reports the shares of the patient-level data where there were 0 to 4-or-more cardiologists
observed available in the analysis sample.
                   Figure A2: Cardiologist Attending vs. Cardiologist Availability
 Cardiologist
  Attending       0.35

                    0.3

                  0.25

                    0.2

                  0.15

                    0.1

                  0.05

                      0
                                   0                    1                   2                    3                   4+
                                                                                                 Available Cardiologists
This figure plots coefficient estimates of the relationship between cardiologist assigned as the attending physician versus the
number of available cardiologists from a model that includes hospital x quarter x day-of-week fixed effects. Dotted lines
represent 95% confidence intervals calculated using standard errors that were clustered at the hospital level.
                            Table A1: Sample Construction
                                                                            Observations
1. Heart failure patients admitted via the emergency department and
were continuously enrolled in fee-for-service Medicare for 12 months
prior and 12 months after the beneficiary's first heart-failure admission
from 1999-2012                                                                4054875
2. Admission year < 2012 for uncensored outcomes                              3844767
3. Attending physician admitted at least one more patient on same date
for any condition                                                             1499170
4. Age < 90 for variation in treatment intensity                              1295848
5. Nonmissing physician characteristics                                       1285659
6. Hospital had > 100 observations                                            1180177
7. > 1 observation in the hospital-quarter-day of week cell                    909083
Source: 100% Medicare inpatient claims.
                                                          Table A2: Sample Means

                                                                                       All Heart Failure Inpatients      Analysis Sample
                                                                                          Mean            Std.         Mean          Std.
A. Patient characteristics                                                                  (1)            (2)          (3)          (4)

        Demographics     Age                                                               80.4            8.0         78.2           6.6
                         White                                                             0.86           0.34         0.85          0.36
                         Black                                                             0.09           0.29         0.11          0.31
                         Hispanic                                                          0.02           0.13         0.02          0.13
                         Male                                                              0.43           0.50         0.46          0.50

                  Risk   1-year lagged spending                                           12524          20348        13135         20980
                         1-year mortality                                                  0.36           0.48         0.33          0.47

B. Physician characteristics per day

                         Number of physicians observed on same date                        12.6           10.4         15.6          11.1
              Training     Cardiologists                                                   1.53           2.18         1.98          2.43
                           Other specialists                                               4.34           4.75         5.61          5.17
                           Non specialists                                                 6.74           5.21         7.97          5.64
                         Number that attended a top-50 medical school (Primary Care)       2.87           3.68         3.57          4.12
                         Number that attended a top-50 medical school (Research)           3.52           4.59         4.39          5.11
                         Number that attended a US medical school                          8.33           7.89         10.37         8.62

        Demographics     Number of male physicians                                         10.3           8.79         12.8          9.52
                         Average years since graduation (10 years)                         2.13           0.48         2.12          0.40

               Volume    Average number of patients last year                              7.93           6.25         8.75          6.91

                        Observations                                                    4,054,875                     909,083
Source: 100% Medicare inpatient claims. Table A1 describes the sample restrictions.
                                     Table A3: Physician-Availability Variation

                                                                                         Sample S.D.           Within Cell S.D.
Physician characteristics per day                                                            (1)                     (2)
         Training Number of cardiologists                                                   2.43                    0.95
                   Number of other specialists                                              5.17                    1.71
                   Number of non-specialists                                                5.64                    1.86
                   Number that attended a top-50 medical school (Primary Care)              4.12                    1.33
                   Number that attended a top-50 medical school (Research)                  5.11                    1.51
                   Number that attended a US medical school                                 8.62                    2.32

   Demographics     Number of male physicians                                                9.52                   2.55
                    Average years since graduation (10 years)                                0.40                   0.21

         Volume     Average number of heart-failure patients last year                       6.91                   2.62

                    Observations                                                         909,083
Source: 100% Medicare inpatient claims. Table A1 describes the sample restrictions. Column (2) reports the standard deviation of
the measures that have been de-meaned within hospital x quarter x day-of-week cells.
                                                   Table A4: Cardiologists & 30-day Mortality

                            Dependent Variable: 30-day mortality
                                                    (1)          (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)         (9)
Cardiologist Attending                            -0.035      -0.032
                                                 (0.0016) (0.0015)

Any Cardiologist Assigned                                                     -0.041      -0.034
                                                                             (0.0013)    (0.0013)

Number of Cardiologists Observed = 1                                                                  -0.0043      -0.0041     -0.0040      -0.0010      -0.0009
                                                                                                      (0.0017)     (0.0017)    (0.0017)     (0.0035)     (0.0035)

Number of Cardiologists Observed > 2                                                                  -0.0077      -0.0073     -0.0070      -0.0040     -0.0038
                                                                                                      (0.0020)     (0.0020)    (0.0020)     (0.0043)    (0.0044)

Number of Other Specialists Observed                                                                  -0.0003      -0.0002     -0.0003      -0.0003     -0.0003
                                                                                                      (0.0003)     (0.0003)    (0.0003)     (0.0006)    (0.0006)
Controls for:
 Number of physicians and patients                   Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Patient characteristics                             No           Yes         No           Yes          No           Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
 Other physician characteristics                     No           No          No           No           No           No          Yes         No           Yes
                                                   Hospital-    Hospital-   Hospital-    Hospital-     Hosp-        Hosp-       Hosp-       Hosp-        Hosp-
                                                   Quarter-     Quarter-    Quarter-     Quarter-     Quarter-     Quarter-    Quarter-     Month-       Month-
Fixed effects                                        Day          Day         Day          Day          Day          Day         Day         Day          Day

Mean of the dependent variable                        0.099
Observations                                         909,083
Models control for the number of physicians and patients include indicators for each value observed in the same hospital-date cell. Controls for patient
characteristics include those listed in Table 2. Other physician characteristics are described in Table 3. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by
hospital.
                                           Table A5: Specialists and Treatment Intensity




                                         Operation on the                   Cardiac            Number of procedures
                   Dependent Variable: cardiovascular system            catheterization            (30-days)                Hospital charges

                                             (1)         (2)             (3)        (4)            (5)         (6)           (7)         (8)
Cardiologist Attending                     0.105                       0.064                     0.256                      5578
                                         (0.0053)                    (0.0026)                   (0.016)                    (469.6)
Any Cardiologist                                       0.2682                     0.2360                      1.044                     11586
                                                      (0.0076)                   (0.0057)                   (0.0282)                    (528)

Mean of the dependent variable               0.217                     0.082                      0.997                      24829
Observations                                909,083
All models include the full set of patient and environment controls described in Table 2, including hospital x quarter x day-of-week fixed
effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by hospital.
                                                     Table A6: Cardiologist Availability & Facility Spending

                            Dependent Variable:      Index admission inpatient & outpatient facility spending                  1-year inpatient & outpatient facility spending

                                                           (1)                   (2)                   (3)                     (4)                   (5)                   (6)
Number of Cardiologists Observed = 1                      134                   120                   113                      145                   117                   112
                                                         (36.8)                (36.5)                (36.5)                   (146)                 (143)                 (143)

Number of Cardiologists Observed > 2                      362                   325                   307                      181                   104                   89.3
                                                         (51.5)                (51.0)                (50.8)                   (172)                 (168)                 (169)

Number of Other Specialists Observed                      40.2                  37.7                  40.7                     40.9                 23.4                  33.5
                                                         (9.77)                (9.75)                (10.1)                   (26.8)               (26.7)                (26.8)
Controls for:
 Patient characteristics                                  No                    Yes                   Yes                      No                   Yes                   Yes
 Other physician characteristics                          No                    No                    Yes                      No                   No                    Yes

Mean of dependent variable                                  7140                                                               24285
Observations                                              909,083
All models include indicators for the number of physicians and the number of patients observed in the same hospital x quarter x day-of-week cell. Controls for patient
characteristics and other physician characteristics are the same as those described in Table 2. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by hospital. 1-year spending includes
the initial hospital stay. Facility spending does not include physician fees.
                                         Table A7: Cardiologist Availability & Readmissions

                            Dependent Variable: 30-day readmission

                                                        (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)            (7)
Cardiologist Attending                                -0.017         -0.015
                                                     (0.0020)       (0.0020)

Any Cardiologist Assigned                                                           -0.010         -0.0048
                                                                                   (0.0017)       (0.0017)

Number of Cardiologists Observed = 1                                                                              0.0001         0.0001         0.0001
                                                                                                                 (0.0023)       (0.0022)       (0.0023)

Number of Cardiologists Observed > 2                                                                             -0.0004        -0.0002        -0.0002
                                                                                                                 (0.0026)       (0.0026)       (0.0026)

Number of Other Specialists Observed                                                                              0.0007         0.0006         0.0007
                                                                                                                 (0.0004)       (0.0004)       (0.0004)
Controls for:
 Patient characteristics                                No            Yes             No            Yes             No             Yes            Yes
 Other physician characteristics                        No            No              No            No              No             No             Yes

Mean of Dep. Var.                                      0.217
Observations                                          909,083
All models include indicators for the number of physicians and the number of patients observed in the same hospital x quarter x day-of-week cell.
Controls for patient characteristics and other physician characteristics are the same as those described in Table 2. Robust standard errors in
parentheses, clustered by hospital. 1-year spending includes the initial hospital stay. Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered by hospital.
