NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MARRIAGE BARS: DISCRIMINATION AGAINST
MARRIED WOMEN WORKERS, 1920's to 1950's

Claudia

Goldin

Working Paper No. 2747

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1988

This paper is a modified portion of Chapter 6: Why Did Change Take So Long?
of
from C. Goldin, Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History
American Women, (Oxford University Press, forthcoming). The National Science
Foundation
Foundation supported much of the research and the Guggenheim
Cohn for extensive and
provided a year of leave. I would like to thank Sam
Joshua Angrist, Alan
thought-provoking comments on previous drafts, and
Relations
Krueger, and other members of the Princeton University isIndustrial
This research
part of NBER's
Section for their helpful suggestions.
research program in the Development of the American Economy. Any opinions
those of the National Bureau of
expressed are those of the author not
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2747
October 1988
MARRIACE BARS: DISCRIMINATIONACAINST
MARRIED WOMEN WORKERS, 1920's to 1950's
ABSTRACT

Modern personnel practices, social consensus, and the Depression acted
in concert to delay the emergence of married women in the American

economy through an institution known as the "marriage bar."
bars were policies

Marriage
from

adopted by firms and local school boards,

about the early 1900's to 1950, to fire single women when they married
and not to hire married women.

I explore

their determinants

using

firm-level data from 1931 and 1940 and find they are associated with

promotion from within,
personnel practices.

tenure-based

salaries,

The marriage bar,

and other

modern

which had at its height

affected 751 of all local school boards and more than 50% of all
office workers,

was virtually abandoned in the 1950's when the cost

of limiting labor supply greatly increased,

Claudia Coldin
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297

The labor force participation rate of married white women increased twenty-

fold over the past century.'

The expansion was concentratedalmost entirely in

the post-World War II period and appeared in two phases.

The initial increase

extended from the 1940's to the 1960's and affected older married women more than
it did younger women,

Employment among married women 45 to 54 years old expanded

four-fold from 1940 to 1960, while that for women 25 to 34 years old rose by
less than half that figure.
was just the reverse.

The second phase began in the 1960's, and its impact

Younger married women, particularlythose with pre-school

children, experienced greater increases in participation
The increase from 1960 to 1980 was

52

than did older women.

greater for the younger than the older

group.

Many have traced the increase in female participation rates since the late
1940's to the rise in real wages

(Mincer, 1962; Smith and Ward,

1984, 1985).

Others have attributed the difference between the older and young groups to the
baby-boom

of the post-war period (Easterlin, 1978, 1980).

Younger women were

marrying earlier and having larger families, and thus could not partake equally
in the general increase in employment rates.

But the reason older married women

responded after World War II as never before to economic factors has remained
somewhat of a mystery.
Their heightened reaction was due, in part,

to the better education

and

training they received when young compared with that acquired by most previous
cohorts

(Goldin, 1983).

gender relations

It has also been asserted that World War II altered

and norms that had previously circumscribed women's

although many revisionist histories have not supported this claim.

roles,
The war

itself, according to several recent studies, had little direct impact on women's
labor force participation (e.g., Campbell, 1984).

-1-

But many of the forces that eventually generated change in married women'a
employment

-

- increaaed

education,

a markedly

reduced hirrh rate, and the

-- were apparent
amergence of the clerical aector, to mention a few

the 1920'a,

as early aa

Yet the proceaa of change in participation and in gender differences

in earnings and occupations was extremely protrscted.

Conditions in the 1930's

had much to do with the slow progress in the economic role of women, hut the
impact of the Depression often worked through preexisting
institutional barriers,

social norms and

Before 1950 the labor market did little to accommodate

aarried and older women, and many employers barred their hire.

Married women

were barred from the position of reacher by the majority of local school boards
and from clerical work by many large firms.
The notion that change in the female labor force was impeded prior to the
1950's is often inferred from the slow growth in participationrates of married

women before World War II and from the rhetoric of Depressionemployment policy.
Many other factors, however, could have intermediated.
occupation, and fertility
women,

and

these

The education,

of a cohort influence the participation

cohorts-effects

are

first

of married

maintained throughout the lifetime.

Differences in cohort effects, therefore, could account for the timing of change.

A pooled analysis of time-series and cohort data indicates that cohort effects
as well as period effects, such as unemployment, demand for female labor, female
wages, and so on, account for a substantial share of the change in psrticiparoin
over time and across cohorts (see Goldin, 1983; also Goldin, forthcoming, chapter
5).

But the residuals from this model are negative and large among older age

groups in 1920, 1930, and 1940.

in participation

rates

Although the model explains much of the variance

across cohorts and through time,

it is less able to

explsin why participation rates among older married women were low in the pre-2-

1950 period.2
Thus older married women before 1950 had lower participation
all the other factors considered in the analysis.

Why

they did

rates given

is explored here

in an analysis of 'marriage bars," prohibitions against the hiring of married
women.

I discuss how modern personnel

practices, social consensus,

the Great

in concert to delay the emergence
Depression, and individual expectations acted
of married women in the American economy.

1.0

Marriage

Bara

Discrimination

against women is manifested in a variety of ways.

most typical form no prescribed barriers exist.

Rather, employers,

In its

employees,

and customers can express their prejudices against women workers by preferring
not to associate with them.
its effects

on earnings

This form of discrimination

and occupations.

is often inferred from

In other instances,

tradition are dominant and individuals are penalized for deviating.

custom and
Prescribed

barriers against the training and employment of women are perhaps the most easily
observed forms of discrimination.

Rules have existed barring the education and

training of women, as in the professions of law and medicine and among certain
medieval guilds and more modern unions (see Morello, 1986 on law; Harris, 1978

in general).

on the professions

In other circumstances,

rules

restrict

the

fire departments,
employment of women, as in the armed forces, post office, local

and legal profession.
--

the more

prohibitions

The distinction between the two types of discrimination

or less subtle revealing
-

-

is

of preferences and the rather obvious

often blurred when written rules do not exist but custom

dictates the result.

Bars concerning the hiring and firing of married women, termed "marriage

in taacbing and clerical work from the late 1800's to the early

bars," arose

1900's and provide

the most numerically

important form of all prohibitions

their Impacr cn tha employmentof married women.

in

In 1920 just 11% of all married

women in tha lahor force were teachers and clerical workers, yet by 1970 the
percentage nearly quadrupled to 411.

The prohibitions covered, therefore, what

ware to becoaa the most frequent occupations for married women in the post- 1950
era,

In contrast, prohibitthns against the training and employment of women as

doctors and law'yera,

oroba'oly

of women,3

percentage

the beat

knon

of all bans, affected a trivial

It ia also of interest

that marriage bars covering

clerical and other orcupaticns have existed arroaa a variety of countries and

have only recently

been prohibited in Japan by its 1985 Equal Employment

Opportunity Law,4
Prohibitions

of two bans

-.

the retention

against the employment of married women consisted

generally

one against the hiring of married women and a second concerning
of existing workers when they married.

The first ban will be

referred to aa the "hire bar" and the aecond as the "retain bar."

It was

uncommon for a firm to hire married womeo yet fire single women when they
married,

But firma often banned the hiring of married women yet retained single

employees when they married.

When firms can acreen beginners for valued traits

or when firms invest considerably in training their workers,
workers

can be costly.

firing existing

Some firms and many school boards allowed women who

married in service to remain as temporary workers or as substitute teachers, who
could be dismissed

at will and whose salaries were not based on tenure.

often imposed both the retain bar and the hire bar.

Firms

It was rare, however, for

a firm to impose the same prohibitions on men)
The bar against women who married in service was the more restrictive

of

-4-

the two.

In the 1920's, young women were just beginning to extend their working
At that time the older married woman seeking white-collar

time after marriage.

employment was in an extreme minority,
decreased

in part because increased education and

fertility most affected cohorts born after 1900.

The rationale for the marriage bars offered here and elsewhere (Cohn, 1985,
1988) is simply that the policy was profitable, even in the absence of what may

be termed clearly prejudicial views about the impropriety of married women's
emp1oyment

Even though firms lost many trained employees and restricted their

labor supply by refusing to hire married women, they gained considerablymore.
Precisely

why they gained is not yet

perfectly

clear,

and I

offer

two

complementary reasons that place considerable blame on modern personnel practices

such as fixed salary scales and internal promotion.
policies also required certain precedents,

But

the marriage bar

such as sex segregated occupations

and social consensus.
Discrimination

against married women and older workers came rather cheaply

to firms in the pre-Worid War II period; the reduction in supply was small and
the loss in trainingwas minimized by the types of occupations routinely offered
women.

Firma also perceived

there were gains

to policies that

guaranteed

homogeneity across sex, race, age, and marital status lines within occupations.

But many aspects of this equilibrium were deceptively fragile and were to change
radically during and after World War II.

By the 1950's firms could no longer ignore older, married women and certain
aspects of the work place were altered.

The marriage bar, which had at its

height affected 75Z of all local school boards and more than 50% of all office
workers, was virtually abandoned in the 1950's.
changed as well.

The rhetoric of the work place

Where a married woman was once an anomaly,

perceived

as an

-5--

inefficient

workec,

she was now the coveted employee.

In mid-l950's

one

personnel director, whose firm had previously barred married women, praised older
women's "maturity and steadiness," and another noted "they are more reliable than
the younger ones."6

1.1 Extent of the Marriage Bar
The extent of the bans across the entire economy has been difficult

These were, after all, the policies of individual firms and, in the caae

assess.

of school boards, individual localities,
of

married women teachers have been lass

Prohibitions

against the employment

difficult to track due to comprehensive

surveys of local school boards by the National Education Association
beginning in the late 1920's.
Marriage bars were

l800'a

to

instituted in public school teaching

sometime

(NEA)

in the late

and were expanded in the early 1900's. Extensive surveys of local school

boards beginning with 1928 indicate that 61% of all school boards would not hire
a married woman teacher and 52% would not retain any who married while on
contract (see Table I).
of locality,

Ta'ole

Because the data are prouped in the NEA reports by size

I also weights the percentagaa by population.

T'ne

unweighted

data are generslly greater than the weighted data because large citiea had
proportionatelyfewer bars.

Both types of bars increased during the Depression,

and on the eve of American entry into World War II fully 87% of all school boards
would not hire a married women and 70% would not retain a single women who
married.

But sometime during World War II both bars disappeared.

By 1951 only

18% of the school boards had the hire bar and 10% the retain bar.

The extent of the marriage bar in office work can be inferred from
information in two comprehensive

surveys conducted by the Women's Bureau (U.S.

-6-

and
Department of Labor, 1934, 1942), called here the 1931 Office Firm Survey
the 1940 Office Firm Survey (see Data Appendix).
these

reveal much about

surveys

Firm-level

manuscripts

the origin of the hans and

their

from

impact

the earlier
Although both Women's Bureau surveys were administered in the 1930's
the later one,
one, taken in 1931, contains information about the 1920's, and
taken in 1940, reveals the changes that occurred during the Depression.7

The

before
earlier survey, therefore, will be a guide to whether the bars existed
the

rationing

of jobs during the Depression.

178
The 1931 survey sampled mainly large firms in seven cities of which
and Hartford are included here.

firms in Chicago, New York City, Philadelphia,

The 1940 survey was taken in five cities end sampled a wider range of firma; the
sample here includes 328 firma in Kansas City, Loa

Only Philadelphia is included in both surveys.
include

insurance

companies,

investment

The firma

houses,

and Philadelphia.

Angeles,

in the 1931 survey

banks,

publishing firms,

firms.
advertising companies, public utilities, and mail order

survey are

manufacturing

firma,

retail

stores,

Added to the 1940

wholesale

outlets,

small

and communications sector.8
professional offices, and firma in the transportation
Both surveys contain information of a rather confidential nature regarding

firm personnel practices, including occupations offered to either women or men,
discrimination

of single women when they
against blacks and Jews, the retention

from
martied, the barring of married women, the use of salary scales, promotion
within,

and minimum and maximum age limits.

Information of this type would be

virtually impossible to obtain in today's litigious environment,
officers

and other

exceptionally

firm

managers interviewed

by the Women'a

candid, ma their remarks below will indicate.

But peraonnel
Bureau were

The surveys also

contain more mundane personnel mattara, such as the numbers of female and male
-7-

employees, number of new employees, hours of work, personnel benefits (retirement
insurence), union activity,

plan, group

the bureaucratic

firm, and various paternalistic practices

organization of the

Because the two surveys were executed

by the same governmental agency (the Women's Bureau of the U.S. Department of
Labor)

they are

comprehensive.

similar

in

format,

although

that

for

1940

is

more

10

In 1931 12% of all firms in the sample had s formal policy of not retaining
single women when they married (see Table 1), but 23% of all female employees

were in firma having such a policy.
size,

Some

firms

did

The policy, therefore, increased with firm

not have a strict marriage

bar policy,

discretionary rules allowing them to retain able workers

but

had

to hire married women

when single were unavsilable, or to leave the policy up to department heads.
These are termed the 'discretionary" cases in the table. About 35% of all female
employees were working in firms thst would not retain them when they married as
a condition of both policy and discretion.
against hiring married women than against
married.11

Considerably more firms had policies
the retention

of single women who

About 29% of all firms had such policies in the 1931 survey and the

policies affected 36% of all female employees across these firms.

More than 50%

of all firms in the sample dismissed women when they married as a condition of
policy and discretion, and the policy affected more than 50% of all female
employees in the sample.'2

The policy of firing and hiring married women varies considerably with the
type of firm and with firm size (see Table 2).

Insurance offices, publishing

firms, banks, and public utilities had the most extensive
insurance

offices,

manufacturing

banks,

public

utilities,

firms had the most in 1940.

and the

controls in 1931;
office

portion of

Large firms, measured by the number

-8-

of female employees, were more likely to institute such policies than were small
firms for both years'3

Although the marriage bar policy varied considerablyby

city in the 1940 sample, it did not in the 1931 sample, given the industrial
distribution.

Tables 1 and 2 suggest an increase in the marriage bar policy during the
The data in Table 2 that array policies by size of firm

Great Depression.

some increase during the 1930's, particularly

show

for the marriage bar as policy.

The Kansas City and Philadelphia percentages for the retain and hire bars in 1940
are, with one exception, greater than the average for 1931, but the Los

data are not.14

Angeles

The extent and even existence of the increase is difficult

to

discern because the 1931 survey includes only large firms, and the industrial
distribution of firms as well as the cities covered differs across the two
surveys.
One way of handling the problem of composition

is to pool the two samples

and include firm size, industry and city dummy variables, and a year variable
to estimate the impact of the Depression.

Equations estimated in this fashion

exhibit a positive, large, and significant effect of the Depression, in the case

of the hire and the

retain bar as

policy.

But the discretionary-policy

version

of both the hire and retain bars did not change over time.15 The Depression, it
seems, led firms to extend a discretionary marriage bar into the realm of firm

policy.

Where firms had exercised discretionin the hiring and firing of married

women before the Depression and during its first year, they instituted strict
policy not to hire and not to retain married women by 1940.
Philadelphia
evidence

was the only city sampled in both years and provides further

for the extension of the marriage bar during the Depression.

Of the

41 firms in the 1931 sample for Philadelphia, 23 were also sampled by the Women's
-9-

Bureau in the 1940 survey.
policy,

Of these 23 firms, 11 experienced no change in

2 reversed their prohibition,

and fully 10, or 43%,

increased

their

prohibitions

Marriage bars have been mistakenly

portrayed as

originating

in the

unemployment of the 1930's, hut the Depression reinforced and extended already
existing bans agsinst the employmentof married women.17 Because the respondents

in the 1931 survey often noted that the policy was a Depression measure, and
because the data were coded aotordingly, the results indicate that the marriage
bar, in both the retsin arid hire versions, predsted the Depression among firms

hiitng office workers,

The precise degree that it did, however,

aacercained with these date.

cannot be

There is, however, ample evidence in Table 1 that

and that the
marriage bare instituted by school boards preceded the Depression

bars in both sectors were expanded during the 1930's.
often cook the form of governmental

regulations

extensions, however,

T'ne

that greatly strengthened

preexisting social norms and conventions.
Federal Order

213, passed in 1932 as part of the Federal. Economy Act,

mandated that executive branch officials, in the face of layoffs, fire workers
whose spouses were employed by the federal government.

The regulation almost

always entailed the firing of married women, although many husbands could have

been furloughed.
women's

By 1940 26 states had proposed legislation to restrict married

employment

restriction
effective

already

in state government jobs, and 9 others had some form of
in place (Shalleross, 1940).

among various local governments

Similar regulations

became

and served to expand the group

of

affected occupations to include librarians and nurses, although they too were
probably covered by prohibitions prior to the Depression.18
Federal Order 213 and the actions of state

and local governments

lent

credibility to pre-Depression policies of businesses and local school boards and
enabled the extension of a system already in place.

The bar was extended to

occupations and to sectors, such as manufacturing, where it was not extensively
found before the Depression.

The Depression served to reinforce

social norms

that kept married women, particularly the emergingmiddle class, out of the labor
force.

Because the bars were extended during the Depression, and because they

were often justified by the need to ration employment among the most needy, many
have thought marriage bars originated in the Depression.

But it is inconceivable

that marriage bars could have gained such wide acceptance during the Depression

had previous policies not existed and had social consensus not been built around
them
Economic

recessions are often periods of social recession,

discarded

and outmoded forms of gender relations

accident,

for example,

similar

that differences

work were scrutinized

are extolled.

when already
It was no

in wages between men and women for

in a federal survey taken

in 1895/96

(U.s.

Commissioner of Labor, 1897) to establish that women were not taking jobs from
men.

The

report was ordered

by Congress during a severe depression when

unemployment rates in the manufacturing sector were, for a brief period, as high

as they were to be again in the 1930's. similarly, periods of economic expansion
often provide an impetus for progressive social change, as happened in the 1950's
when the marriage bars vanished.

1.2 Firm-level Evidence,

1931 and 1940

The correlates of the policy of not retaining single women at the time of
marriage (Retain) are explored in Table 3.

A

somewhat different set of variables

could be included for the more comprehensive survey of 1940.

In both 1931 and

-11-

1940, there is a positive. yet weak, relationship between the number of employees

in the firm and the probability of not retaining women who marry (also see Table
But in both samples, the impact of firm size

2 on the effeot of firm size).
declines when factors concerning

seems, may be a proxy here for the internal
employee policies.

are included.

personnel relations

structure

of firms

Firms having a policy of internal promotion,

Size,

it

and related
fixed salary

a higher
scales, or regular salary increments with time on the job (Promote) had
probability of not retaining single women upon marriage.
increases with policies
Fitas

generally

The probability also

that set a maximum age for new hires (Maximum age).

adopted a maximum age policy when they instituted

regular

internal promotion ladders, and the policy was generslly in effect for both men

and women,

The retain bar policy increases with the existence

of pensions

(Pensions), yet decreases with unionization for the 1940 sample (Union).

The

lower the number of scheduled hours per week (Hours) and the smaller the growth

rate of the firm for the 1940 sample (Growth) the greater the probability of not
-

retaining single women.

Another variable related to internal promotionwas

the existence of certain

as
jobs for which only men would be considered (Male only), and that variable,
well,

is positively associated with the retain bar policy.

these jobs were supervisory and others were professional,
starting jobs, such as messenger,

Although some of

the vast majority were

mail boy, and file clerk.

The greater the

number of these, the more extensive the internal promotion in the firm.'9
The

results

indicate

that fins with established

personnel

practices

did not retain single female
regarding internal promotion and salary increments
employees when they married.

Their policies,

tightness of their labor market, so that

however,

fins with

were tempered by the

lower hours, possibly due

to work-sharing policies, and lower growth rates were more likely to have the
marriage bar.2°
The coefficients on most variables are sufficiently large to have greatly
influenced the marriage bar policy.

In the 1931 data, for example, a firm with

300 employees and a work week of 40 hours would stand a nearly negligiblechance,
But had the firm, in addition,

3.5%, of having the retain bat as policy.

policy of internal promotion the probability would rise to 14.9%.

a

If hours fell

from 40 to 35, say because of depressed economic conditions, the probability of
the retain bar would rise further to 29.3%.
firm, however, would have a

154%

In the 1940 data, the same original

probability

of the retain bar, increasing to

24.7% with a policy of internal promotion, and to 43.4% with a decrease in hours

to 35 from the original 40.

Thus the 1940 firma had a much higher chance, from

1.5 to 4 times in these examples, of having the marriage bar independent of their
personnel practices and hours.

Further, the impact of the Promote variable is

less in the 1940 data than the 1931 data.

The implied change in the probability

of the retain bar with the internal promotion policy is 0.168 for 1931 but 0.076
for the 1940, computed around the means.2'
All of

hs

implies that during the Depression firma joined a band-wagon

that had sanctioned tt.e firing of women who married and their wholesale banning

as employees.
to

those

Some firma in the Depressionenacted the bar for reasons similar

of firms

manufacturing

in the

1920's,

but many others,

particularly in the

sector, were seeking ways to cope with employment

cutbacks.

They

found precedent and consensus in discrimination against married women.
The presence of the maximum age policy raises further questions

hiring of women.

about the

In some instances the policy was related to the existence of

pensions or group insurance that were not experience-rated, and maximum age rules

-13-

shielded the firm from paying out more to employees then had been accumulated,22
The policy constreined borh men and women searching for jobs in their mid-life,

but provided greater restrictions for women who lacked continuity in the work
force.

For men, the new personnel practices often meant that tenure with firms

was encouraged and frequently

ensured.

But for women, the new institutional

arrangements became added bars to their reentry at mid-life,
The Women'

s

Bureauschedules contain, in addition to the easily quantifiable

information just analyzed, comments of personnel directors and agents of the firm
revealing their justificationa

for marriage bar policies.

The reasons elicited

for the marriage bars often confound the firms' actual constraints,
prethdices,

and societal norms.

individual

Some firms expressed concern that women who

married in their employ might become lesa efficient because they would leave in
the near future.

A personnel officer in a Philadelphia insurance firm noted that

although his firm had no official policy, he would prefer women leave on marriage

because "they were less efficient after marriage -- too much temporary didn't
care attitude,"23

Other agents, concerned that by firing women who married they

would lose valued employees, put them on probation.

A Philadelphia bank official

stated "that those who marry are told that the company reservea the right to
dismiss them at any time so that those whose work deteriorates after marriage

can be dispensed with."24

Some firms

actually reversed earlier bars,

like

Provident Mutual Life Tnsurance of Philadelphia which had a bar in 1924 but found

that "too many valuable [employees] were lost."22
Most officers, however, gave no rationale for their policies, and a few
offered personal reasons.

An agent in the publishing industry noted that "men

are too selfish and should have to support their wives," and another, employed

by the Presbyterian

Board

of Christian

Education,

thought

"personally

that

-14-

married women should plan to be in their homes if possible."26

Many personnel

officers and other agents appeared to take great pride in answering that their
firms gave preference to married men in hiring and in salaries, and to married

women whose husbands were unemployable.

After all, social consensus

in the

1930's labor market was built around rationing jobs by need, the notion that men

should earn a "family wage," and norms circumscribing

the economic role of

married women.
One surprising aspect of the comments is that various firms did mention they
gave small dowries or vacations when female employees married, but these were
always firms that retained single women and hired married women,

In Hartford,

where most insurance companies had both the hire and retainbars, Phoenix Mutual
Life, which had no policy, had a "special wedding vacation.

,,27

An investment

firm in Chicago, which also did not have the marriage bar, stated they "really
28
does not appear,
encourage marriage by giving a present from the company.
then,

that

firms encouraged

young women

to marry,

in the same manner that

pensions encourage retirement.

Marriage bars therefore were instituted by large firms, with centralized
hiring promot4.n

fccin

thin,

salary schedules that were often fixed and based

on tenure with the fita, and other modern employment practices.

The evidence

suggests that firms may have wanted to encourage turnover when earnings rose more
rapidly with tenure than productivity.

The experience of local school boards

with the marriage bar echoes that of firms hiring clerical workers, although the
evidence is at a more aggregated level.

-15-

Evidence fcom Local School Boards

1.3 Complementary
Sometime
contractual

in

the

early

twentieth

school

century,

boards

obligationa with teachers and fixed salary schedules.

instituted
The stated

purpose of salary schedules was to elicit appropriate effort from teachers with

bickering. Although the precise timing is not clear, bars against
the hiring and retention of married women appear linked to these arrangementa.29

a minimum of

Salary

schedulea

varied widely across the thousands of American school

boards by the stipulation of minimum and maximum salaries
and thus the number of years of poasible increase,
did

o,ot

cisc limitlessly.

a salary schedule,

salary increaenta,

Salary schedules, therefore,

By 1923 the vast msjority of school boards had adopted

and the average elementary-school

teacher would hsve taken

6 to 2 years to achieve maximum salary.3° The schedules were further complicated

by provisions for increases with training and summer school and for off-scale
increments called supermaximum salaries.

As in the case of office workers, the policy of marriage bars was pursued
more vigorouslywhen the potential labor supply of already married women seemed
slender

and

personnel.31

when general

economic

conditions

called for

reductions

in

It should also be noted that the legalityc f the marriage bar was

often in doubt, and in 1941 courts

in 22 states

ruled

tha

marriage bar

"capricious and unjust."32

The firing of married school teachers was justified by contemporaries
various ways.

moralistic - their own -the classroom

There was a reason to fit anyone's prejudice,

that

to

ranging from the

married women with children should be home taking care of

the Victorian --

--

in

to

became entrenched.33

that

the economic --

pregnant women would be objectionable

that

in

married women were less efficient and

As in the case of office workers, the marriage bar for
-16-

teachers was successful because most Americans could justify and rationalize it.

Thus the evidence from local school boards and firms hiring office workers
suggests

that marriage bars are associated with fixed salary scales, internal

promotion,

and other personnel

potential

sacrifice

policies,

supply is minimal.

from limiting labor

interestingly, were rarely found among
piece-rate payment

and that they flourished when the

was

firms hiring factory

The

bars,

operatives for whom

often used (47Z of all female operatives

fn the 1890's

were on incentive pay) and for whom, therefore, the relationship between earnings
and productivity was strictly maintained.
encountered
large

is that of electrical

manufacturing

firms

extensive, modern personnel
sectoral

distribution

The only important exception I have

machinery

(General

Electric

and

in two

(Schatz, 1983)

operatives

Westinghouse)

both having

practices similar to those in office work.34

of the marriage bar creates a prima facie case that it

emerged when the relationship between pay and productivity was severed.

were few

costs,

and much to gain,

lurking In

There

from both forms of the marriage bar in the

1920's, and the possible benefit grew during the Depression.

were

The

But increased costs

the background.

1.4 Explaining the Marriage Bar
Social consensus has so often been built around barring the employment of

married women that the original reason for the marriage bar has been obscured.

A

frequently

encountered

interpretation

of

these

prohibitions

involves

discrimination against educated, middle-classmarriedwomen, particularlynative-

born and white women (see, for example, Kessler-Harris,
occupations,

1982).

The covered

teaching and clerical work, almost always required high-school
-17-

education,

and thus many have claimed the hans were intended to limit the

employment

of educated,

middle-class married women.

Female operatives in

waitresses, and domestic servants, on the other hand, were often

manufacturing,

foreign horn and black, and their positions were generally unaffectedby marriage
bans,

To this way of thinking, the bans served tc maintain a threatened status

quo, keeping middle-class women in the home to take care of their families.
bans,

Yne

in this light, were a reaffirmation of a legal and social system marred

hy patriarchy.
of employers, as expressed in the 1940 survey,

The personal prejudices

indicate that certsin firms may have passed the matrisge bsr policy to limit the

employment of middle-class

women,

But the correlation

cf the policy with

vsriables concerning personnel policiee indicates that, while personal prejudice

may have been satisfied, other considerations were paramount.
Another explanation of bans is that employers in firms with rigid wage
systems, tied to their workers'

seniority, desired a young, inexperienced work

When managers are unable to set

forte, particularly in times of unemployment.

wage stales for separate jobs, as might be

tb-c

case when there is o strongunion,

certain positions could have earnings that rise more rapidly

then- productivity.

At some point, therefore, earnings for certain individuals will exceed their
productivity,

and the firm will wsnt to terminate their employment.

Routine

clerical work in large-stale firms provides a possible instance in which the job
was

simple,

repetitive,

and not accompanied

productivity with experience on the job.
acceptable way of terminating

the employment

by m continued

increase

in

The marriage bar was a socially

of young women whose wages would

eventually exceed their addition firm revenue.
The position that labor turnover was desired has been convincingly argued

elsewhere for the case of two British firms, the Great Western Railway and the
General Post Office,

(Cohn,

l985).

Because salary schedules

in these firms

rose with tenure presumeblymore then did productivity, some experienced workers
eventually beceme too

expensive

end cheeper beginners

were preferred.

For

reasons that will become clear, it wee women, not men, whom these firms desired
to dismiss.

Firms found it edventegeous to pay workers lees then their worth

at the beginning of their employment, but more leter on,
5

At some point, eey in

yeere, the (present discounted) velue of the peyment scheme would just equal

one in which the employee were peid her true value to the firm et eech date.

At 5 years, then, both firm end employee would be even.
salary schedules is often to reduce monitoring

The purpose of such

end supervisory costs.

But if

workers do not leave the firm at the "breek-even" point, eey at 5-years, the firm

can lose money each day the worker remains.

Of course, if the worker leaves

before the breakeven point, the worker will have

of the scheme
supervision,

that keepa

workers

in

line.

bet, end

it is this espect

Rather than have systematic

a policy of eporedic monitoring with dismiseel

workers will be more effective the heevier is the penelty.

of unproductive

Under the system of

paying wnrkers lees at the outset end more lacer, workers are, in essence, bonded
to

the firm, and

firing

compels them

to forfeit the bond.

Cohn's reasoning is similer thet of Lesser (1979, 1981) concerningmendetory
retirement end hours reetrictione.

But in the case of msrriege bers firms went

to dismiss workers at s rather early point in their employment.

Most young women

were hired at around 16 to 18 years end most married in their early twenties.
Firms, therefore, could treat a 5 to 7 year period me the expected tenure for

young women, since most would leave at merriege in any case.
assigned to women did not entail much productivity

The office jobs

increese over time end, in

-19-

contrast to thsir male counterparts, few would receive promotions from within.
Thus

the marriage bar ensured

that all women left after a relstively short

period and that the firm would not have to support high-priced
workers at the expense of cheap beginners.

experienced

Becsuse the marriage bar did not set

specific age or time period, young women could evade "early retirement" through
late marriage. Substantial dowries, according to Cohn, were therefore offered
to women who married after at least 6 years of company service. The dowries

a

were meant to

ancoursge young women to marry and thus leave the firm, in the face

but constant productivity
While various facts in the American case acer onsistent with this
explanation for the marriage hers, others are not. Marriage bars, it was found,
of

their rising reel

are

wages

associated with fixed salary scales, internal promotion,

and other personnel

practices and they are not associated with piece-rate work,

Severiog a strict

some manner, to
relationship between productivity and earnings is related, in
the institution of marriage bars.

These facts lend support to the notion that

turnover was desired for the reasons just outlined.

But firms did not seem to care if single
the firm.

worsen

remained indefinitely with

It was marriage, not age nor experience, that mattered,36

They were

also less concerned about retaining women who married in service than shout
hiring married women.

Among ffrms that had some form of the bar in the 1931

not hire a
sample 49% had the hire bar but not the retain bar, and thus would

married women but would retain a single women who married.37

Barriers

to the

hiring of married women can not be attributed to a simple desire to increase
turnower.

Rather, auth barriers can be viewed as reflectingvarious prejudices

concerning married women's employment.

Firma may have believed that married

women were less productive in general, but that single women could be screened
-20-

on the job before marriage.

Thus it appears that many firms did not want to lose

skilled and trusted employees.

In fact, the sectors with the most restrictive

policies, often had female employees with the longest

tenure.

Further evidence

against the turnover thesis is that American firms with dowry arrangements
not institute marriage bars,

did

contrary to the British experience described by

Cohn.

Of most significance,
(e.g. ,

typists,

4),39

Thus the difference

of ordinary female clerical workers

the salaries

stenographers> rose by only 1.44% annuallywith tenure (see Table
between productivity

increasing at a maximum of only 1.44%.

and earnings could have been

The 1.44% figure is a maximum because

part of it may reflect true productivity

increases.

Further,

fixed

salary

scales, often written into labor contracts and found in personnel brochures, did

not rise continuously with time and became level at about 6 years for women.
If the marriage bar were intended to get rid of workers at, say, 5 years
tenure, then the break-even point between a flat profile and one that rises at
1,44% must be
productivity
increase.

5

years.

Beyond that point, earnings rise at 1.44% more than does

to the firm, assuming the worker's value to the firm does not

At b years of service, then, the employee's cost to the firm would

exceed her value by about 3% and at 10 years the figure would be about 11%, both
computed under the assumption that her value to the firm does not increase at
all.4°

Although it is possible that the difference was sufficient to make the

marriage bar policy profitable,
some doubt on the thesis.
Employers

the slow growth in earnings with tenure casts

There is, however, a related possibility.

may have perceived that recently married female employees had

reduced productivity but found it costly to supervise,

on a discretionary basis.

fire, and reduce wages

The majority of young women in the 1920's left the

-21-

work force at the precise rime of msrriage or soon theresfter, more than 80% did
by estimates

presented elsewhere

(Coldin,

forthcoming,

chapter

2).

Firma,

may have been reluctant to retain recently married women who would

therefore

troat their jobs as temporary poaitions, be less docile,

remain in the dead-end positiona all were aaaigned.

and less willing to

Rather, they may have found

it more profitable to have rules governing the hiring and retention of married
women.

The reason that rules, rather than discretion, were preferred concerns

set of related polities instituted by various firma in the 1920's.
policies include rigid salary aoalea, strict internal promotion lines,
a

paternalism.

Thus rho

rationale here is related to that of

Cohn

The

roe
and

personnel

polities and salary structures of certain firma caused rules rather than
discretion to be most profitable.
Firms

often

adopt

internal promotion,

fixed salary stales, and benefit

packages to conserve on supervision costs and encourage efficiency and effort
among

employees

(see,

for example,

Lazesr,

1979;

Lazear

and Rosen,

1981).

Discretionary firing could result in greater wage demands to compensate employees
for the increased probability cf being terminated.

In various incentive-based

models of the labor market (lszear, 1981, 1979;

Bulow and Summers,

employees

base their salary demands on the expected probability

furloughed.
reduction

1986)

of being

The gains from having rules rather than discretion increase if the

in labor supply from curtailing the employment of married women is

smell.
Therefore,

the bar against retaining single women at marriage emerged, in

pert, from the various policies of modern personnel departments.

mmdc discretionary
procedures

These policies

firing costly, end resulted in salary scales end promotion

that severed the relationship between wages end productivity.
-22-

Two complementary reasons have been offered for the benefits of the marriage

bar to firms: one involves a reduction

in the costs of paying experienced

to firing workers.
employees and the other a lowering of the cost
incurred losses from the bar.

Trained and trusted employees had to be fired and

no matried woman could be hired.
1930's because

Marriage bats were adopted in the 1920's and

these coats were low,

of the labor market.

But firms also

They were minimized by certain features

The cost of firing women who married in service was slight

because the ancillary rule, the barring of all married women, entailed, at the
time, little sacrifice.
routinely

Costa were further minimized by the type of occupations

offered women,

Elsewhere

I have discussed

how increased education

office and fosteredmechanization,
encouraged extensive division of labor in the

both of which increased the value of formal skills and reduced the need for onthe-job training (Coldin, forthcoming, chapter 4),

Experienced female workers,

in the majority of offices, were easily replaced by female high school graduates.

Jobs in the clerical sector were highly segregated by sex
barred from some occupations, women from others.

-- men

were routinely

Firms, therefore, did not lose

much by having policies that required them to diamiaa women when they married.
With little ro lose and much to gain,

a substantial

percentage of firms

as
instituted a marriage bar prior to the Depression and many extended the bar
a socially acceptable means of rationing employment during the 1930'a.

1.5 The Decline of the Marriage Bar in the 195D'a

The 1950's mark a sharp break in the way the labor market accommodated
married women,

older

women,

and women with household reaponaibilitiea.

Discriminationnever disappeared and child-care centers never flourished.
after 1950 the marriage

bar vaniahed almost entirely (except

for

But

flight

-23-

attendants41) and parttime work becarne widespread.

The factors that account for

these changes acount to nothing short of a revolution

in the demographics

of

labor supply.42

of all female workers in 1900, and more than one-half in the

Three-quarters
(non-war)

years

prior

exceptionally young.

to 1950, were single.

Not

surprisingly,

were

they

The mean age of single women workers was 20 years in 1900,

and that of all working women was 23 years; but by 1950 the mean for all exceeded
36 years.

Employers in the 1920's and l930'e routinely hired only inexperienced

high school girls; "younger, untrained people direct from

[h.igh3 achool

note aariafectory" was the frequent response of personnel officers.43
little reason to look elsewhere,

prove

They had

Young, single women flooded the labor marker

in these years; they were docile, educated, and had few home
responsibilities.
The labor market for women workers was
organized for the young and was structured
around the presumption that women would remain at work
only until marriage.
Demographic shifts of the 1920's and 1930's made many changes inevitable.
The decline in the birth rate, evident

n Figure

5.3, meant the population had

to age substantially in the coming years and that the supply of
young women and
female high school graduates had to decline as a
proportion of the population.

This "labor squeeze" was further exacerbated

increased education,

by several related changes

--

the post-WorldWar II decline in the
marriage age, and the

baby boom.44 Thus fewer young woman ware available for employment after the late
1940's, and those who might have bean ware marrying earlier and having larger
families.

For all these reasons

simply disappeared.
The percentage

the supply of young,

single female workers

The data in Table 5 tell much of the story.
of the adult female population composed of 16 to 24 years

olds was 31% in 1900 but 20% in 1960.

The percentage of adult women who were

-24-

16 to 24 and sng1e was 21% in 1900 but 11% in 1960, and the proportional
decreaae ia even greater for those 18 to 24 years.

The proportion of 16 to 21

year olda at school was 1.7 times as great in 1960 than in 1900.
change in Table 5 involves combining
and education --

into

eli.

three factora

The largest

age, marital status,

a single measure. the percentage of adult women composed

of those 16 to 24 years old, single, and not at school, The measure
as great in 1900 as in 1960.

s

3.6 times

All three factots point to a decrease Ln the supply

of young, female emplcyees over the first half of this century.
This inversion in labor acpplywas accompanied by a desire by older, married

women to seek gainful employment.

The young women of the 1910's and 1920's who

left high school and took clerical positions eventually became the older, married

women of the 1930's ard 1940's.

Most were past child-rearing

cohort they had few childrenby hisoricsl co'rperson.
and work experience

it.

age, and as a

Further, they had skills

the emergIng sectors of the nconomy.

Tn the ebsence of

the Depressionthey would surely have increased their lsbor force pertic.pation
earlier than the 1950's, and their partioipation

during World War TI creates a

prima facie case for that counterfactuml.
Thus the constraints facing firms changed considerablywith World War II.

No longer did they operate in an environment of unemployment.

No longer could

they bar the hiring of married women without plmcing formidable restrictions on
their imbor supply.
The procedures

Personnel polities quickly reflected these new constraints.

end the

rhetoric

accompanying

schedules of m 1957 study on personnel

them mre

revealed

in original

polities (Hussey, 1958; called here the

1957 Hussey Report, see Data Appendix).
Older female workers in the mid-1950's
maturity,

relimbility.

were suddenly praised for their

neat sppemrmnce, and less chatty nature.

Employers,

-25-

particularly in the clerical sector, were pleased to "rehire those who
which
previously sened in that capacity," as did Penn Mutual Life Insurance

prior to World War II had a marriage bar.
r.ould "offer skills

Scott Paper hired married women who

gained earlier, before marriage," underscoring the finding

that a women's first occupationaltered her chance of future employment (Goldin,
But in retail trades, particularly

1989.

forthtomingL4

older

married women with absolutely

employee";

the middle-class

in the suburbs, the

no previous training wee now rhe "ideal

woman, "naturally courteous"

and "well-bred," who

did not have to work was preferred by the major department storee.4

all personnel- officers viewed the hiring of the older married woman with
equanimity. There were detractions aa we-Il ma benefits. In retail trade, one
Not

manager

remarked that "Housewives who h.ave never worked or have not worked for

15 to 20 years are found to be inexperienced in arithmetic and have difficulty
in learning to operate the cash registers."

In banking, "older women may work

more slowly," but most added as well that "the type of aervice they can give a
company is of great value.

"

Firms were still leery of hiring young married

women and acme adopted a policy of not hirin.g those with small children or firing

women wh-o became pregnant.
bar."

All

in all,

The sequel to the marriage bar was the "pregnancy

the beat female employee was,

in the words of a Sears,

Roebuck, and Co. officer, "a married woman with a mortgage on her house and her

children partially raised.

By

the 1950's married women were welcomed employees

in almost all large,

World War II barred their hire.
paternalistic companies that just prior to
complete turnaroundwas a consequence of changed constraints,

The

The unemployment

of the 1930's, that compelled firms to ration jobs through means that included
the firing of married women, had vanished and in its place was an extremely tight
-26-

The young woman of two decadea earlier who gave a firm several

labor marker.

years before marriage, waa replaced by one who left school later and married

eanier.

Firm aanagera knew the constraints, although they often overstated

thea: "In the earlier years, the girl of 18 might work until she aarried at 23

or 24

a she is more likely to marry within 6 aonths or a year of starting

work and resign within another.

But

it should also Dc

remembered that

the

older married woman of the 1950's Lad been the young woman of the 920's and
1930's.

The point dId nor escape

Report who spoke of womer

me

returning

attention of firm officers
to positiona

it

the

Hussey

they held decades before.

Despite their rusty matheaatcal skills, older married women of the 1950's were
considerably more equipped to handle modern clerical and sales work than were
their predecessors

in the 1920's.

Altered constraints were not the only facrora that brought a shift in hiring
practices.

World War fl awakened firms to the fac" that bans against the hiring

of married women were lessening their supply of female employees

The number

of working women during World War II increased most among those older than 45
years.

From March 1940 to July 1944, the peek of the wartime employment

woaen, those 45 to 64 years old increased in numbers by

165

of

and those over 64

years by 197Z; in contrast, those 25 to 44 years old increased by only 128Z.
The bans had little impact on potential

labor supply in the early 1920's

when the majority of older married women would not have joined the labor force
in any event,

But the bans became considerably

more binding and thus more

restrictive as tohorts of educated young women advanced in age.

By the 1940's

many in the cohorts who served as office workers when young were the mothers of
grown children, and by the 1950's the vast majority of adult married women had
high school diplomas.

It had been easy in the 1920's for firms to issue blanket
-27

policies against the hiring of married woman, but it was far harder in the 1950's
for them to bar certain kinds

of married women -- those with young children,

those with demanding husbands,

and so on.

So the bans were lifted, almost in

and the participation of married women in the American labor

their entirety,

force advanced in the abser.ce

of perhaps the most blatant form of eaployment

discriminationin the history of women's work.

1,6 The Long-Run impact of the Marriage Bar

The bans restricted
economy in several senses,

from employment
century

the participation

of married women in the American

In the most obvious fashion they barred married women

in a varfety of occupations during the first half of this

But the marriage bars that preceded the Great Depressionmay have been

less overtly and intentionally discriminatory

than is apparent.

constituted an odd form of discrimination against women.

Marriage bars

The covered occupations

were almost always female-intensive ones, so it cannot be said that women aa a
group were discriminated against,
the rules, hut

t.he

Social consensus was formed around and fueled

dominant underlyingracionele was not necessarily a pcejudice

against middle-class

married women's working.

As characterized here and in the work of Cohn (1985, 1988) the bars were
initially

related

personnel policies.

to the adoption

of tenure-based

salary scales and related

But they may also have resulted from perceived differences

in the efficiency of single and married female employees, and such beliefs may
not have been formulated in an unbiased fashion.

Dscriminatinn against married

women may have caused employers to have a jaundiced view of their productivity.
Both reasons offered here for the marriage bars are based on the fact that firm
policies segregated

office work by sex and routinely placed women in dead-end

positions.

But even had marriage bars been motivated entirely by unbiased, but

profit-maximizing

employers,

their prejudices.

they encouraged others to find justificatior

Social norms

for

of married women that

against the employment

preceded and fostered the bans and the extension of both the bans and social
norms during the Depression were a setback to -orking women.
The

immediate

impact

of the bans in the

1920's

on the

labor

force

participation of married women may not have been substantial, but the longer
range

effectc

were ikely of great significance.

Young

women had little

coverer by the
encouragement to invest in skills that were valued in the sectors
bars.
less

but they had

They might become typists and possibly machine operators
incentive

to become accountants.

The bats also prevented

recognizing the hidden labor supply of older marrIed women

in the late 1920's and during the Depression

firms

from

As the bars expanded

many married women who might

otherwise have looked for employment, were discouraged from doing so,

As the

potential pool of educated and expertenced married women expanded, firms may have

underestimatedthe costs of the marriage bar policy.
The bars in office work both before and during the Depression restricted

the employment of married woman but did not block their hiring,

Smaller firms

without modern personnel practices hired married women and did not fire single

women when they married.

Sectors

such as banking,

insurance,

and public

utilities, however, were off limits to married women, as were a large percentage
of local school boards around the country.

For offIce workers these prohibitions

often meant that married women were restricted from precisely those firms having
internal promotion possibilities.

While internal promotionwas never substantial

for women in any sector, the added restrictions lowered married women's returns

to education,
-29-

A

sample of female clerical workers from the 1940 Women's Bureau survey (the

1940 OfficeWorker Survey) reveals differences between married and single women's
earnings, given years with the current employer, total job experience, educston,

and time spent between jobs in the home, among other relevant factors.
-and

Married

single women earned approximately the same on average, but the returns to

aducaton varied by marital status.

Returns were considerably lower for married

women, so that while women with lower than average education

received higher

aarnings if they were married, those with higher than average education received
lower earnings.

Returns to a year of eduration were 4.6% for single woaen but

only 1% for married women,50

The data suggest that married women were rhanneled

into firms. serrors, and jobs for which eduraton was of lower value parrirularly

within the internal promotion scheme.
The extensive movement during the Depression

sarred women can be credited to

to ration jobs by firing

the marriage bars that preceded 1929.

Firma

rould hardly have built a solid consensus around the firing of married women had

it not been for the existence of marriage bars prior to the Depression.

The

bars, through a peculiar quirk of history, were responsible for the setbarks to
women's employment during the Depression.

In these ways, then, marriage bars

served to delay the period of increased female labor force participation

in

America

-30-

ENONOTES
censua estimates ftom "gainful employment" data are 2.5% fot 1890.
The most recent figure is 558% for 1988, yielding an increase of twenty-fold.
When the 1890 figure is revised for the undercount of married women working at
1. Official

paid employment

to

4

5

in the home

times (Coldin, 1986a)

and on family farms the

figure is reduced to about

2. The residuala ate large and positive for the younget groups in the moat recent
decades

In 1980, for example,
physicians and lawyers.
3.

only

14%

of all labor force

participants

were

are
4. Marriage hats and other diactimination on the basis of martial status
discussed in International Labor Organization (1962). Edwards (1988) analyzes
1985.
Many
the impact of the Japanese Equal Employment Opportunity Law of
fired women
for
workers,
have
life-time
which
often
employment
Japaneae firma,
at the time of marriage.
5. Airlinea impoaed both forms of the marriage bar in the 195O'a which initially
Cambridge and Oxford
affected both male atewarda and female stewardesses.
be unmarried, a
male
instructors
one
mandated
that
at
time,
Univaraitiea
continuation of the previoua clerical atatua of profeaaora.
Brown
1957 Huaaey Report: Penn Mutual Life Insurance Co., August 22, 1956:
Inatrument, March 29, 1957.
6.

other citiea were
survey was taken in 1931 in the four cities sampled;
surveyed in 1932.
8. Government offices were excluded from the sample becauae they used civil
7. The

service

procedures.

Personnel officers and other agents of the firms freely admitted to having
for
discriminated against blacks in hiring office workers and to various reasons
Such candor is echoed in the remarks on aex discrimination.
their prejudices.

9.

records
10. The Women's Bureau also recorded individual-level data from personnel
in each of the firma surveyed. These records do not exist for the 1931 survey
but do for the 1940 one, and have been used in Goldin 1984, 1986b.
for the two years
11. Cross tabulations of the hire and retain bar

1931 1 —
Retain

bar

Hire Bar

Bar

0

0

45%
3%

1

as policy or discretionary

1
27%
25%

1940 1 —

Retain
Bar

0
1

bar

arc

as policy or discretionary

Hire Bar
1
0
44%
3%

23%
30%

-31-

12 These suxsmary data are in general agreement with those from a national survey
cited in Cohn (1985, p. 99).
In that sample 51% of all offices did not hire
married women and 30% did not retain them in 1936 (when "supervisor's discretion"
is treated as no bsr).
For factory employment the figures are 39% and 18%,
however there is little evidence that factories had as extensive bars for
operatives in the 1920's as they did for clerical workers. Rather, it appears
that operatives were almost entirely unaffected by the marriage bar until the
Depression.

the 1931 survey included only fins that had more than 9 female
only such firms are included for the 1940 survey information in Table
3. Note the very small numbers of firms in the smallest size group for the 1931
survey and the substantial fraction of total female employees in firma with over
13.

Because

employees,

700.

roe differences between the 1931 and 1940 data are most apparent in Table
Of the 12 possible cases, the percentages are all greater for Philadelphia
and Kansas City in 1940 than for rhe aggregate in 1931, with the exception of
the unveighted, hire (diacretonary and policy) case for Kansas City in 1940.
roe 1940 Philadelphia data for the weighted, retsin (policy and discretionary)
case is juar 0.2 percentage points lower than that for the aggregate 1911 data.
14.
I.

It is not deer why Los Angeles is an outlier. It is possible that only large
cities in eastern and midwestern states had extensive
marriage bars; western
cities may have had less restrictive policies, iO general, against female
employment.
15. The coefficients on the dummy variable for the 1930's sample are: 0904 (t —
1.67) for the case of the retain bar as policy and 0,928 (t 2.20) for the rose
of the hire bar as policy.
An insurance company in Philadelphia with 300
employees, for example, would have had a 23,4% probability of the retain bar in
the 1931 sample, but a 43.0% probability in 1940.
16. One firm actually changed each bar in the opposite direction and is included
with the group experiencing no net change. Of the 10 that increased the bar,
4 changed the retain bar only, 3 changed the hire bar only, and 3
changed both.
The increased bar occurred in three ways: S fins moved from a discretionary bar
to a bar policy; 2 moved from no bar to discretionary; and 3 moved from no bar
to a bar policy.
Fully 50% of the increase reflects a change from discretion
ro rule, providing further evidence to support the pooled regreasion results that
many fins during the Depression merely changed discretionary policies.
17.

See the discussion in Schsrf (1980), for example.

18. On legislation passed and proposed during the Depression see Shallrross
(1940) and Kess1erHarris (1982); a detailed history of Federal Order 213 ran
be found in Schsrf (1980, chap. 3). See also Wandersee (1981) on the impart of
the marrisge bar during the Depression.
19. A similsr vsriable for "female only" jobs, those for which men would not be
considered, was not significant and wss omitted.

-32

20. Note that the 1931 results may reflect
initial onset of the Great Depression.

the decline in hours during the

21. The computations use the logit regression coefficients in Table 3, column
(1) Retain Bar "As Policy," for both years. To compute the chance of having the
retain bar, the coefficients ($) are multiplied by their mean values (X), in
this case the 40 or 35 hours week, the 300 employees? and a 0 or I for the
a logit estimation
Promote variable.
The equation for the probability (P)
Th cosputstons for thn cierge in thfr retsln bar with
is: P
l/1 + exp(-Xflfl.
the adoption of the internal promotion policy use the tormuls: BP/BPromote
is the coefficient on the Promote vsriable. The compcted data
P(l - P)$, where
for 1940 implicitly apply to either Philadelphia or Kansas Gity because of the
inclusion of city dummy varIables.

?

22. This discussion raises the possib1ity that retreaent end grtup £nsurence
policies changed between the 1920's and 1950's and became experience rated, If
they did, older comen in particular wou.d haie benefited, The possfbfllty tha'
some personnel practices changed raises the issue whether tenure-based wage
systems snd promotion from within were also altered in the 1950's to sccommodste
the large supply of older female employees.
23. 1931 Office Firm Survey: Indemnlty Ins. Go. of North America, Philadelphia.
24. 1931 Office Firm Survey: Provident Trust Go

,

Philadelphia.

25. 1931 Office Firm Survey: Provident Mutual Life Insurance, Philadelphia.
26. 1931 Office Firm Survey: F. A. Davis Go,; Presbyterian Board of Ghristiar'
Education, Phlsde1phie.
27.

1931 Office Firm Survey: Phoenix Mutual Life insursnce, Hartford.

28.

1931 Office Firm Survey: Field Glore and Go., Ghicago.

29. Peters (1934, p. 25), in a volume on married women teachers in Virginia,
contains the only published evidence I have encountered on the urban-rural
breakdown of the marriage ban over time. According to his figures, the majority
of urban school boards in Virginia instituted a ban against hiring married women
before 1928, while the majority of rural school boards instituted the ban at the
start of the Great Depression. About one-third of all urban school boards having
a ban after 1932 had one before 1918, while only one-tenth of the rural school
boards had such a ban before 1918. This chronologyfits that of the institution
of fixed salary scales.
30. See National Education Association

(1923)

31. Margo and Rotelle (1981) consider the case of Houston, in which the marrisge
bar was established before World War I, then dropped during the war, only to be
reinstated after.

n

St.
Louis, where
See Peterson (1987) who notes that
established in 1897, no women had challenged it until 1941.

32.

the

bar was

-33-

33. See Lewis (1925, pp. 185-88) who lists 31 frequently heard reasons why
married women should not be employed as teachers and 31 equally routed reasons
why they should.

34. There are probably other exceptions, particularly in manufacturing.
Orra
Langhorne, for example, in her 1886 volume
in Sketches from Pit inia (cited
Scott 1970, p. 122), noted that "married women are not admitted" in the
cigarette factories of Lynchburg in which white, single women snd black women
worked.

n

35. See also Cohn (1988) who analyzes one of the surveys used here and finds
support for his theory of "synthetic turnover."
Although my findings differ
somewhat from Cohn's on the details of the msrriage bat, our substantive
conclusions are quite similar.

36. In the case of stewardesses, however, it was often age ss well as marriage
that was cause for dismissal.
37. The 49% figure includes firma with the bar as polity and the bar as
The figure is 62% for the bat as policy only.
discretionary course,
In 1940
the sane percentages are 42% and 52% respectively.
38. In New York, for example, 3fl of all female office wotkers had spent 5 or
more years with their present firm; but 44% of those in insurance companies and
38% of those in public utilities had (U.S. Department of Labor. 1934,
p. 27).
The evidence for the other cities supports the conclusion here that there is no
clear relationship between experience with a firm and the existence of a marriage
bar.
39. The 14% figure is en average of the coefficients on years of current fita
experience for the two lower-skilled female groups in Table 4. The coefficient
on yeats of totsi job experience is larger in magnitude (see Table 4). but
is the value of the individual's training to any firm. The notion
presumably
that fines pay workers less than they ate worth
the
and more

it

end

at

to nonserve on supervisory costs pertains to
and

beginning

att-he

difference between true
earnings. Thus, the coefficient on years with the current firm.

productivity
also called tenure,

th-e

is the relevant figure.

40. Typists and stenographers typically began work at $70/month in 1940 (U.S Department of labor, 1942). If earnings rise at 1.4% per yeat hut productivity
does not and if the break-even point i5 5 yeats, the (constant) value of the
worker to the firm is around $73. That is, the present discounted value of $73
over 5 yeats is approximately equal to the present discountedvalue of a stream
of earnings that begins at $70 and rises by 1.4% each year for 5 years. At 10
years of service, for example, the worker costs the firm around $80/month but
she is still worth only $73, or 9.6% more than she is actually worth.
41. United Airlines recently lost a Title VII class action case (Rnmasanta
Lines, Inc.) for firing stewardesses when they married.

United Air

42. Oppenheimer (1970, chap. 5) contains such a theory about the evolution
married women's labor market work.

ti.

of

-34-

43. 1931 Office Firm Survey: Hartford records.
44. Easterlin (1978, 1980) causally connects the two swings in fertility through
a model of relative income.
45. 1957 Hussey Report: Penn Mutual Life Insurance, August 22, 1956; Scott Paper,
March 28, 1957.
46. 1957 Huasey Report: Lord and Taylor, October 30, 1956.
47, 1957 Hussey Report: Strswbridge and Clotnier,
Penn National Sank, October 19, 1956.
48. 1957 Huasey Report: Sears. Roebuck, end Co.

,

November 14, 1956

Noverher

tentral-

7, 1956.

49. 1957 Hussey Report: Fidelity M.xtual, August 17. 1956.
The sample (1940 Office Worker Survey) is described in the Dsce Appendix and
consists of 724 women, 168 of whom were married. It is discussed at length ir
Coldin (1984, 1986b). In a regression on the log of full-time yesriy earnings,
married) is
the coefficient on a dummy variable indicating rnsritsl status (1
end years of
0.424, but chat on en interaction between the dummy variable
The coefficient on years of education for the entire
education is -0.0362.
is
0.0458.
sample
50.

-35-

Table I
Marriage Ears Among School Boards, 1928 to 1951
and Firms Hiring Office Workers, 1931 and 1940

Do Not Retain
Year
1928
1930/31
1942
1950/51

Single Women When Married
Weighted Not Weighted
Teachers
47.3%
52.2%
52.2
62.9
58.4
70.0
9.4
10.0
Clerical Workers
(Policy)
25.0%
12.0%
26.4
14.3

1931 (178)
Phila, (44)

Do Not Hire
Married Women
Weighted Not Weighted
61.9%
72.2
77.7
19.5

61.0%
76.6
87,0
18.0

(Policy)
36.0%
29,2%
40.4
31.8

1940
Phila. (106)

26.6

Kansas City

(83)

Los Angeles

(139)

1931
Philadelphia
1940
Philadelphia
Kansas City
Los Angeles

28.4
9.4

23.6
15.7
8.6

(Policy & Discretionary)
34.7%
27.3%
36.9
35.7
34.5
46.0
25.1

34.9
30.1
15.7

41,1
41.7
24.4

50.9
31.3
15.8

(Policy & Discretionary)
51.7%
52,8%
60.7
59.1
58.5
57.8
38.8

60.4

43.4
26.6

Notes:
Teachers:

Weighted figures use city population weights; the unweighted are
simple averages by number of school hoards,
City population weights are from
Historical Statistics (1975).
The "Do Not Retain" case is (1 - "may continue
to teach"); the "Do Not Hire" case, includes "rarely under special conditions"
for 1942 and 1950/51.
Office Workers: Weighted figures are weighted by the firm's female employment;
the unweightedare simple averages across firms in the sample. The 1931 sample
includes Chicago, Hartford, N.Y.C. , and Philadelphia.
Where possible the
responses apply to practices predating the Depression, although the interviews
were conducted in 1931/2. The 1940 sample includes Los Angeles, Kansas City,
and Philadelphia and refers to practices during the Creat Depression.
Figures
in parentheses are the number of observations.
"Discretionary" means firma
stated single women were preferred, married women were placed on special
probation, or the policy was up to the department head,
Sources:
Teachers: National Education Association (1928, 1932, 1942, 1952), from citations
in W. Oppenheimer, The Female Labor Forc in the Ungftates (Westport, CT:
Creenwood Press, 1976; orig. pubi. 1970), table 4.5.
Office Workers: 1931 Office Firm Survey, 1940 Office Firm Survey, see Data
Appendix.
-36-

Table 2
Marriage Bars by Sector and Size of Firm. Clerical Sector

Size of Firm (number of female clerical employees)
1931
Policy and Discretionary
Policy
Distributions by
Do Not
Do Not Do Not
Do Not
Firms Female Employees
Hire
Retain
Hire Retain
1.11.
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
11 - 20
0.0%
0.0%
3.3
21.0
27.5
10.9
46.7
21 - 50
25.9
6.0
28.9
24.2
8.4
63.5
51 - 100
40.4
18.5
9.4
41.8
26.0
17.4
3.5
101 - 200
11.8
11.3
59 5
47.5
31.0
22.2
201 - 400
5.1
8.6
89.8
45.7
39.0
32.2
401 - 700
61.3
11.8
45.6
33.5
39.5
30.4
701+
178
51597
No. of Obs,
1940 (Kansas City and Philadelphia)
11
21

-

51

-

101
201

-

-

-

20
50

100
200
400

401+
No. of Obs.
Sector:
1931
Insurance
Publishing
Banking
Pub. Util.

41 0%
43.6
46.9
50.0

17.9%
18.2

62.5
27.3

50.0
18.2

25.0
25.0

49.1
65.6
75.0
62.5
54.5

24.2%
34.2
19.9
9.9
5.0
6.8
161

25.6%
25.5
56.3
43.8
62.5
27.3

59.5%

36.0

34

41.9
93.9
26.6
28.2

30.2

27

42.9

13

9.8
0.0

27
13

53.8%
33.3

26
15

45.4
50.0

22.0

72.7
66.7
50.0
67.8

10.3

24.].

13.8

11
6
6
59
29

45.71.

37.0
35.4

34.7

21.2
13.5
1.4

0.0

1940 (Kansas City and Philadelphia)
Insurance
Publishing
Banking
Pub. Util.
Investment
Manufact.
Sales

50.0%
33.3
54.5
50.0
16.7
57.6
17.2

42.3%
13.3
9.1
33.3
16.7

53.8%

46.7

Includes only firms with > 9 female
Sources: See Table 1.

16.7

37.3

employees

3.71.

11.2

15

7

13.8

12.0
43.6
25358

Number of Firms
58

73.21.
56.].

61.1%

32.9
Investment 11.3
Advertising 11.1

43.6%

for

comparability

with 1931.

-37-

Table 3
Explaining Marriage Bars:
Logit Regressions for Retain Bar, 1931 and 1940
Dependent variable — 1

if Retain

1931

Bar is maintained
As Policy
and Discretionary
Means

As Policy

(1)

# employees x

l0

(# employees x 10-7)2

Promote

1.00
(2.12)
-1.26
(1.47)
1.58
(2.40)

(2)

0,671
(1.33)
-0.906
(1,06)
1.49
(2,18)

(3)

0.186
(0.41)
-0,58
(0.70)
1.94

0,991

(1.29)
Hours

-0.172
(1.61)
3.27
(0.76)

Constant

(2.32)

0.892
(1.99)

-0.228
(1.95)
4.91
(1.05)

-0.225
(2.51)
6.29
(1.77)

Log likelihood ratio

-54.1

-46.6

No. of observations

174

166

0 223

(2,03)

132

Pens ions

0.536

(4.27)

0,775

Maximum age

581

0.289
40 2
.

-78.3

166

Mean of the dependent
variable (unweighted)

As Policy

1940

# employees

(# employees
Promote

Maximum age
Pens ions

Union
Male only

.120

.121

x
x 10-5)2

1.90
(1.20)
-1.41
(1.20)
0.593
(1.64)

0.671

(1.33)
0.155
(0.37)
1. 12
(2.62)
1,11
(2,32)
-0.845
(1.01)
0.340
(0.90)

.289
As Policy
and Discretionary
Me an
0,382
(0.77)

0.227

149

0,347

(0.65)

1.03
(2.73)
0.724

(1.85)
-1.10
(1.54)
0.593
(1.93)

0.151
0.188
0.074
0.450
-38-

Hours

-0.170
(2.46)

Growth
4.65
(1.68)

Constant

Log likelihood ratio -126.7
No, of observations

Mean of the dependent
variable (unweighted)

317

-0.110
(1.42)
-1.93
(1.20)
2.51
(0.78)
-99.5
271

.151

-0.093
(1.46)
-2.05
(1.61)
2.67
(1.01)

40.4
0.162

-135.3
271

.151

258

Notes:
Promote —
if policy of firm was to promote from within or if ther' wsro gradeA
1 if the firm had a
salary steps or annual increases in salary; Maximum age
I if the firm had a pension plsn;
stated maxirum age for new hires, Pensions
Union —
if the firm's office workers were unionized; Male only I if the firm
had at least one job for which women ware excl'sded by policy, Pours — norms1
weekly hours of office workers; Growth — (new hires in 1939)/(employment in
ir. the last column
to the regression
1939) . Means refer
Dummy variables for
cities and a variable indicating whether salary grades were used were also
Absolute values of 't' statistics are in
included in the 1940 regression.
parentheses.

I

I

Sources: See Table I.

-39-

Table 4
Earnings Functions for Unskilled and Skilled Office Workers,

Dependent variable
(logarithm)

Constant
Total Experience
Total experience2 x 10-2
Current firm experience
Years education

Married

Lower Skilled
Typist Steno
Full-time Annual Full-time Annual
Earnings
Earnings
Females
Males
Females
6.17
(69.5)
0.0461
(10.1)
-0.0709
(7.85)

0.0121

0.0144

(3.75)
0.0426
(6.39)
0.083

(3.14)
0.0347
(3.85)
0.0162
(0.41)

(2.34)
R2

Number of observations

6.19
(52.3)
0.0287
(3.59)
-0.0590
(2,15)

.725
204

.464
187

6.48
(69.9)

0,0238
(4.22)
-0.0390
(1.95)
0.0134
(4.26)

1940

Higher Skilled
Full-time Annual

Earnings
Males

Females

6.50

572

(58,6)
0.0056
(6.86)
-0.0800
(6.02)

(34.6)

0.0102

0,0384
(4.19)
-0.0719
(3. 71)

0.0189

(2.57)

(2.68)

0.0205

0,0321

0.0640

(2.97)
-0.030
(1.14)

(4,87)
0.181
(3,94)

(5.52)
0.134
(2.38)

.381

.514

.536

338

237

121

Notes and Source: 1940 Office Worker Surrey. Full-time earnings are wages paid
per last time period worked multiplied by the number of time periods per year.
Total experience — experience with current firm + experience at other office jobs
+ experience at jobs other than offices,
Lower-skilled occupations are
messenger, mail boy, various lower-skilled clerks, mimeo-mschine operators, and
so on. The typist-steno column also includes various machine operators. Higherskilled include professionals, supervisors, those in the accounting group, and
soon. The lower-skilled and higher-skilled groups were chosen for comparability
between male and female office workers; very few men in the sample were typists
and stenographers. Absolute values of 't'-ataristics are in parentheses.

-40-

Table 5

The "Labor Squeeze," 1900 to 1960
1900

1920

1940

1950

1960

1900/1960

Female Population
16-24 years/
16-64 years

30.9

27.0

29.0

20.9

20.3

18-24 years, single!
18-64 years

14.7

12.0

10.9

7.4

6.4

2.30

16-24 years, single/
16-64 years

20,7

17.0

15.2

10.9

10.8

1.92

14.9

12.9

9.7

5.8

4.1

3.63

1.52.

16-24 years, single,

not at school/16-64 years

1960/1900
16-21 years in school/
16-21 year olds

27.5

32.9

34.9

37.8

47.4

1.72

Notes and Sources:
All data are from relevant U.S. population censuses.

-41-

REFERENCES

with
Jeremy, and Summers, Lawrence, "A Theory of Dual Labor Markets
Applitation to Industrial Policy, Discrimination and Keynesian Unemployment."
Journal of Labor Economics 4 (January 1986): 376-414.
Bulow,

Campbell, D'Ann.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University

Press, 1984.

Cohn, Samuel.
Clerical LabojnCrgt Britain.

Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1983,

of the
Cohn, Samuel, "Firm-level Economics and Synthetic Turnover: Determinants
Use of Marriage Bars in American Offices during the Creat Depression."
Unpubliahed manuscript, University of Wiaconain, February 1988.
Richard A. "What Will 1984 Be Like? Socioeconomic Implications of
15 (November 1978): 397-432.
Recent Twists in Age Structure,"
Eaaterlin,

Rgy,gy

Easterlin, RichardA.
Welfare,
New York: Basic Booka, 1980.
Edwards, Linda. "Equal Employment Opportunity in Japan: A View from the Wear,"
Induatrial and Labor Relations Review 41 (January 1988): 240-250.
Coldin, Claudia. "The Changing Economic Role of Women: A Quantitative Approach"
13 (Spring 1983): 707-733.
"The Historical Evolution of Female Earnings Functions
Coldin, Claudia.
Occupationa." RiQLaflonsia1conomicHiEsor 21 (January 1984): 1-27.

and

Coldin, Claudia. "The Female Labor Forte aod American Economic Crowch: 1890 ro
1980."
in Stanley L. Engerman and Rohorr F. Galiman, eda,, Lpg-Tera' Factors
in American Ecopqj4rowth, Conference on income and Wealth, Vol. SI. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, l986a.
Claudia. "Monitoring Coats and Occupational Segregation by Sex: A
Historical Analysis." Journal of Labor Economica 4 (January l986b): 1-27.
Coldin,

Claudia. "Life-Cycle Labor Force Participation of Married Women:
HiatoricalEvidence and Iraplicationa." Journal of Labor Economics (January 1989,
Coldin,

forthcoming).
Coldin, Claudia. Underatanding the Cender Gao; An Economic History of American
New York: Oxford University Press, forthcoming.
Harris, Barbara J.
History, Westport, CT: Greenwood

in American
Press, 1978.

Hussey, Miriam. Personnel Policies during a Period of Shortage of Young Women
Workers in Philadelphia. Philadelphia: Industrial Research Unit, Wharton School
of Finance and Commerce, University of Pennsylvania, 1958.
-42-

Lazear, Edward. "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political Economy
87 (December 1979): 1261-1284.
Edward.
and
Lazear,
Profiles,
"Agency,
Earnings
Productivity,
Restrictions." American Economic Review 71 (September 1981): 606-620.
Lazear, Edward.

Hours

and Rosen, Sherwin. "Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor
Political Economy 89 (October 1981): 841-864.

Contracts " Journal of

Lewis, Ervin Eugene. Personnel Problems of the Teaching Staff.
Century Co.. 1925.

New York: The

Margo, Robert, and Rotella, Elyce. "Sex Differences in the Labor Market for
Public School Personnel: The Case of Houston, Texas, 1892-1923.
Unpublished
manuscript. 1981.
Mincer, Jacob. "Labor Force Participation of Married Women: A Study of Labor
In H. Gregg Lewis, ed ,
of Labor Economics UniversitiesSupply."
National Bureau Committee for EconomIc Research. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1962.

gg

Education Association
Teachers' Salprjes and Salary Trends in 1923.
Report of the Salary Committee of the NEA, Vol. I, No. 3. Washington, D.C.:
NEA, July 1923.
National

National

Education Association

Bulletin of the NEA, Vol. VI

Practices Affecting Teacher Personnel. Research
4. Washington, D.C.: NEA, September
1928,

No

Practices
Classroom
National
Education
Association.
Administrative
Affecting
Teachers.
Part I: The Selection and Appointment of Teachers and
Retention, Promotion, and Improvement of Teachers. Research Bulletin of the NEA,
Vol. X, No. 1. Washington, D.C.: NEA, January 1932

National Education Association. Teacher Personnel Procedures: Selection and
Appointment. Research Bulletin of the NEA, Vol. XX, No. 2.
Washington, D.C.:
NEA, March 1942.
NationalEducation Association. Teacher Personnel Practices. 1950-51: Appointment
and Termination of Service. Research Bulletin of the NEA, Vol. XXX, No. 1.
Washington,

D,C,: NEA, February 1952.

Oppenheimer, Valerie Kincade. The Female Labor Force in the United States:
Demographic and Economic Factors Governing Its Growth and Changing Composition
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1976; orig. publ. 1970.
Peters, David Wilbur. The Status of the Married Woman Teenher. New York: Teachers
College, Columbia, 1934.
Peterson, Sharon. "MarriedWomen and the Right to Teach inSt. Louis, 1941-1948."
Missouri Historical Review 81. (January 1987): 141-158.

-43-

o

Wed: Female Employment,
Scharf, Lois. To Work and
flggg,gion.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1980.

Feminism,

and the Great

at General Electric
Schatz, Ronald W. The Electrical Workers: A History of Labor
ntiesX.ln house, l9Z3-Q. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1983.
to Politics.
Scott, Anne Firor. The Southern La_dy..From Pedestal
1970.
of
Press,
Chicago
Chicago: University

1830-1930.

49.
Shallcross, Ruth. Should Married Women Work? Public Affairs Pamphlets No,
New York: National Federation of Business and Professional Women's Clubs, Inc.,
1940.

in the Female Labor
Smith, James P., and Ward, Michael P. "Time-Series Growth
Force," j gna]_of abor Ecozjpmics 3 (January 1985; supplement): S59-S90.
Smith, James P., and Ward, Michael P. ¶og.en's Wa&es
Century, Santa Monica: The Rand Corporation, 1984.

U.S. Commissioner

of Labor. Eleventh Annual Report

s hommisflpnmf

ndCjjgren.

Washington, D.C.:

G.P.O., 1897.

U.S. Department of Labor, Women's Bureau. "The Employment of Women in Offices,"
by Ethel Erickson. Bulletin of the Women's Bureau, No. 120. Washington, D.C.:
G.P.O., 1934.
U.S. Department of Labor, Women's Bureau. "Office Work in (Houston, Los Angeles,
Kansas City, Richmond, and Philadelphia). Bulletins of the Women's Bureau, Nos.
188-1,2,3,4,5.
Washington, D.C.: G.P.O., 1942.
Wanderaee, Winifred 0. Women's Work and FapilyValues,,,j92O-l94Q.
MA: Harvard University Press, 1981.

Camhridge,

-44-

DATA APPENDIX
1931 Office Firm Survey: National Archives, Record Group #86 Boxes 280-281.
See U.S. Department of Labor, Womens Bureau, "The Employment of Women in
Offices," by Ethel Erickson, Bulletin of the Women'a Bureau No. 120 (Washington,
D.C.: G.P.O., 1934). Only the firm-level records of this survey survive. The
data came from "general interviews with the management on numbers of men and
women employed, policies and practices as to hours of work, overtime, vacations
promotions, and welfare activities, restrictions based on age or marital status
kinds of office machines used. snd effect of mechsnizstion on employment in the
preceding i-year period" (p 2). The firms covered in this survey are larger
than those In a similar 1940 survey (see below) and include only banks public
utilities, insursnce companies, investment houses, publlshing tompanies, snd
New
sdvertising fIrms. Records for 178 fIrms in four cities (Chicago Hartford,
York City and Philadelphta) were used and information was coded on- numbers of
female and male office workers, scheduled hours, and personnel relations (whether
firm hired msrrien women, fired women if they married, had internal promotion,
The rr,r,ments of the
age restrictions, pensions, and group insurance).
interviewee were also recorded regarding the reasons for various policies and
whether policies regarding marriage were due to the onset of the Depression.

1940 Office Firm Survey: National Archives, Record Group #86, Boxes 496-500.
Women's Bureau, "Office Work in [Nouston, Los
See U.S. Department of Labor
Bulletins of the Women's
Angeles, Kansas City, Richmond, Philsdelphia]: 1940."
Both firm- and
Bureau No. 188-1,2,3,4,5 (Washington, D.C.. G.P.O., 1942).
Information was
individual-level records of this survey survIve (see below).
gathered by the Women's Bureau from pay-roll records and from inerviews wit?
Firms of all sIzes were
personnel officers and other agents of the firms.
surveyed, and include those in the sectors listed for the 1931 survey plus the
office portion of the manufacturing, meat packing, petroleum, and transportation
and communications industries, non-profits, government agencies, retail and
The surveya were
wholesale basinesses, and small offices (e.g. lawyers).
extensive; for example, fully one-fourth of Philadelphia's office workers were
included in the survey (No. 188-5, p. 2). Records for 328 firms in Kansas City,
Los Angeles, end Philadelphia were collected and information was coded on the
variables listed above for the 1931 survey plus: new hires in 1939, personnel
policies regarding discrimination on the basis of race and sex (whether the firm
had policies against the employment of women or men in certain occupations), and
The interviewees often noted whether the firm favored
the presence of unions.
married men in hiring, promotion, end salaries. Only firma with more than 9
female employeea and at least 20 total employees were coded in Philadelphia
No government agencies were used in the sample.
1940 Office Worker Survey: National Archives, Record Group #86, Boxes 472-86.
A asmple of
See citation above for Firm Records; also Goldin (l9B4a, l986b.
724 female office workers and 481 male office workers was collected for
educatior.
Philadelphia. Information was coded for each on: age, marital status,
and varioua vocational
(years end diploma for grade school, high school, college,
and graduate programs), total work experience, experience with current firm,
Data Appendix,

when
experience with office work, other experience, current earnings, earnings
worker began at the firm, whether worker had been furloughed, and whether work
with the current firm was continuous,
1957 Hussey Report: The files containing these schedules are in box #167 of the
(as yet unarchived) papers of Gladys Palmer, generously lent to me by Ann Miller
of the Sociology Department of the University of Pennsylvania. They are referred
to here as the "Hussey Report,' after Miriam Hussey, who as Gladys Palmer's
assistant, conducted the surveys. See Miriam Hussey, Personnel Policies during
a Period of Shortage of Youna Women Workers in Philadelphia (Philadelphia:
Industrial Research Unit, Wharton School of Finance and Commerce. University of
Pennsylvania, 1958).
Approximately 40 complete interviews exist and cover a
range of Philadelphia firms and retail stores for the period 1956/57. Many of
the same firms are included in the 1931 and 1940 Office Worker Surveys (see
above>.

Data Appendix,

-46-

